standard specifications for highway and bridge construction new mexico state department of transportation num edition intentionally blank table of contents section page division num general provisions division contents num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions num num bidding requirements and conditions .
num num award and execution of contract .
num num scope of work .
num num control of work .
num num control of materials .
num num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public .
num num prosecution and progress .
num num measurement and payment .
num division num earthwork division contents num clearing and grubbing .
num num excavation borrow and embankment num num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures num num subgrade preparation num num linear grading num num blading and reshaping num num excavation and backfill for major structures num num obliterating old road num division num bases division contents num processing placing and compacting existing pavement num num base course num num portland cement or lime treated subgrade num division num surface treatments and pavements division contents num pavement smoothness measurement num num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material num num open graded friction course nonqla num numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course nonqla num num rubberized open graded friction course num num detour pavements num num tack coat num num prime coat num num hotpoured crack sealant num num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement remixing method num num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num num cold milling num num pavement surface restoration num num minor paving num num miscellaneous paving num num hotmix asphalt superpave qla nonqla num num warm mix asphalt num num portland cement concrete pavement qla num num portland cement concrete pavement num num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints num num cracking and seating concrete pavement num num diamond grinding and diamond grooving of portland cement concrete pavement pccp num division num structures division contents num driven bearing piles num num drilled shafts num num load testing of bearing piles num num pile integrity testing num num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures num num portland cement concrete mix designs num num portland cement concrete num num concrete structures num num superstructure concrete num num concrete barrier railings for bridges num num reinforced concrete for minor structures num num flowable fill num num precast concrete structures num num prestressed concrete members num num shotcrete num num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members num num nonshrink mortar num num chemical adhesive anchors num num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors num num pier and abutment bearing modification num num bridge deck and pccp preparation for repair num num permanent antigraffiti protective coating num num penetrating water repellent treatment num num concrete structure repair num num epoxy injection num num crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers num num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay num num steel reinforcement num num steel structures num num highstrength bolts num num metal railing num num protective coating of new structural steel num num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel num num recoating structures num num safety and environmental requirements for painting operations num num treated timber num num elastomeric bearing pads num num elastomeric compression joint seals num num bridge joint strip seals num num polymer bridge joint seals num num preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals num num pipe culverts num num structural plate structures num num castinplace concrete pipe num division num miscellaneous construction division contents num removal of structures and obstructions num num slope and erosion protection structures num num temporary erosion and sediment control num num soil and drainage geotextiles num num drains num num metal and concrete wall barrier num num fence num num sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement num num curb and gutter num num cattle guards num num cleaning of culverts and drainage structures num num pipe casing num num vibration monitoring and video taping num num traffic control management num num headgates and flapgates for irrigation ditches num num selectivenonselective herbicide application num num mobilization num num field laboratories and field offices num num drop inlets num num wire mesh for slope stabilization num num scaling of rock slopes num num glare shields num num rumble strips num num revegetation num num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities num num manholes num num utility items num num landscape planting num num rest area and miscellaneous landscaping items num division num traffic control devices division contents num traffic signs and structures num num construction traffic control devices num num traffic markers num num pavement markings num num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems num num signal and lighting systems num num signal and lighting standards num num foundations for signal and lighting installations num num rigid electrical conduit num num pull boxes and splice cabinets num num wiring num num signal assemblies num num detectors num num traffic signal controllers num num beacons and temporary signal equipment num num luminaires num num vehicular impact attenuator units num num pavement marking removal num division num construction staking and post construction plans division contents num construction staking by the contractor num num post construction plans num division num quality criteria division contents num quality controlquality assurance qcqa num index num division num page num division num general provisions division contents num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions num num bidding requirements and conditions .
num num award and execution of contract .
num num scope of work .
num num control of work .
num num control of materials .
num num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public .
num num prosecution and progress .
num num measurement and payment .
num section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions num active voice imperative mood references use of language the new mexico department of transportation publishes this edition of the standard specifications for highway and bridge construction with an emphasis on the active voice .
in a sentence written in the active voice someone acts on something .
for example the engineer will take a sample .
a similar sentence in the passive voice a sample will be taken would be unclear about who was responsible for taking the sample .
this edition of the standard specifications also makes use of the imperative mood .
the imperative mood is used when the party issuing an instruction and the party receiving it are already understood .
in these standard specifications the department is stating its requirements or directions for work to the contractor such statements have the same force as if they contained the word shall .
in an imperative sentence such as pour the concrete the department is indicating that it requires the contractor to pour the concrete .
before an award of a contract imperative statements are directed to the bidder .
after a contract has been awarded imperatives are directed to the contractor .
the department will identify parties other than the bidder or contractor to whom it gives a responsibility in these standard specifications .
in phrasings where the responsible party has already been clearly identified or in factual statements when it is not important to do so the department may use the passive voice .
the word shall is used in a mandatory or imperative sense and signifies that the department is imposing a duty on a person or body that is the subject in the sentence .
the word may is used to signify the conferring of a discretionary power privilege or right .
however use of the term may not signifies that a right privilege or power is intended to be denied .
the titles or headings of the sections and subsections herein are intended for convenience of reference and shall not be considered as having any bearing on their interpretation .
the contractor having an obligation to comply with observe and comply with all federal and state law and regulations any reference to any federal or state law or regulation shall constitute a reference to any applicable amendment or successor law or regulation .
num abbreviations when the following abbreviations are used in the plans the specifications other contract documents and department correspondence their meaning is as follows table num acronyms and abbreviations acronym or short form full name or meaning aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute ai aggregate index amrl aashto material reference laboratory astm american society for testing and materials awg american wire gauge awpa american wood preservers association awwa american water works association cbc concrete box culvert ccd closed circuit detection cd compact disc section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num table num acronyms and abbreviations acronym or short form full name or meaning cfr code of federal regulations cmp corrugated metal pipe cn control number cpm critical path method ctr certified test report cwb concrete wall barrier dbe disadvantaged business enterprise ea entrance angle esal equivalent single axle loading fhwa federal highway administration grt gross receipt tax hdpe high density polyethylene hfe highfloat emulsion hid highintensity discharge hma hotmix asphalt hmwm high molecular weight methacrylate ies illuminating engineering society imc intermediate metallic conduit ite institute of transportation engineers jmf job mix formula lcd liquid crystal display ll liquid limit msds material safety data sheet mtr mill test report mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nchrp national cooperative highway research program nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association nmac new mexico administrative code nmda new mexico department of agriculture nmed new mexico environment department nmsa new mexico statutes annotated nmsspwc new mexico standard specifications for public works construction npdes national pollutant discharge elimination system ntsc national transmission standards committee oa observation angle ogfc opengraded friction course osha occupational safety and health administration pcc portland cement concrete pccp portland cement concrete pavement pci prestressed concrete institute pct process control technician pep penetrating emulsified prime pi plasticity index ptl private testing laboratory pvc polyvinyl chloride qa quality assurance qc quality control qct quality control technician qla quality level assurance rap reclaimed asphalt pavement row right of way sspc society of protective coating formerly steel structures painting council section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num table num acronyms and abbreviations acronym or short form full name or meaning swppp storm water pollution prevention plan tero tribal employment rights organization ttcp technician training and certification program tv target value ubc uniform building code ul underwriters laboratories usepa united states environmental protection agency uv ultraviolet vma voids in mineral aggregate vtm voids in total mix wma warm mix asphalt num symbols within the specifications and contract reference to the english system of measurement symbols is a reference to the u.s .
customary inchpound system .
some of the symbols for units of measurement used in the specifications and in the bid form are defined as shown in table num measurement symbols .
the symbols for other units of measurement used in the specifications are as defined in the various specifications and tests referenced in the specifications .
table num measurement symbols physical characteristic unit name symbol length microinch µin mil num inch mil inch in foot ft yard yd mile mi area square inch in num square foot ft num square yard yd num square mile mi num acre acre volume pint pt quart qt gallon gal cubic inch in num cubic foot ft num cubic yard yd num mass weight ounce oz pound lb ton short num lb ton temperature degree fahrenheit f time millisecond ms section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num table num measurement symbols physical characteristic unit name symbol second s minute min hour h speed miles per hour mph pressure poundforce per square inch psi power energy and electricity watt w kilowatt kw milliampere ma ampere a volt v voltampere va ohm ω hertz hz joule j lumen lm footcandle fc horsepower hp force poundforce lbf num poundsforce kip torque poundforce foot lbfft viscosity dynamic centipoises cp poise p viscosity kinematic centistokes cst flow gallons per minute gpm concentration parts per million ppm inductance henries h frequency concrete consolidation vibrations per minute vpm sound decibel ascale dba num engineers estimate symbols the measurement symbols shown on the engineers estimate differ from those found in the rest of project documents .
table num symbols for engineers estimate lists and defines the symbols .
table num symbols for engineers estimate symbol unit of measure or meaning ls lump sum each each alow allowance l.f .
linear foot mile mile s.f .
square foot section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num table num symbols for engineers estimate symbol unit of measure or meaning s.y .
square yard syin square yard inch acre acre c.y .
cubic yard lb pound ton ton num terms and definitions if the following terms are used in the plans the specifications other contract documents and department correspondence the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows acceptance .
also called accept accepted and acceptable num the determination by the department that materials and work are in compliance with the contract .
num the process by which the department determines whether or not the quality of produced material or work is acceptable pursuant to the contract including sampling testing certifications and assessment of test results .
act of god .
an unusual sudden and unexpected manifestation of the forces of nature the effect of which could not have been prevented by reasonable human foresight pains and care .
addendum .
a change in the plans or specifications issued after the advertisement and before the opening of the bid .
advertisement .
also called invitation for bids .
a public announcement inviting bids for work to be performed or materials to be provided .
apparent low bidder .
the bidder who submits at a bid opening a total bid amount that is numerically lower than the total bid amount submitted by other bidders but whos bid may later be subject to rejection recalculation or other modification that may change the order of bidders .
assistant district engineer ade construction .
the engineer in charge of the construction operations in a designated portion of a department district .
award .
the written acceptance by the department of a contract bid .
base course .
the layer or layers of specified material placed on a subbase or a subgrade normally used to support a surface course .
baseline schedule .
a fixed project schedule that is the standard by which project performance is measured .
basis of payment .
the terms under which work is paid as a designated pay item in accordance with the quantity measured and the pay unit .
bid .
the offer of a bidder on the prescribed form to perform the work at the prices quoted .
bidder .
an individual partnership firm corporation joint venture or their authorized representative submitting a bid .
bid form .
the approved form on which the department requires bidders to prepare and submit bids .
bid guaranty .
the security provided with a bid to guarantee that the bidder will enter into section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num the contract if the department accepts its bid .
bid item contract item pay item .
a specifically described unit of work for which a bidder provides a bid item unit price and bid item price .
the bid items become contract items when the contract is executed .
the contract items become pay items when calculating progress payments .
bid item price .
the price established by the contractor for each individual bid item on the bid form the product of the bid item quantity provided on the bid form and the bid item unit price .
bid item unit price .
the price established by the contractor for each unit of an individual bid item on the bid form .
a bid item unit price reflects a bidders actual and direct costs for the item plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
bid opening .
a public reading of the properly submitted bids on a date established by the invitation for bids .
bid package .
the bid documents submitted by a bidder in accordance with section num bidding requirements and conditions .
bid schedule .
listing or table of bid items also referred to as proposal schedule .
borrow pit .
a source outside the roadway prism from where suitable material used primarily for embankment is obtained .
breakaway .
the ability of a system to yield at a predetermined impact force .
bridge .
a structure having a length as measured along the center of the roadway of more than num ft between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes or extreme ends of openings for culverts placed in series with a spacing between culverts not exceeding ½ the diameter and carrying a pathway or roadway over a depression or obstacle .
it includes all appurtenances necessary to its proper use .
the length of a bridge structure is the distance along the line of survey stationing backtoback of backwalls of abutments if present or endtoend of the bridge floor and in no case less than the total clear opening of the structure .
the bridge roadway width is that clear unobstructed width of bridge deck available for vehicle use measured normal to the centerline of the bridge .
business hours .
the departments business hours are from num a.m. to num p.m. monday through friday official state holidays and emergency closures excluded .
cabinet secretary .
the individual in charge of the department .
also referred to as the secretary .
calendar day .
each and every day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
certificate of compliance .
a certificate provided by the contractor proving that the relevant material is in accordance with the contract .
change order .
a written order issued to the contractor by the department covering contingencies extra work increases or decreases in contract quantities payments for items for which there is no bid item unit price additions or alterations to the plans or specifications within the scope of the contract and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes or adjustments to the original contract .
a change order may consist of a supplemental agreement or field sheet .
a change order is the only method authorized for changing the contract .
section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num chief engineer .
the engineer in charge of the planning and design of projects for the department or the individuals designee .
chill factor .
the chill factor is the ambient temperature in degrees fahrenheit minus wind velocity in miles per hour .
claim .
a contractor request or demand for a contract adjustment equitable adjustment additional time or compensation and other contractual damages delay damages an extension of contract time passthrough subcontractor claims or for any other remedy arising from a dispute disagreement or controversy concerning respective rights and obligations under the contract .
commercial material source .
a material source that has been utilized by a private producer in a commercial operation from which material has been sold within the last num months before the date of the letting .
completion dates .
contracts may have the following completion dates as defined herein substantial completion date physical completion or completion date mandatory completion date construction maintenance easement cme .
a real property interest in land acquired by the department in conjunction with a highway street or road project to provide permanent access to private property to perform specific construction and maintenance functions .
construction zone .
the area within the right of way from the first traffic control sign announcing the road work to the last sign announcing the end of road work within which the contractor shall perform construction activities .
contract .
the entire and integrated written agreement between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties including but not limited to the performance of the work and the basis of payment .
the contract includes the advertisement bid form and contract bond standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions addenda notice to contractors general and detailed plans standard drawing serials and notice to proceed also any change orders and agreements that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized extensions thereof all of which constitute one num instrument .
contract bonds .
the approved payment and performance bonds executed by the contractor and the contractors surety or sureties guaranteeing complete execution of the contract and all change orders pertaining thereto and the payment of all debts pertaining to the construction of the project .
contractor .
the individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture contracting with the department for performance of the work .
contract time .
the time specified in the invitation for bids for completion of the contract .
this time may be defined as a specified fixed date a given number of working days or a given number of calendar days or a combination of the above .
the contract time may be amended by mutual written agreement to include authorized time extensions as the performance of the contract requires .
county .
the county in which the work herein specified is to be done .
section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num cultural resource .
any prehistoric or historic period artifact site building structure material remains or traditional use area resulting from or associated with human cultural activity .
historically important cultural resources are those eligible for inclusion on the national register of historic places .
cultural resource professional .
an individual with at least four num years of fulltime paid experience in cultural resource investigations including analyzing and preparing documentation needed to meet the requirements of section num of the national historic preservation act .
the individual must be properly permitted to meet the requirements of the nm state historic preservation officer or appropriate tribal preservation officer .
culvert .
any structure not classified as bridge or casing that provides an opening under a roadway .
day .
calendar day unless otherwise noted .
delay .
any event action or factor that extends the time for the performance of the work or that negatively affects the critical path for the project whether it be excusable inexcusable nonexcusable concurrent compensable or noncompensable .
deleterious material .
unsuitable material harmful to final product .
department .
the new mexico department of transportation as constituted under the laws of the state for the administration of transportation work .
any reference to contract documents plans special provisions standard drawings forms change orders and any other pertinent written communication in which the terms new mexico state highway department or new mexico state highway and transportation department appears shall be the same as the term new mexico department of transportation or its designated agent .
detour .
a temporary route for traffic vehicular or otherwise around a closed portion of a road .
disadvantaged business enterprise dbe .
as defined in title num cfr part num .
district .
a subdivision of the state for the purpose of executing the departments construction maintenance and administrative activities .
district engineer .
the engineer in charge of a department district .
divided highway .
a highway with separated roadways for traffic generally in opposite directions .
embankment .
the portion of a roadway that is below the subbase base course and surface courses and that is built up in layers consisting principally of soil and broken rock or a combination thereof .
engineer .
the designee of the cabinet secretary of the department .
entrance angle ea .
the angle between the reference axis and the axis of incident light counterclockwise rotation of the reference axis relative to the axis of incident light is considered positive .
environmental professional .
an individual qualified to perform hazardous material investigations .
this individual must possess the qualifications described in num cfr part nume the usepas standards and practices for all appropriate inquiries .
environmental program manager .
the individual in charge of the environmental bureau of the department .
section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num environmental resource .
the physical and biological components of the human and natural environment .
environmental specialist .
an individual with at least four num years of fulltime paid experience in environmental investigations including analyzing and preparing documentation needed to meet the fhwa approval requirements for the national environmental policy act and related legislation .
equipment .
all machinery tools and equipment together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance necessary for the construction and completion of the contract .
extra work .
work not provided for in the contract but found by the project manager to be essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract within its intended scope .
extra work means either num an item of work ordered under the contract for which there is no bid item unit price or num an increase or decrease of num in the original contract quantity of a major contract item .
see section num significant changes in the character of work .
such work shall be performed as directed and will be paid for only on one num of two num grounds as provided in section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work by bid item unit price negotiated price agreement or by force account .
fabricator .
a supplier that fabricates or supplies structural steel or other structural items .
field sheet .
a type of change order that does not require a contractors signature .
force account .
the basis of payment for the directed performance of work with payment based on the actual cost of labor equipment and materials and including various constant additives .
fractured face .
at least onehalf of the projected particle area exhibits a rough angular or broken texture with well defined edges .
general office go .
the departments main headquarters .
hazardous materials .
any substance product waste or other material of any nature whatsoever that is or becomes listed regulated or addressed pursuant to all applicable laws all as amended or any other federal state or local statute law ordinance resolution code rule regulation order or decree regulating relating to or imposing liability or standards of conduct concerning any hazardous toxic or dangerous waste substance or material .
highway street or road .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel .
holiday .
holidays recognized by the state of new mexico are as follows unless otherwise provided by the legislature num .
num st day of january new years day num .
num rd monday in january martin luther king jr. day num .
num rd monday in february presidents day num .
last monday in may memorial day num .
num th day of july independence day num .
num st monday in september labor day num .
num nd monday in october columbus day num .
num th day of november veterans day num .
num th thursday in november thanksgiving day section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num num .
num th day of december christmas day .
if any holiday above falls on a saturday or sunday the previous friday or following monday respectively shall be considered a holiday .
independent assurance .
a construction management tool in which a third party not directly responsible for process control or acceptance provides an independent assessment of the work materials or the reliability of test results obtained from process control and acceptance testing .
incentivedisincentive provision .
predetermined adjustments to the contract price .
incidental .
occurring or likely to occur at the same time or as a result of other items of work as specified in the contract for which no separate or additional payment will be made .
inspector .
the project managers authorized representative .
invitation for bids .
see advertisement .
job mix formula jmf .
the combined aggregate gradation and the percentage of each material component in the mix .
laboratory .
a testing laboratory of the department contractor or any other testing laboratory that may be designated by the engineer and is aashto materials reference laboratory amrl certified .
landscape architect .
the cabinet secretarys designee for landscape architecture .
lighting and signal engineer .
the engineer in charge of the departments signal and lighting design .
luminarie .
a lighting device designed to illuminate the surface of a specific area from a mounting on a standard including the housing optical control lamps and necessary ballasts .
lump .
the mathematical quantity for a lump sum item is one num .
machine vision vehicle detection system .
a system that tracks vehicles on a roadway via processing of video images and provides detector outputs to a traffic controller .
mandatory prebid conference .
a meeting or conference to be conducted prior to the bid opening at which all bidders are required to attend .
a mandatory prebid conference is conducted for the purpose of discussing contract requirements to inform bidders of important information relating to the performance of the work to answer questions of prospective bidders in order to better facilitate proper bidding compliance with the contract performance of the work to reduce jobinprogress disputes between the department and contractor and to reduce the potential for change orders claims liquidated damages added costs and cost overruns .
the requirement to attend a mandatory prebid conference shall be set forth in a notice to contractors special provision or addendum .
a bidders failure to attend shall result in its bid being rejected as nonresponsive .
maintaining agency .
public entity such as a city or county responsible for the electrical energy costs and maintenance of the approved and accepted signal and lighting system .
major contract item .
any item excluding mobilization having a bid item price of ten percent num or more of the total bid amount for the contract minus the amount bid for mobilization .
section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num mandatory completion date .
the date on which the project shall be completed .
this may be either substantial completion or physical completion as specified in the contract .
if neither is specified it shall mean substantial completion .
materials .
any substances specified for use in the construction of the project and its appurtenances .
median .
that portion of a divided highway separating the traveled way for traffic in opposing directions .
method of measurement .
the method in which a pay item is measured to conform with the pay unit .
nominal maximum sieve .
one num sieve size larger than the first sieve that retains ten percent num or more of a given material .
nonconformance .
contractors failure to comply with the contract or to provide acceptable work to the department .
nonconformances are subject to a withholding of num of the progress payment .
nonconformance withholdings will be paid at the subsequent progress payment following resolution of all non conformances .
notice to proceed .
work order written notice to the contractor to proceed with the contract work including the beginning date of contract time .
notice to contractors .
an addition to the contract package made prior to its issuance to the contractor indicating changes to the plans and specifications .
observation angle .
the angle between the axis of incident light and the observation axis .
partial suspension .
the suspension of work on some but not all contract items .
pavement structure .
the combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed .
pay adjustment .
an adjustment to a payment for a specific portion of the work based on the quality of the work performed by the contractor and accepted by the department .
other department documents may refer to this term as price adjustments price reductions or pay reductions .
physical completion .
all the work is physically completed on the project and is accepted by the project manager .
all documentation required by the contract and by law shall be furnished by this date .
pit agreement .
an agreement with a property owner to provide borrow or surfacing material for highway construction or maintenance .
plans .
the approved contract drawings showing profiles typical cross sections or exact reproductions that show the location character dimensions and general or specific details of the work to be done .
post construction plans .
final drawings reflecting work and quantities performed under the contract .
preconstruction conference .
a meeting between the department and the contractor prior to any work taking place to review and discuss contract requirements construction details the baseline schedule contract administration issues and any items peculiar to the project .
see section num notice to proceed and pre construction conference for specifics associated with the preconstruction conference .
section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num prepave conference .
a meeting between the department and the contractor prior to the commencement of paving operations to review discuss and coordinate the work associated with paving operations .
prefabrication conference .
a meeting between the department and the contractor prior to any fabrication work taking place .
predeck conference .
a meeting between the department and the contractor prior to the commencement of deck placement operations to review discuss and coordinate the work associated with the deck placement .
prebid due diligence .
the bidders exercise of due diligence before submittal of a bid which includes the careful independent examination of the site of the proposed work including materials pits and haul roads the bid package all contract documents including standard specifications special provisions supplemental specifications and standard and serial drawings and boring logs which are representative of the condition at the precise location where each boring was made but conditions may vary between boring locations .
professional service .
a subcontractor who provides a specialized service requiring professional licensure by the state of new mexico e.g .
professional engineers professional surveyors and attorneys .
profile grade .
the line obtained from the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top of the surfacing at the locations shown on the plans and determined in accordance with the criteria set forth in the standard serials and drawings .
profile grade means either the elevation or the gradient of such trace according to the context .
the location of the profile grade will be designated by the department and shown on the plans .
the profile grade may be used to designate the gradient and elevation of other construction features such as tops of curb channels sidewalks etc .
progress payment .
a monthly payment provided by the department to the contractor for work subject to withholdings for nonconformances and retainage .
project .
the specific section of the highway or property on which construction is to be performed as specified in the contract .
project manager .
the departments representative who is delegated the responsibility for administration of the project .
punch list .
a list prepared by the project manager of corrective work items to be completed by the contractor after substantial completion but before contractors request for final inspection .
the punch list is limited to items of the work that are necessary to correct minor imperfections deficiencies and deviations from the requirements of the contract but which have no material or adverse effect on the full operability of the project for its intended purpose and may be safely and effectively used by the public without delay disruption or impediments .
quality assurance qa .
the departments sampling testing inspection and other activities to determine payment and make acceptance decisions .
quality control qc .
the contractors actions and considerations necessary to assess production and construction processes so as to control the level of quality being produced in the end product .
quality control includes sampling and testing by the contractor to monitor and adjust its process .
quality control does not include acceptance sampling and testing by the department .
quality level assurance qla .
is equivalent to qcqa .
section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num rvalue .
the measurement of the response of a compacted sample of soil or aggregate to a vertically applied pressure under specific conditions .
required documents for bid submittal .
those documents specified in the bid package required for bid submittal .
resource loading .
the contractors assigning of resources necessary to develop an acceptable cpm for the project .
resource loading shall include personnel contract dollars earned materials facilities and equipment associated with each activity within the cpm .
responsible bidder .
a bidder who submits a responsive bid and who has furnished when required information and data to prove that his financial resources production or service facilities personnel service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the services construction or items of tangible personal property described in the invitation for bids as defined in nmsa num num .
responsive bid .
a bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids and the contract documents including notice to contractors special provisions supplemental specifications and addenda and which has not been rejected .
material respects of a bid include but are not limited to price quality quantity or delivery requirements as defined in nmsa num num .
retainage .
five percent num of the total original contract amount as amended by change order .
the five percent num shall be retained when the progress payments equal num of the amended contract amount .
the retainage shall be withheld until physical completion to assure that the contractor shall satisfy its obligations and complete the work .
right of way row .
a general term denoting land or property or interest therein usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes .
roadbed .
the graded portion of the highway with top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the subgrade pavement structure and shoulders .
roadway .
a general term denoting the traveled way and the shoulders .
roadway prism .
the roadway construction limits between the outside limits of the side slopes .
secretary .
see cabinet secretary .
shoulder .
the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalk .
that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for use by pedestrians .
signal assembly .
a housing containing the required illuminated traffic signal indications vehicular and pedestrian mounted on a standard .
small business .
as defined in num usc section num and num usc section num of the small business act .
special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications covering conditions applicable to an individual project .
specialty items .
work not usually performed by highway contractors and so designated in the contract .
section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num specifications .
a general term applied to all written provisions and requirements pertaining to performance of the work .
specific intensity .
candlepower of the returned light at the chosen observation and entrance angles for each lumen per square meter footcandle of illumination at the reflector on a plane perpendicular to the incident light .
standard .
in traffic lighting a poletype structure that supports and positions signal and lighting devices including arms mounting hardware and lowering and breakaway devices as required .
standard drawings .
detailed drawings for specific items of work approved for repetitive use .
standard specifications .
the departments book of specifications approved for general application and repetitive use .
state .
the state of new mexico acting through its authorized representatives .
state asphalt engineer .
the engineer in charge of the departments asphalt unit of the state materials bureau .
state bridge engineer .
the engineer in charge of the departments bridge design bureau .
state concrete engineer .
the engineer in charge of the concrete unit of the state materials bureau .
state construction engineer .
the engineer in charge of the state construction bureau .
state geotechnical engineer .
the engineer in charge of the geotechnical unit of the state materials bureau .
state materials engineer .
the engineer in charge of the state materials bureau .
state transportation commission .
the six num member policy board for the department .
state transportation commissioner .
an individual member of the state transportation commission .
structures .
bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes under drains foundation drains and other such features that may be encountered in the work .
structural steel .
steel shapes plates hpiling and sheet piling .
shapes are pipes structural tubing and all hotrolled flanged sections .
hotrolled flanged section are rails and mill products having aisc shape designations of w s m c mc hp l wt st and mt .
subbase .
the layer or layers of specified material thickness placed on a subgrade to support surface courses .
subcontractor .
an individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture other than a trucker to whom the contractor subcontracts part of the contract who meets the requirements of a subcontractor under section num subcontracting .
the term subcontractor includes firsttier secondtier and other tiered subcontractors and subsubcontractors .
a subcontractor has no privity of contract with the department and has no direct or indirect cause of action against the department for any claim or cause of action including nonpayment by the contractor arising out of the project .
subgrade .
the portion of the roadbed prepared as a foundation for the pavement section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num structure .
substantial completion .
the point at which num .
all critical path activities on the project have been completed and accepted num .
all nonconformance issues have been resolved without exception num .
the project is complete such that it can be safely and effectively used by the public without delays disruption or impediments num .
the contractor has requested a determination of substantial completion from the ade construction and num .
the ade construction has made a determination that the project is substantially complete .
for conventional bridge and highway work it is the point at which all the following work is complete for the safe and efficient use of the public or as otherwise defined in the contract num .
bridge deck num .
parapet num .
pavement structure num .
shoulder num .
permanent signing num .
a minimum of one num application of striping num .
traffic barrier num .
signalization and lighting and num .
safety appurtenances .
substructure .
all of that part of the bridge structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with the backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
superintendent .
the contractors agent authorized in writing to be in responsible charge of the project .
superstructure .
the entire bridge structure except the substructure .
supplemental agreement .
a type of change order that may require contractor signature .
supplemental specifications .
approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications .
supplier .
any individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture that manufactures or supplies materials to be incorporated into a construction project but who performs no actual work on the project site .
surety .
the corporation partnership or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor .
surface course .
layer or layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
surfacing pit .
a source from which suitable material for the production of surface course aggregate is obtained .
suspension and debarment .
the disqualification of a bidder or contractor from bidding or performing construction work for a period of time determined by department section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num regulations num nmac .
system master .
in traffic lighting an electronic device normally installed in a controller cabinet capable of supervising an interconnected network of local controllers providing coordinated traffic movement .
system masters in turn may be controlled by a computerized traffic control closedloop system .
temporary construction permit tcp .
a temporary interest in land acquired in conjunction with a highway project to provide for the temporary use of private property for the duration of the construction to perform construction activities in which the improvements are not intended to be permanent .
termini .
a general term used to describe the project limits and including the beginning and end of the project its right of way pit sites haul roads and temporary and permanent construction or maintenance easements .
total bid amount .
the sum of all the bid item prices on the bid form .
total original contract amount .
the total amount bid as compensation for the contract .
town city or district .
subdivisions of the state used to designate or identify the location of the proposed work .
traffic lanes .
see traveled way .
traffic services engineer .
the district engineers representative for traffic engineering .
traffic signal .
the complete installation of a traffic control system at an intersection including the illuminated signal indications supports electrical controls and distribution system .
traveled way .
the portion of the right of way designated for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
trucker .
also called trucking trucking deliveries deliveries and hauling a trucker is an individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture that transports or delivers materials to and from the project and does not perform work on the project site .
a trucker transports but does not place materials i.e .
pit materials plant materials fabricated materials demolished and milled materials trash and waste materials .
unbalanced bid .
a bid which is either materially or mathematically unbalanced .
a materially .
a bid that generates a reasonable doubt that awarding the contract to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
b mathematically .
a bid containing lump sum or unit bid items that do not reflect reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
value engineering cost proposal .
a contractorprovided alternative to the work methods or materials specified in the contract that establishes a better or approvedequal product or result without affecting the functional purpose of the work being revised and that produce a net savings to the department .
areas exempted from value engineering cost proposals are mix designs and traffic control .
work .
the providing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary for the successful completion of the project the successful completion of pay items and the carrying out of the duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
working day .
every day except saturdays sundays and holidays .
based on a review of weather conditions and the actual work performed by the contractor the project manager will determine between the end of the day and noon of the next day if the section num abbreviations symbols terms and definitions page num department will charge a working day .
if the contractor was able to effectively prosecute work on a critical path item for six num or more hours on a saturday sunday or holiday a working day will be charged .
working drawings .
contractorfurnished documents including but not necessarily limited to num .
stress sheets num .
shop drawings num .
bending diagrams for reinforcing steel num .
plans for erection false work frames work cofferdams and other items and num .
such other similar data required for the successful completion of the work .
section num bidding requirements and conditions page num section num bidding requirements and conditions num invitation for bids the department will issue invitations for bid for the construction of projects on the date set for project advertisement .
the invitation for bids will indicate the following num .
the project number num .
the contract time num .
the locations length and description of the work num .
the date time and place for the bid opening and num .
information concerning the cost and availability of plans and required documents for bid submittal .
num prequalification of bidders prequalification of bidders is a condition for submitting a bid as authorized by the new mexico procurement code nmsa num num and num .
bidders shall be prequalified in accordance with the requirements of the departments prequalification regulations num nmac .
the failure of a bidder to be prequalified shall render the bid nonresponsive and the bid shall be rejected .
num suspension and debarment the department may suspend or debar a bidder in accordance with nmsa num num num to num and the departments suspension and debarment rules as per num nmac .
a suspended or debarred bidder shall be ineligible to bid or perform any work on department projects during the period of its suspension or debarment .
a bidder who is suspended or debarred by a federal agency i.e .
as identified on the federal excluded parties list shall be ineligible to bid or and may be ineligible to perform any work on any project subject to federal reimbursement during the period of its suspension or debarment .
num bid package the department will make available to prospective bidders a bid package consisting of the required documents for bid submittal .
the required documents for bid submittal are comprised of the documents as specified in the contracts index of documents including but not limited to the following bid form bid schedule and bid guaranty .
num .
only the required documents for bid submittal are to be submitted .
all forms in this package are considered a part thereof and must not be detached or altered when the bid is submitted .
num .
all requirements for electronic submittals will be specified in the departments invitation for bids .
when specified in the invitation for bids submit a bid in electronic format .
num refusal or rejection of bids the department may refuse to receive or open a bid or may reject a bid for the following reasons num .
a bidder lacks competency financial stability or adequate machinery plants or other equipment or the ability to commence the work within num days of the notice to proceed num .
a bidder is responsible for uncompleted work that in the judgment of the department might reasonably be expected to hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work section num bidding requirements and conditions page num num .
a bidder fails to timely pay satisfactorily settle or provide security for the payment of claims for labor equipment materials supplies or services legally due on previous or ongoing contracts num .
a bidder is not prequalified num .
a bidder defaults under a previous contract including contracts with other public entities num .
a bidder performs previous work unsatisfactorily or fails to comply with section num schedule num .
the department issues a notice of suspension or debarment to the bidder num .
a bidder submits more than one num bid for the same work under its own name or under a different name num .
evidence exists of collusion among bidders or prospective bidders in the preparation of a bid for a department project num .
a bid item unit price results in an unbalanced bid to the potential detriment of the public or the department .
the department may require the apparent low bidder to detail in writing how its prices were determined and to justify the basis for its prices num .
a bid item unit price or total contract bid price differs significantly from the engineers estimate or from other bids to the potential detriment of the public or the department num .
a bid item unit price does not include reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs insurance and other indirect costs including any insurance or overhead expenses necessary to complete that bid item to the potential detriment to the public or the department num .
a bidder contacts or communicates with any state transportation commissioner or any department personnel responsible for bid review and the award of the contract in relation to the bid review or award process at any time prior to the notification that the contract has been awarded to the lowest responsible bidder except for exercising a bidders right to file a written protest pursuant to section num bidding dispute resolution procedures or in response to an inquiry from the bid review committee num .
a potential benefit to the public or the department exists if the contract is re advertised num .
failure to attend a mandatory prebid conference when so required by a notice to contractor special provision or addendum num .
a bidder is subject of a judgment or verdict imposing a civil or criminal penalty under either the federal false claims act or the new mexico fraud against taxpayers act num .
to redesign the project or change project specifications num .
if the department becomes aware of an error in the quantity of a bid item shown in the bid schedule plans or other contract documents which may call into question the departments ability to determine which bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department or num .
when it is in the best interests of the public or the department to do so .
num interpretation of quantities the quantities appearing in the bid schedule plans or other contract documents are approximate only and are prepared for the comparison of bids .
payment to the contractor shall be made only for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or materials furnished or as otherwise specified e.g .
computed quantities in the contract .
num examination of contract plans specifications special provisions and site of work num .
the department will prepare plans and specifications in accordance with acceptable engineering standards and will give such directions as may enable any section num bidding requirements and conditions page num competent contractor to construct the work .
the submission of a bid shall be considered prima facie evidence that the bidder has exercised prebid due diligence and accepts the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and accepts the provisions and requirements of the contract .
the bidder must so certify on the bid form for the bid to be considered a responsive bid num .
when available boring logs and other records of subsurface investigations including borrow surfacing material and other materials pits may be inspected by the bidders .
bidders are informed that such information is for department design and estimating purposes only .
such information is made available to bidders so that they and the department have identical access to subsurface information .
the department does not warrant the sufficiency of such subsurface investigation documentation and the department furnishing such subsurface investigation documentation does not relieve the bidder from at its own expense performing its own site investigation considering geotechnical data from previous projects performed by the bidder in the vicinity of the project and determining how subsurface conditions may affect the means methods and cost of the work num .
requests for contract interpretation shall be in writing addressed to the chief engineer and must be received by the chief engineer at least num hours prior to the date fixed for the opening of bids in order to receive a written response to the request .
no interpretation of the meaning of the contract shall be made to any bidder orally .
the contractor shall not rely on oral statements and shall only rely on written responses provided by the chief engineer or designate .
any and all such interpretation and any supplemental instructions if issued by the department will be in the form of an addendum or posted to bid express .
such addendum will be provided to all prospective bidders for such purposes and shall whenever practicable be issued no later than twentyfour num hours prior to bid opening .
the bidder agrees that it will make no claim because of misinterpretation or misunderstanding of the contract or because of lack of information and num .
the contractor is not entitled to a written response by the chief engineer when contract interpretation requests are received less than num hours before bid opening .
if a written response by the department to a request for contract interpretation is not provided the bidder shall bid the contract according to the contract documents .
num preparation of bid num .
submit the bid as provided in the bid package and complete the blank spaces in the required documents for bid submittal .
for each bid item the bidder shall state in numerals either in ink or digital format the bid item unit price for which the bidder proposes to perform each bid item num .
specify a bid item unit price for each bid item except when a bid item unit price is established by the department .
the bid item unit price shall include and shall be conclusively presumed to include reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs insurance and other indirect costs necessary to complete that bid item num .
show the bid item prices by multiplying the respective bid item unit prices and quantities and also show the total bid amount in the space provided on the bid schedule .
the total bid amount will be the sum obtained by adding the bid item prices num .
for paper bid submittals make changes to any entry on the required documents for bid submittal by marking through the entry in ink and making the correct entry adjacent thereto in ink .
initial the change in ink num .
show the amounts for the respective bid item unit prices to a maximum of three num decimal places .
truncate additional decimal places in excess of three num num .
exclude the applicable state grt and local option tax .
the department will pay the applicable tax num .
exclude any indian business tax tero tax and other tax imposed by a tribal government section num bidding requirements and conditions page num num .
submit required documents for bid submittal signed by the president vice president owner or other representative of the bidder authorized in writing to bind the bidder and num .
except in the exercise of a bidders right to file a written protest pursuant to section num bidding dispute resolution procedures or in response to an inquiry from the bid review committee a bidder shall not contact or communicate with any state transportation commissioner or any department personnel in relation to the bid review award process or awarding of the contract at any time prior to the notification that the contract has been awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder .
num innovative contract incentives the department may include innovative contract incentives in the special provisions notice to contractors or addenda .
the department reserves the right as may be provided in the contract to escrow bid documents to request information for informational purposes only and to use innovative bidding approaches including requiring bidders to bid a daily overhead rate cost day as a bid item unit price .
num irregular bids a bid will be deemed irregular and shall be rejected in the event a bidder .
num .
submits its bid on forms different than the required documents for bid submittal num .
does not sign its bid form in accordance with section num preparation of bid and thereby fails to bind the bidder to its bid num .
alters the required documents for bid submittal num .
omits any material portion of the bid package when submitting its bid num .
submits a bid containing irregularities such as unauthorized additions and conditional or alternate proposals that tend to make the bid incomplete indefinite or ambiguous num .
adds provisions reserving its right to accept or reject an award or reserving its right to refuse to enter into a contract after an award num .
omits both a bid item unit price and a bid item price for each bid item num .
fails to initial in ink changes to bid item unit prices or bid item prices in accordance with section num preparation of bid num .
fails to deliver the bid in accordance with section num delivery of bids or num .
fails to provide in its bid the certification required by section num examination of contract plans specifications special provisions and site of work .
num bid guaranty a bidder shall submit with the bid a bid guaranty in the amount of at least five percent num of the total bid amount .
the bid guaranty shall be in the form of one num of the following num .
bid bond num .
certified check or num .
postal or bank money order .
num delivery of bids a bidder shall submit the bid in a sealed envelope and plainly marked with the project number control number location of the project and the name and address of the bidder .
if sent by united states mail or private carrier mail in accordance with the invitation for bids .
the department must receive the bid before close of business the day before the bid opening .
in the alternative a bid may be handdelivered by the bidder prior to the bid section num bidding requirements and conditions page num opening to the official designated by the department to open and read bids at the bid opening .
alternatively the bidder may submit its bid electronically in accordance with the invitation for bids .
num revision of bids a bidder may revise its bid after submitting it to the department provided such revision is in writing facsimile or electronically in portable document format pdf and is received by the department before the bid opening in accordance with the invitation for bids .
a bidder may revise electronic bids anytime before bid opening .
num withdrawal of bids a bidder may withdraw its bid after it has been deposited with the department and before the time set for bid opening by requesting to do so in person in writing by facsimile or electronically in pdf .
once a bid opening has commenced at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids a bidder may not withdraw its bid except that an opportunity will be given prior to the opening and reading of the bids on each project for a bidder to withdraw the bidders own bid for that project and for any other projects which have not yet been opened and read .
withdrawn bids shall not be resubmitted .
alternatively the bidder may withdraw its bid electronically in accordance with the invitation for bids .
num bid opening bids will be opened and read publicly in the presence of one num or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids .
the amount of each bid and each bid item and such other relevant information as may be specified by the department together with the name of each bidder will be recorded and the record and each bid will be open to public inspection .
num engineers estimate the engineers estimate shall be confidential and is not subject to the inspection of public records act and shall not be disclosed to or be subject to inspection by members of the public prior to the bid opening .
when all responsive bids for the project are received and read during the bid opening the engineers estimate for the project will be publicly disclosed .
section num award and execution of contract page num section num award and execution of contract num consideration of bids after the department opens and reads the bids a bid review committee will check the extended unit prices and the sum of the extended unit prices and item lump sums for accuracy and compare the resulting total bid amounts .
the departments bid review committee shall review and evaluate bids for a number of factors which may include comparison of bids against the engineers estimate number of bids submitted unbalancing of bids bid prices for the project versus bid prices for similar projects unit bid price differences between a bid the engineers estimate and other bids bid irregularities whether a unit bid price substantially reflects reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs insurance and other indirect costs necessary to complete that bid item justification for any differences and any other factors the department has determined to be in the publics interest .
the results of the completed analysis will be available to the public after preliminary award of contract .
if the bid item unit price is omitted the bid item price will be divided by the estimated quantity thereby establishing a bid item unit price .
if both the bid item unit price and the bid item price are omitted the bid shall be rejected .
if a discrepancy exists between a bid item unit price and its extension the bid item unit price shall govern .
if two num contractors submit identical lowest total bid amounts the department shall determine the successful bidder by the flip of a coin .
mathematical errors in bid item prices or total bid amount shall be corrected by the department during the review of bids .
the department reserves the right to reject any or all bids to waive technicalities or to advertise for new bids if in the judgment of the department the best interests of the public and the department would be promoted thereby .
any or all bids may be rejected when it is in the best interest of the public and the department at any time prior to execution of the contract .
if all bids are rejected the department may request a new invitation for bids .
a department decision to cancel the award of contract or to reject all bids and issue a new invitation for bids is wholly an exercise of executive discretion not subject to review at an informal hearing pursuant to section num bidding dispute resolution procedures .
num award of contract when required by the department the bidder shall submit written answers to the bidder information questionnaire .
the department will determine if the apparent low bidder is a responsible bidder using the answers to this questionnaire .
the department will base its decision on whether the bidder demonstrates adequate financial resources production or service facilities personnel service reputation and experience to make satisfactory delivery of the construction described in the invitation for bids .
except as described in section num bidding dispute resolution procedures the department will award the contract within num days after the opening of bids to the lowest responsible bidder .
this bidder may agree to a later award time if requested to do so by the department .
unless the department determines to cancel the invitation for bids or to reject all bids the department will notify the lowest responsible bidder in writing that its bid has been accepted and that it has received preliminary award of the contract .
the department will provide the contract to be executed by the contractor and returned to the department .
num bidding dispute resolution procedures num preaward section num award and execution of contract page num in the event of a bidding dispute the following procedure shall control the award of the contract num .
a bidder disputing the bidding or preaward process must file a written protest with the cabinet secretary a .
disputes arising from the departments prebid opening process and solicitation of bids including issues arising from invitation for bids prequalification irregularities with the departments bid package and irregular bids must be raised by written protest no later than seven num days from the date of the bid opening .
num postaward num .
a bidder disputing the preliminary award process or award of a contract must file a written protest with the cabinet secretary .
a .
disputes relating to the preliminary award or award of a contract or any department decision regarding the issuing receiving or opening of any bid or rejection or nonrejection of any bid must be brought within num days of the date of the preliminary award of contract b .
the written protest must include facts supporting the protest any pertinent contractual provisions law rules or regulations and other legal authorities supporting the protest and a requested action c. written protests filed prior to the departments preliminary award of contract may be deferred at the sole discretion of the department and not considered until the department has preliminarily awarded the contract .
num informal hearing procedures num .
failure to file a timely protest shall constitute a waiver of the bidders right to protest num .
service of the written protest shall be made only upon the cabinet secretary with a copy contemporaneously transmitted and separately served upon the office of general counsel for the department during the departments regular business hours by delivery in person or by certified mail postage prepaid return receipt requested or by delivery by a nationally recognized overnight or sameday courier service that obtains receipts .
electronic communication i.e .
email facsimile shall not be considered .
service of a written protest made after the departments regular business hours shall not be effective until the next business day .
copies of the protest shall be contemporaneously transmitted by the disputing bidder to every bidder when the protest is served upon the cabinet secretary and the office of general counsel and num .
any bidder other than the disputing bidder that considers itself to be an interested party to the bidding dispute may submit a written response to the protest in advance of the informal hearing .
the response shall include a statement of the requested action a rebuttal of any of the factual matters in the protest facts supporting the response and any contractual provisions laws rules or regulations or other authority supporting the response .
num .
when a timely protest is filed the cabinet secretary will not proceed further with the award until the dispute is resolved as detailed below unless or until the cabinet secretary determines that the award of the contract is necessary to protect the substantial interests of the public and the department .
the cabinet secretary retains the right to cancel the award of contract or to reject all bids and issue a new invitation for bids when it is in the best interest of the public and the department num .
when a timely protest is filed the bids of both the apparent low bidder and the next apparent low bidder shall be automatically extended an additional num days .
the department will subject to other provisions in the specifications award the contract within num days of the bid opening section num award and execution of contract page num num .
within seven num days of receiving a timely bid protest the cabinet secretary or the cabinet secretarys designated informal hearing officer will cause to be delivered by mail postage prepaid or by facsimile copy or by email transmission a letter notifying all parties to the grievance of the date time and place to appear with all necessary material evidence for an informal hearing in the departments general office or elsewhere as identified .
such letter shall include a copy of the written protest .
whenever practicable the parties shall be afforded at least seven num days notice of the scheduled informal hearing .
if an informal hearing officer is designated by the cabinet secretary the designee shall not be a person who made or approved the decision under review or a subordinate of such person during the past num months num .
the informal hearing officer has absolute discretion in establishing the degree of formality for the informal hearing .
the formal rules of evidence or civil procedure do not apply to the informal hearing .
while parties to an informal hearing may call their own witnesses they are not afforded the opportunity to subpoena or crossexamine witnesses .
parties are permitted to submit documentary evidence and written arguments at the informal hearing .
parties may supplement the record or provide supplemental written arguments after the initial hearing date provided that such materials are provided to the informal hearing officer at least three num days prior to the deadline to issue a determination letter .
the presentation of evidence and argument may be limited by the informal hearing officer .
the informal hearing officer shall have the authority to question any party or witness .
the informal hearing officer may limit the time for oral argument exclude the participation or testimony of any person who becomes belligerent or unruly or any representative who attempts to harass any witness and refuse to hear testimony or argument if it is cumulative not relevant or is immaterial to the issues .
at disposition the informal hearing officer is not restricted to considering only those documents and testimony introduced at the informal hearing but may consider evidence that is reliable accurate and competently obtained from either party .
when such information is obtained the hearing officer shall provide it to both parties and provide num hours for rebuttal before the final decision .
the informal hearing officer is responsible for maintaining a complete record of the informal hearing including all evidence transcripts of the hearing and written arguments submitted by the parties .
a complete record of the testimony and argument at the informal hearing shall whenever practicable be either stenographically or electronically recorded by a certified court reporter or monitor .
transcripts or recordings of the proceeding if available may be supplied to any party at their own expense upon request to the court reporter or monitor num .
within seven num days of the initial hearing date the cabinet secretary or the cabinet secretarys designated informal hearing officer will issue a determination letter stating the reasons for the action taken and informing the losing party of its right under nmsa num num to file an appeal in santa fe district court within num days of the issuance of the adverse determination .
the determination letter shall constitute the final department decision or order num .
the award of the contract to the lowest responsible bidder based upon the departments determination letter shall be conditioned upon the unsuccessful party not appealing under nmsa num num to the santa fe district court within num days of receiving the determination letter .
the award letter if it is mailed within num days of the bid opening shall bind the lowest responsible bidder to accept the contract or to reject the contract and forfeit the bid guaranty it has provided num .
if an appeal is filed pursuant to nmsa num num the department may extend the date of the award letter to a later date as agreed upon by the department and the lowest responsible bidder .
when such an extension can not be agreed upon or for any other reason the department may proceed with the award to the lowest responsible bidder if the cabinet secretary determines that the award of the contract is necessary to protect the substantial interests of the public and the department or may cancel the award of the contract or reject all bids and issue a new invitation for bids when it is in the best interest of the public and the department section num award and execution of contract page num num .
if a bidder successfully prevails on appeal a bidder is limited to one num of two num remedies arising from a bidding dispute award of the contract or if the contract can no longer be practicably awarded to the bidder or it is not in the best interest of the public and the department to award the contract to the bidder the contractors reasonable documented bid preparation costs and num .
each party shall bear its own attorneys fees and costs .
num cancellation of award the department may cancel the award of any contract or reject all bids and issue a new invitation for bids at any time prior to the execution of the contract by all parties without incurring liability where such cancellation is deemed by the cabinet secretary to be in the best interests of the public and the department .
no bidder has a contractual equitable implied or any other right to the contract until executed by both parties .
num return of bid guaranty immediately following the opening and checking of bids the department will return all bid guaranties submitted in the form of a check except for those of the two num lowest bidders .
the department will return the bid guaranty of the unsuccessful of the two num lowest bidders if submitted in the form of a check within ten num days of the contract award .
the department will return the retained bid guaranty of the successful bidder if in the form of a check after the successful bidder has furnished satisfactory contract bonds and the contract has been executed .
the department will return bid guaranties in the form of bid bonds only upon the request of an unsuccessful bidder .
num requirement of contract bonds return the signed contract with contract bonds .
the value of each bond shall equal the total original contract amount .
the department must approve the surety and the form of the contract bonds .
all bonds shall be procured from sureties with an a.m. best company financial strength rating level of a or better class vii or better unless otherwise approved in writing by the department .
in no event shall the department approve the use of a surety with an a.m. best company financial strength rating level of b or worse .
num execution and approval of contract the successful bidder shall sign and return the contract and provide contract bonds and lists of all subcontractors and suppliers within num days of receiving the contract .
if the department fails to execute the contract within num days of receiving the signed contract and contract bonds from the successful bidder the bidder may withdraw the bid without penalty .
no contract shall be effective until it has been fully executed by the department and the contractor .
num failure to execute contract failure by the successful bidder to return the signed contract and contract bonds within num days of receiving the contract shall constitute just cause for cancellation of the award and the forfeiture of the bid guaranty which shall become the property of the department not as a penalty but as liquidation of reasonable damages sustained .
the department may then award the contract to the bidder with the next lowest responsive bid reject all bids reject all bids and issue a new invitation for bids or take other actions as the department may decide .
section num scope of work page num section num scope of work num intent of the contract the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion in every manner and detail of the work described in accordance with the plans specifications and contract terms except for materials supplied by the department in accordance with section num departmentprovided material .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor is vested with the discretion and is wholly and solely responsible for selecting and managing the means and methods for performing the work including determining the suitability of equipment experience of labor and staff construction management and scheduling production rates materials and compliance with all federal state and local laws and regulations .
the contract is a final complete and exclusive statement of the written and executed agreement of the parties .
no modifications limitations waivers or discharge of the contract or any of its terms shall bind the department unless made in a written change order signed by the project manager .
a course of performance or course of dealing on this contract or any other contract between the department and a contractor shall not constitute a modification or waiver of the contract and shall not give rise to any claim including any cause of action based upon promissory estoppel estoppel waiver or detrimental reliance .
num significant changes in the character of the work the department reserves the right to make in writing modifications in quantity and alterations to the work .
such changes will not invalidate the contract nor release the contractors surety and the contractor shall perform the work as altered .
if modifying the quantities or altering the work significantly changes the character of the work the project manager will make an adjustment to the contract which excludes additional profit .
the project manager and the contractor shall agree upon the adjustment prior to the contractors performance of the work .
if an agreement is not reached the project manager will determine a fair and equitable adjustment .
if the modifications or alterations do not significantly change the character of the work the department will pay for the altered work in accordance with the contract bid items .
significant change applies only to modifications or alterations that num .
materially change in kind or nature the character of the work including the critical path or num .
increase or decrease a major contract item by twentyfive percent num .
adjusted compensation shall apply only to the following a .
for quantity in excess of one hundred twentyfive percent num of the original contract item quantity or b .
for the case of a decrease below seventy five percent num of the original contract item quantity the adjusted compensation will apply to the total quantity placed .
num .
affect work performed under a departmentapproved subcontract .
the department will make adjustments if prior to the work the contractor demonstrates that the change adversely affects the subcontractors work or payment .
the department shall not consider customary increases or decreases in quantities necessary to complete the work changed by the contractors schedule of operations his or her planning of the work or unscheduled mobilizations .
num differing site conditions section num scope of work page num the contractor and the project manager shall provide each other with prompt written notice not to exceed two num working days of the following conditions encountered on the project during the progress of the work num .
latent physical conditions differing materially from those shown in the contract or num .
unknown conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work .
the party providing notice shall do so before the conditions are disturbed or as soon thereafter as practicable and before the affected work continues .
pursuant to section num schedule format the contractor shall provide a revised schedule to the project manager within seven num days of the discovery or notice of a differing site condition this timeframe may be extended in writing by the project manager .
the project manager will decide within a two num working days after written notification whether the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required to perform the work .
the project manager will notify the contractor of this decision .
the project manager will adjust the contract for differing site conditions in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work and will include the costs of delays but exclude anticipated profit in accordance with section num compensation for claims .
no contract adjustment or additional compensation or time which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed if a differing site condition could have been discovered or anticipated by the contractor through the exercise of prebid due diligence .
the contractor is not entitled to a claim due to a differing site condition unless the contractor has provided the required written notice pursuant to section num notice of potential claim .
if the contractor or the project manager fails to provide prompt written notice which results in additional costs to the department which could have been mitigated the department shall adjust the contract accordingly .
num extra work the contractor shall perform extra work at the departments written direction and in accordance with the specifications .
the department shall pay for extra work in accordance with section num significant changes in the character of work and section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work .
num maintenance of traffic the contractor shall provide erect and maintain barricades warning signs flaggers and pilot cars in accordance with the version of the mutcd current at the time of letting and the accepted vehicular and pedestrian traffic control plan and division num traffic control devices .
the contractor shall provide flaggers with proper training and equipment in accordance with the mutcd current edition .
the contractor shall keep flagging equipment clean and in good repair .
the contractor shall keep the existing roadway open with a minimum of inconvenience to the traveling public or provide an approved alternate route .
the contractors equipment shall enter and leave the open roadway in the direction of public traffic except with the approval of the project manager .
the contractor shall not endanger the traveling public when moving equipment on or across the open roadway .
the project manager may direct the contractor to maintain the pavement surface of open traffic lanes adjacent to the work zone within the limits of the project traffic control .
the department will pay for this work in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work and will either be negotiated or paid by force account .
section num scope of work page num the department is responsible for snow removal on sections of roadway open to the traveling public .
the project manager will coordinate snow removal with the contractor and the maintenance patrol .
the contractor is responsible for snow removal on sections of the roadway not open to the traveling public as necessary for protection of the work .
the contractor shall furnish warning devices take protective and safety measures provided in this section and complete shoulder work drainage structures or other features of the work .
if the contractor fails to do so the project manager will notify the contractor in writing of the deficiency and the contractor shall take corrective action within the time frame specified by the project manager .
if the contractor does not take corrective action in this period the project manager may make corrections or terminate the contract in accordance with section num default of contract .
the contractor shall reimburse the department for department incurred costs of such corrections plus an additional ten percent num for administrative costs .
the contractor shall provide reasonable vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to adjoining properties during the duration of the contract .
the contractor shall advise and schedule access modifications with local business owners and residences and the project manager at least num hours in advance .
the contractor shall open partially completed sections of the roadway to traffic under the following conditions num .
at the project managers direction num .
as shown on the plans or num .
if requested by the contractor and approved by the project manager .
such an opening shall not constitute a full or partial acceptance of the work or a waiver of any contract provisions .
the project manager will provide written instructions stating any sections not shown on the plans which are to be opened .
if the project manager directs the opening of a roadway section because of an unforeseen need that is not the fault of the contractor the department will negotiate a change order for additional compensation or additional time if any qualifying under section num significant changes in the character of the work .
if a roadway section is opened at the request of the contractor the contractor shall remain liable for the section until final acceptance of the project and must repair at its own expense any resultant damage to the section except differing site conditions which shall be paid as extra work under section num significant changes in the character of the work and section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work .
num rights in and use of materials found on the work the contractor may use stone gravel sand or other material meeting contract requirements and found in an excavation required by the contract .
the department will pay for the excavation at the bid item unit price for excavation and will pay for the pay item for which the contractor uses the material .
if the excavated material would have been used to construct embankments or bridge approaches or for other purposes any of which would have been required to complete the contract the contractor shall replace the excavated material with acceptable material at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not charge the contractor for the use of the excavated material .
the contractor shall obtain written authorization from the project manager before excavating material that is within the right of way but outside the grading limits as shown by the slope and grade lines .
prior to granting approval the project manager will verify that the requirements of section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public have been met .
if not previously cleared environmentally meeting these requirements will be the responsibility of the contractor .
section num scope of work page num unless otherwise provided the contractor may temporarily use the material from existing structures in the erection of a new structure but shall not without the approval of the project manager cut or otherwise damage such materials .
num final cleanup before final acceptance the contractor shall clean waste including concrete and asphalt chunks loose rock excess materials and temporary structures from the roadway and pit sites and ground used in connection with the work .
leave all parts of the work in an acceptable condition .
to avoid the requirement of removal of equipment from private property before final acceptance make appropriate arrangements with private property owners .
the contractor shall revegetate borrow pits haul roads and all occupied ground in accordance with section num revegetation and the contract .
acceptance by the project manager of a letter of intent from the landowner for future use may exempt haul roads or other areas from this requirement .
the contractor shall strip borrow pits and surfacing pits when indicated on the plans and stockpile topsoil .
after construction operations are complete place stockpiled materials uniformly over the stripped area to form a seedbed for planting .
the contractor shall spread stockpiled waste that is not covered by a land owner agreement over the stripped area prior to placing the topsoil .
stripping stockpiling and replacement of topsoil and spreading of stockpiled waste shall be incidental to completion of the work unless a bid item for them exists in the bid .
the contractor shall not allow borrow pits and surfacing pits to change the general pattern of existing drainage .
unless borrow pits or surfacing pits are suitable to develop as ponds or lakes and the property owner has notified the department in writing that such development is planned the contractor shall where practicable leave all pits well drained .
the contractor shall when excavation is complete contour grade pits except quarry pits to blend with the natural topography of the surrounding area or in accordance with the contract or agreements with the property owners .
pits located on state or federal land are governed by the appropriate requirements of their agency .
the above requirements do not apply to a commercial source .
num value engineering cost proposal vecp when the total original contract amount exceeds num the contractor may submit a vecp which does not impair or degrade any of the following num .
service life num .
economy of operation num .
ease of maintenance num .
desired appearance num .
safety num .
environmental requirements or num .
any other essential functions and characteristics of the project .
the contractor shall provide sufficient information in writing for a vecp to stand on its own merit and require minimal verification as determined by the department .
num content requirements the contractor shall provide at a minimum the following information in writing in a vecp num .
a statement identifying the submittal as a vecp section num scope of work page num num .
a description of the work to be performed under the contract and under the vecp num .
an engineering analysis including drawings computations and other documents necessary for an evaluation by the department num .
a list of the contract requirements that must be changed if the department adopts the proposal and a recommended way to make these changes num .
a detailed estimate of the contractors cost to perform the work under the existing contract and under the proposal including the cost of developing and implementing the change num .
a list of the pay items affected by the proposal and the resulting difference in quantities num .
an assessment of the effects that the adoption of the proposal will have on other department costs including future maintenance and operation num .
a deadline if any for the department to accept the proposal and num .
a statement of the effect that adoption of the proposal will have on the contract time and the schedule .
num procedural requirements the following requirements and procedures apply to vecp num .
in order to expedite the processing of a vecp and to minimize costly studies by the contractor and department the contractor may submit to the department on a department form a summary of the vecp .
the department will evaluate the summary for merit and submit a recommendation to the contractor .
a favorable recommendation to the contractor shall not be construed as acceptance of all or any part of the submittal num .
the department will not accept a vecp if it is similar to a change in the plans or specifications the department is considering for the project at the time the proposal is submitted or if the proposal is based upon or similar to the standard specifications special provisions standard drawing serials or procedures the department adopted after the advertisement for the contract num .
the department will execute a change order with the necessary contract modifications if it accepts a vecp num .
if the department approves a vecp only the contractor who initially submitted the proposal will be eligible for payment in accordance with section num value engineering cost proposals vecp .
in this case the approved vecp will apply only to those contracts which were awarded to the contractor before submission of the vecp and for which the proposal was submitted num .
the department will deduct from the net savings the costs it incurs implementing the accepted vecp and the changes num .
the department will be the sole judge of the estimated net savings resulting from an approved vecp .
in determining the estimated net savings the department may disregard the bid item unit price if in the departments judgment the prices are not a fair measurement of the work performed or deleted .
the department will also determine the net savings by considering actual jmfs shrink and swell factors and other actual design criteria used num .
the contractors share of an approved vecp is num of the net savings num .
the contractors share of num of the net savings shall be full compensation for effecting all changes pursuant to the change order resulting from an approved vecp num .
the department will not pay for the actual costs of implementing an approved vecp if these costs exceed the contract amount originally committed num .
when the district engineer determines the actual net savings the department will execute a change order for a lump sum of the contractors share .
the project manager may approve a schedule for progress payments of the lump sum and section num scope of work page num num .
in preparing a vecp the contractor shall perform an independent examination of the affected work site .
the department will rely exclusively upon the accuracy of the engineering data upon which the vecp is based and will not be required to perform additional investigations crosschecks or site examinations .
the departments acceptance or adoption of a vecp shall not be construed to alleviate or reduce the contractors full and absolute liability if the implementation of the proposal fails to satisfactorily perform .
except as set forth in section num project closure the contractors liability will not extend beyond the departments final written acceptance .
section num control of work page num section num control of work num responsibility and authority of the department num the department has the authority to num .
manage the contract num .
alter the plans num .
modify the contract by change order num .
supervise and terminate the contract as expressly provided in other sections of the standard specifications and num .
wholly or partially suspend the work for cause e.g .
weather conditions discovery of cultural resource and utility conflicts .
the project manager may also wholly or partially suspend the work for reasons beyond the control of the contractor or not connected to the construction of the project when the project manager deems such a suspension to be in the best interests of the public and the department .
failure by the contractor to suspend work immediately may result in the contractor being in default of contract pursuant to section num default of contract .
the department will pay for work caused by such a suspension pursuant to section num significant changes in the character of work and will adjust any contract time for such a suspension pursuant to section num determination and extension of contract time .
num department authority to suspend work the department has the authority to wholly or partially suspend the work and to prepare and post a zero dollar num progress payment if the contractor num .
fails to correct unsafe conditions num .
fails to comply with any term or condition of the contract num .
fails to observe and comply with any federal or state law or regulation num .
fails to carry out directions of the project manager or num .
fails to perform satisfactory work .
failure by the contractor to suspend work immediately may result in the contractor being in default of contract pursuant to section num default of contract .
the contractor shall not receive additional compensation or time for these failures .
if during the course of the project the contractors personnel are not performing satisfactory work the project manager may order the contractor to suspend operations until the contractor corrects the problem at no cost to the department .
the departments ability to withhold progress payments in part or in their entirety as part of a suspension as authorized by this section supplements the departments ability pursuant to section num progress payments until the contractor complies with the contract .
num contractor request for suspension the contractor may request a suspension of the work wholly or partially but the contractor shall not suspend the work without written approval from the project manager .
num plans and working drawings the contractor shall perform the work in accordance with the details shown on the plans prepared by the department and the approved working drawings prepared and submitted by the contractor .
the contractor shall have the sole responsibility for verifying pertinent dimensions in the field before submitting such working drawings to the department .
section num control of work page num the project manager will review the working drawings although the project managers review does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the satisfactory completion of the work .
the contractor shall obtain written approval of the working drawings from the project manager before beginning work covered by the drawings and shall not alter or amend such drawings without the prior written approval of the project manager .
the furnishing of all working drawings is incidental .
num compliance with plans and specifications the contractor shall perform the work and provide materials in substantial compliance with the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements as specified by the contract .
if work does not comply with the contract the project manager may determine if the nonconforming work is nonetheless acceptable .
if accepted the project manager will document the basis of acceptance by change order and provide an adjustment in the contract price for work or materials as necessary .
if the work or materials do not comply with the contract and the project manager determines they are unacceptable the contractor shall remove replace and correct the work or materials at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor has an affirmative duty to perform all work and provide materials in compliance with the contract .
the departments failure to discover or reject materials or work not in accordance with the contract during the progress of work shall not be considered an acceptance of the work or materials or a waiver of defects .
the failure to properly perform inspections tests or approvals by the department shall not relieve the contractor from its obligation to perform the work and provide materials in strict conformance with the contract .
num coordination of contract documents the following documents are essential parts of the contract and in their totality constitute the contract and are intended to be complementary .
in case of a discrepancy the documents will govern in the following order of importance num .
addenda num .
required documents for bid submittal num .
notice to contractors num .
invitation for bids num .
special provisions num .
plans other than standard drawings num .
supplemental specifications num .
standard specifications and num .
standard drawings .
dimensions given on the plans or that can be calculated govern over scaled dimensions .
if a contract or plan discrepancy is discovered after the award of the project the contractor shall upon discovery promptly notify in writing the project manager of errors or omissions in the plans contradictions within these documents or contradictions between the contract documents and the worksite .
unless otherwise directed by the project manager the project manager will resolve the discrepancy in writing before the contractor proceeds further with performance of the affected work .
the project manager and the contractor may agree that the contractor shall obtain drawings modifications or other documents necessary to correct the error or omission .
the department will pay for this work pursuant to section num significant changes in the character of the work .
num cooperation by contractor section num control of work page num the contractor shall monitor the work at all times select and manage the means and methods for performing the work facilitate the timely progress of the work and cooperate completely with department personnel and other contractors .
regardless of the amount subcontracted the contractor shall have on the project at all times during the course of the work a competent and qualified superintendent who num .
reads and understands the contract documents as listed in section num coordination of contract documents num .
possesses substantial experience in the type of work being performed num .
possesses full authority to execute the orders of the project manager without delay and to promptly supply such materials equipment tools labor and incidentals as may be required by the work num .
can be contacted at an office maintained by the contractor on the jobsite or at a convenient location nearby and num .
attends the preconstruction conference and other meetings associated with the project as directed by the project manager .
the department will provide a project manager with an adequate staff and crew to keep pace with the contractors progress and will maintain an office at a convenient location .
the contractor shall recognize the project manager as the departments contact for all matters relating to the project and promptly submit all documentation or notice required by the contract to the project manager .
num cooperation with utilities the contractor shall copy the project manager on all communications with affected utilities .
for telephonic communications a summary of the communication shall be provided to the project manager .
the department will notify all utility companies all pipeline owners or other parties who may be affected by the proposed construction and will endeavor to have all the necessary adjustments of utility fixtures pipelines and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction made before the award of the contract or as soon as practicable thereafter .
the contractor will cooperate with all such relocations and adjustments performed by others during the course of the contract .
the contractor shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of nmsa num num et seq .
during the performance of the work .
those duties include providing telephonic advance notice of the commencement extent and duration of the excavation work to the onecall notification system operating in the intended excavation area notifying appropriate onecall notification center or underground facility owner or operator of planned excavation in order to allow the location and marking of the location of underground facilities requesting owners or operators of underground facilities to reaffirm line locations every ten num working days after an initial request to locate not moving or obliterating utility location markings and immediately notifying the owner of any underground facilities which may have been damaged or dislocated during the excavation work .
upon request the department will make available to the contractor all information received from utility companies pipeline owners and other parties that the department has notified concerning the proposed construction .
this departmentfurnished information does not abrogate the contractors responsibility for any further verifications and utility inquiries necessary to properly address permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in the performance of the work .
the following items which are to be relocated or adjusted will be moved by others at no expense to the contractor unless otherwise provided for in the special provisions or in the plans num .
potable and nonpotable waterlines section num control of work page num num .
sanitary sewer or storm drain lines num .
electric or communication lines num .
gas or petroleum product lines num .
irrigation systems and appurtenances num .
pumping generation microwave metering and substation facilities num .
individual property service and metering connections num .
utility manholes num .
galleries conduits and cables num .
switching equipment num .
valve boxes num .
highway street or road lighting and num .
traffic signals .
if the utilities or others fail to relocate or adjust utility items and the contract does not impose the responsibility for the relocation or adjustment on the contractor the department may require the contractor to effect the relocation or adjustment .
the relocation or adjustment will be covered by a change order and the contractor shall perform such work under force account basis in accordance with section num scope of work and section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work .
subject to compliance with section num notice of potential claim section num administrative remedy and section num schedule format the contractor may receive additional time under section num determination and extension of contract time for delays caused by the failure of a utility owner or others to make a timely relocation or adjustment or for delays caused by utilities not identified by the contract .
subject to compliance with section num notice of potential claim section num administrative remedy and section num schedule format the contractor may receive compensation under section num compensation for claims for the cost of delays resulting from the failure of a utility owner or others to make a timely relocation or adjustment .
if public or private utility lines or pipelines or other appurtenances unknown to the department and the contractor are encountered during the work the contractor shall immediately suspend construction operations at the site of the utility in question until the department and the utility owner negotiate and complete the required relocation or adjustment work in other areas of the project shall continue .
the contractor shall be responsible for resolving all problems resulting from the contractors failure to make inquiries or notify all known utility companies pipeline owners or other parties of any work or conflicts .
in this instance the contractor shall not be allowed adjustments for delays or extra expense .
num cooperation between contractors the department reserves the right at any time to contract for and have performed other work on or near the project .
when the department anticipates multiple contractors working within the same project limits the bid documents will include sufficient information to allow bidders to reasonably estimate the impact of the concurrent work .
if the department employs multiple contractors and conflicts occur which could not have been reasonably anticipated at the time of the bid openings the department will allow an adjustment in the contract time and price in accordance with section num schedule and section num force account .
the contractor shall num .
plan conduct and sequence the contractors work without unnecessarily interfering with or hindering the progress of other contractors work num .
cooperate with contractors working on the same or adjacent project as directed section num control of work page num num .
integrate the sequence of the contractors work with the activities of other contractors num .
arrange the work and place and dispose of the materials being used so as not to unreasonably interfere with the operation of other contractors and num .
protect and hold harmless the department for all damages or claims as per section num responsibility for third party claims and duty to defend .
if the contractor and one num or more other contractors are unable to agree upon the sequence of work or other matters the contractors shall petition the project manager in writing for a decision .
the project manager will allow a reasonable time for all parties to respond and after reviewing the information received will issue a decision binding on all parties within seven num days of receiving such information .
num authority and duties of the project manager num project manager authority the project manager is a designee of the cabinet secretary with authority commensurate with that of the secretary and has the following responsibilities num .
immediate charge of the details of the project num .
administration and satisfactory completion of the project and num .
authority to reject unaccepted work and material .
num contractor inquiries to project manager the contractor shall submit project issues to the project manager who will resolve all questions regarding num .
the quality and acceptance of materials provided num .
the quality and acceptance of work performed or planned num .
rate of progress of the work num .
interpretation of the contract num .
acceptable performance of the contract requirements num .
administration of payments and num .
other contract inquiries .
the decision of the project manager will be in writing and delivered to the contractors superintendent as soon as reasonably practicable .
num duties of the inspector num inspector authority the department authorizes its inspectors to num .
inspect the work num .
inspect the preparation fabrication or manufacture of materials and num .
reject work or materials not in conformance with the contract until any issues can be referred to the project manager for a decision .
the contractor shall refer questions at issue to the project manager for a decision .
num inspector authority limitations the department does not authorize its inspectors to num .
alter or waive any provision of the contract num .
issue instructions contrary to the contract section num control of work page num num .
act as the foreman for the contractor or num .
suspend the work except for safety reasons .
num inspection of work the contractor shall provide the department with num hour notice for inspection of the work .
failure by the contractor to provide the proper notice may result in the department directing the work performed without inspection to be removed at no cost to the department .
the contractor shall provide the department access to the work and provide all information and assistance requested or required to make a complete and detailed inspection of materials and work .
all materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the department .
the department shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the contractor as is required by the department to make a complete and detailed inspection .
the project manager may direct the contractor to remove or uncover portions of the finished work at any time before final acceptance of the work .
the contractor shall restore the portions of the work to the standard required by the contract after the project managers examination .
if the examined work is acceptable the department will pay for the removal and restoration as extra work under section num scope of work and section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work .
however if the examined work is unacceptable the contractor shall remove and restore the work at no additional cost to the department .
the absence or presence of a department inspector shall not relieve the contractor from any responsibility under the contract for acceptable work in conformity with the contract .
the failure to properly perform inspections tests or approvals by the department shall not relieve the contractor from its obligation to perform the work in strict conformance with the contract .
when a unit of government political subdivision or a railroad corporation is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by the contract its representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
this inspection shall not make the unit of government or political subdivision or the railroad corporation a party to the contract and shall not interfere with the rights of either party .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work work that does not conform to the requirements of the contract shall be unacceptable unless it is determined by the project manager to be acceptable under the provisions of section num compliance with plans and specifications .
the contractor shall remove unacceptable work resulting from causes existing before the final acceptance of the work and replace in an acceptable manner .
the project manager will set the time limit for the replacement work .
the contractor shall not perform work before the department establishes lines and grades .
the department shall not pay for the following under the provisions of the contract num .
work performed contrary to the project managers direction or as provided in the contract num .
work performed beyond the lines and grades on the plans or num .
work performed without authority .
the department may order the contractor to remove or replace such work at no additional cost to the department .
upon failure of the contractor to comply with the removal and replacement of unacceptable or unauthorized work within the time specified by the project manager the project manager shall have authority to cause unacceptable work to be remedied or removed section num control of work page num and replaced and unauthorized work to be removed by others with the costs to be deducted from monies due or to become due to the contractor .
num load restrictions the contractor shall observe legal load restrictions when hauling equipment or material on public roads outside of the project or on roadways within the project .
the project manager may approve exceptions in writing provided the contractor has obtained the proper oversize and overweight permits .
the contractor is liable for damage that may result from moving equipment even with the issuance of a special permit .
the contractor shall not use equipment or haul loads that will cause damage to structures roadway or any other construction regardless of legal load allowances .
the contractor may exceed legal loads on treated base under construction with approval from the project manager .
the department will not allow loads over pcc construction before the minimum curing period has expired or specified strength is obtained .
if the project manager determines that hauling operations are causing undue damage to existing roadways or structures the project manager will issue a written order to the contractor to stop operations causing the damage in accordance with section num contract adustments for suspention of work .
within seventy two num hours of the notice the project manager will decide on one num or more of the following solutions num .
change the haul route num .
reduce the allowable load limit and num .
allow the operations to continue with the requirement that the contractor repair all damaged areas at ½ unit bid prices .
num haul roads if the contract establishes material sources and haul roads and the contractor elects to use others the department will not pay the contractor for corrective actions required to repair damage to existing roadway and structures resulting from the contractors sources and hauling operations .
if the contract specifies that the contractor use established material sources and haul roads the department will determine what preservation or restoration of the existing roadway or structures is necessary payment shall be made pursuant to section num corrective actions and methods of payment .
if the contractors own material sources are used but transported on some contract specified haul roads and the department determines that preservation or restoration of the existing roadway or structures is necessary the corrective action and method of payment will be as follows num .
the contractor shall repair haul roads not established by the contract at no additional cost to the department and num .
the department will pay for repairs to contractestablished haul roads in accordance with section num corrective actions and methods of payment .
the project manager will determine the extent of the corrective action .
num corrective actions and methods of payment num change in haul route if the project manager changes the haul route the department will modify the contractors payment per the following equation num num d d t r p num section num control of work page num where p is the payment modification in dollars r is the rate in dollars per ton mile determined in accordance with section num measurement and payment .
t is the weight of material hauled from the new stockpile area in tons num d is the original haul distance measured from the roadway access point to the original stockpile area numd is the new haul distance measured from the roadway access point to the new stockpile area num change in allowable load limit if the project manager reduces the allowable load limit the department will pay the contractor in accordance with the following equation la lr la d r qf p num where p is the additional payment in dollars r is the rate in dollars per ton mile determined in accordance with section num measurement and payment .
qf is the total quantity of material hauled at the reduced load limit in tons la is the allowable load limit in tons lr is the reduced load limit in tons d is the haul distance in miles if the project manager allows operations to continue the department will pay the contractor for the material used to make the repairs at the bid item unit price or in accordance with section num measurement and payment .
if an item is not part of the contract the department will negotiate a new unit price .
if a structure or existing roadway must be repaired the department may pay the contractor for hauling repair materials using a rate requested and justified by the contractor and approved by the project manager .
num reserved num maintenance during construction the contractor shall maintain the work during construction and until the department accepts the work except as otherwise provided in section num maintenance of traffic and section num acceptance .
this maintenance shall consist of continuous daily work with adequate equipment and forces so that the roadway and structures are kept in satisfactory condition .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the project free and clear of deleterious materials including debris weather related remnants snow loose materials and trash .
the department shall be responsible for snow removal operations on travel lanes open and utilized by the public .
in the case of a contract for placing a course on a previously constructed course or subgrade the contractor shall maintain the previous course or subgrade during all construction operations including when the plan requires the contractor to place traffic on the unfinished roadway .
all maintenance work during construction and before the project is accepted shall be incidental .
the department shall not pay the contractor an additional amount for this work section num control of work page num except in accordance with section num maintenance of traffic and section num acceptance .
num failure to maintain roadway or structure if the contractor fails to maintain the project in accordance with section num maintenance during construction the project manager shall notify the contractor in writing of the failure .
if the contractor does not begin maintenance after such notice the project manager may begin maintenance of the project .
if the contractor does not take corrective action in this period the project manager may make corrections or terminate the contract in accordance with section num default of contract .
for corrective actions implemented by the project manger the contractor shall reimburse the department for department incurred costs of such maintenance plus an additional ten percent num for administrative costs .
num contract adjustment for suspension of work if the work is suspended by the project manager in writing pursuant to section num department authority to suspend work for an unreasonable time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry the contractor may submit to the project manager a notice of intent to claim in accordance with section num notice of potential claim which must be accompanied by a proposed revised schedule pursuant to section num schedule format .
upon receipt the project manager will evaluate the contractors request .
if the project manager agrees that the cost and time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather conditions the project manager will make an adjustment in accordance with section num compensation for claims and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the project manager will notify the contractor of the decision .
the department will not make a contract adjustment under this clause if the contract performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause .
the department will not make a contract adjustment under this clause if a contract adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
num acceptance num partial acceptance the contractor may request that the project manager inspect a portion of the project e.g .
a structure a section of road etc .
at any time during the work .
if the project manager finds that portion to be in accordance with the contract the project manager may accept that portion as complete and without waiving the provisions in section num compliance with plans and specifications and section num project closure the contractor may be relieved of further responsibility for that portion unless the department discovers latent defects before final acceptance of the work .
such partial acceptance does not void or alter the contract .
the department will accept permanent traffic safety and control devices installed in accordance with the contract with all ancillary components and being used by the public upon installation but before completion of the remaining work .
permanently installed items accepted on this basis are limited to the following num .
guardrail num .
impact attenuators num .
traffic signals num .
signs num .
lighting section num control of work page num num .
raised pavement markers num .
cwb num .
concrete bridge parapet num .
bridge railing num .
guard cable num .
guardrail anchorages num .
permanent pavement markings and num .
fence .
all required performance tests and guarantees shall remain applicable .
the department or the contractor will repair or replace any damage theft or vandalism to these items after acceptance in accordance with section num extra work .
if the damage to an item requires only partial repair or replacement and the contractor performs the work the department will pay the contractor in accordance with section num compensation for overrun underrun quantities .
the contractor shall repair or replace items damaged due to the contractors negligence at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall erect these items in a logical construction sequence .
the department shall not accept prematurely constructed items until they may be used for their intended purposes .
num notice of potential claim num .
the contractor shall only make claims in accordance with the contract pursuant to the exclusive administrative remedy and procedures set forth in this section and section num administrative remedy .
num .
the contractor shall not be entitled to pursue a claim if the project manager determines the work ordered is extra work in which case payment shall be made in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work .
num .
the contractor shall promptly notify the project manager in writing of the intent to make a claim and shall provide a contemporaneous statement of estimated damages or delay before beginning the work on which the claim is based but in no event shall notice be given later than seven num days of the contractor discovering the condition or issue giving rise to the claim or within seven num days of receipt of a notice of a differing site condition from the project manager or in the case of termination of contract under section num termination of contract no fault of contractor within num days of the effective termination date .
a notice of intent to claim shall include when relevant to the intended claim e.g .
when the contractor intends to seek a contract adjustment for time delay damages or reduction in liquidated damages etc .
a revised schedule pursuant to section num schedule format failure to include a revised schedule shall render the notice of intent to claim incomplete .
num .
such notice of intent to claim shall be given in order that the department can assess the situation make an initial determination as to the causes of the potential claim institute appropriate changes or procedures to resolve the matter to document issues related to the potential claim to track costs and possible delay and facilitate resolution of the potential claim .
the failure of the contractor to provide timely written notice of intent to make a claim and a contemporaneous statement of estimated damages or delay shall constitute a waiver or abandonment of the claim .
the contractor waives the right to assert a claim if the contractor fails to provide proper and complete notice of intent to claim .
num .
the contractor shall provide the project manager proper facilities to keep account of the actual cost of a claim the contractor waives the right to assert a claim if the project manager is not afforded proper facilities to keep account of actual cost .
the project manager may in the project managers discretion in writing waive the section num control of work page num requirement regarding the furnishing of proper facilities to keep account of actual cost upon a showing of adequate justification by the contractor .
num .
this section and the deadlines stated herein do not modify any of the deadlines for submitting revised schedules as provided in section num schedule .
num .
neither proper notice by the contractor nor the project managers accounts of the cost shall be construed to prove or validate the claim or be construed as an admission of liability .
num administrative remedy once the contractor has provided timely and proper notice of intent to make a claim pursuant to section num notice of potential claim the entire and complete administrative remedy and procedure to resolve all contractual disputes is provided by this section .
the complete administrative remedy is sequential in nature exclusive and consists of the following steps step i .
notice of intent to claim step ii .
submittal of the claim to the project manager step iii .
district level review and decision step iv .
service of request for reconsideration of claim to secretary step v. secretarys review which may include referral to claims board for an informal hearing and secretarys decision step vi .
service of request for arbitration or service of summons and complaint in state district court .
no contractual dispute or claim shall be accorded any level of review unless the dispute has been properly submitted reviewed and decided at the preceding level and the contractor rejects the decision by providing the requisite notices and submittals in writing to the proper department officials or employees within the time periods proscribed in this section and section num notice of potential claim .
the complete terms of a resolved claim regardless of the level of the administrative remedy shall be documented and memorialized via a change order executed by the contractor and the department .
the executed change order shall represent a final agreement to the total amount and time due for any and all work and items pertaining to the work associated with the change order .
unless otherwise provided in writing in the executed change order the executed change order shall operate as an accord and satisfaction of the claim and shall operate as a bar to any further claim by the contractor .
the department shall dismiss a contractors claim for failure to comply with the time limitations requirements and procedures set forth in this section and section num notice of potential claim .
each party shall bear its own attorneys fees costs and expert fees .
num district level the contractor shall submit the claim in writing to the project manager and include justification for the claim and the total amount requested within num days of the date that the work associated with the claim has been completed but in no event later than within num days of receipt of the departments proposed final payment statement estimate pursuant section num project closure .
the contractor may submit a claim only once .
once a claim is submitted to the project manager nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting the contractor to revive modify supplement enlarge or amend the claim other than providing additional documents and information in support of the claim .
the contractor shall be prohibited from amending either the bases of entitlement or the amount of any compensation or time stated for any and all issues claimed in the contractors written claim submitted hereunder and all further proceedings shall be limited solely to the bases of entitlement and section num control of work page num the amount of any compensation or time stated for any and all issues claimed in the contractors written claim submitted hereunder .
this shall not however preclude a contractor from withdrawing or reducing any of the bases of entitlement and the amount of any compensation or time stated for any and all issues claimed in the contractors written claim submitted hereunder at any time .
num .
the contractor has the burden of fully justifying and documenting the claim and shall provide to the project manager the following supporting documentation and information in support of the claim a .
description of the issue upon which the claim is based b .
location where the issue arose c. time and date the issue was identified and the dates impacted d. clear explanation of why the issue requires additional compensation or time or a change to the contract including references to the relevant portions of the contract e. copies of all written communications including correspondence and emails related to the issue f. a detailed compilation of the amount of additional compensation sought and a breakdown of the amount sought as follows documented additional job site labor expenses documented additional cost of materials and supplies a list of additional equipment costs claimed including each piece of equipment and the blue book rental rate claimed for each any other additional direct costs or damages and the documents in support thereof any additional indirect costs or damages and all documentation in support thereof g. where a claim seeks additional time time and compensation for delay adjustment of contract time or the reduction or elimination of liquidated damages previously submitted baseline schedule and revised schedules that comply with the requirements of section num schedule h. invoices identifying the labor materials and equipment used or proposed to be used i .
financial statements .
if the amount claimed by the contractor exceeds num or if requested by the project manager job cost reports and financial statements for the time periods relevant to the contract and the performance of the work .
the contractor shall make the contractors documents available for inspection by the project manager at the contractors project office .
the project manager may waive this requirement j .
bid documents .
if the amount claimed by the contractor exceeds num or if requested by the project manager the contractor shall make the contractors documents available for inspection by the project manager at the contractors project office information and calculations used to prepare and determine its bid for the contract prior to submission of the bid .
the required bid preparation documents as maintained by the contractor to be produced shall include clear itemization of the costs for each pay item broken down into components sufficient to allow a detailed cost estimate the costs allocated to each component broken down into the contractors usual estimate categories such as direct labor equipment materials and subcontractor cost indirect costs including the indirect cost allocations made to each bid item quantity takeoffs the construction and progress schedule and any conceptual schedules upon which the bid was based rates of production and progress marked up plans sheets and working drawings calculations copies and quotes from subcontractors and suppliers memoranda narratives and all other information used by the contractor to arrive at all of the prices contained in the bid .
the project manager may waive this requirement k. total amount of claim in terms of time and compensation and l. the failure of the contractor to provide the project manager all required supporting documentation and information shall constitute a waiver or abandonment of the claim and a failure to exhaust its administrative remedy .
section num control of work page num the project manager retains the right to request additional information and documents from the contractor to support the claim .
the contractor shall provide such additional information and documents .
num .
subcontractor claims shall not be considered except when timely submitted and certified by the contractor as the contractors claim .
num .
the district engineer or designee has num days from the date the claim is received by the project manager or additional time if agreed upon by both parties in writing to review and render a decision .
if the district engineer or designee does not make a written decision within the num days or the agreed upon time the claim is deemed denied by the district engineer .
the parties may engage in informal mediation to resolve the claim at the district level prior to the expiration of the time in which the district engineer or its designee may render a decision .
num secretary level within ten num days of the district engineers or designees denial of its claim or a written notice that the attempted mediation of its claim was unsuccessful the contractor may serve a written request upon the cabinet secretary to reconsider the claim .
service shall not be considered effective unless the request includes all supporting documentation provided at the district level and when applicable a copy of the district engineers written denial of the claim .
the cabinet secretary will provide a written decision on the request or will refer the claim to the departments claims board within num days of service of the request for reconsideration this deadline may be extended in writing by the cabinet secretary .
failure to timely serve a written request to reconsider the claim constitutes acceptance of the district engineers decision and a waiver and relinquishment of the claim .
if the contractor does not timely serve a written request to reconsider the claim the department may within num days of the district engineers decision execute a unilateral change order implementing the district engineers decision .
num .
service of process at the secretary level .
service of all notices and required documentation and information at the secretary level shall be made upon the cabinet secretary with a copy contemporaneously transmitted to both the district engineer and the departments office of general counsel .
service upon the cabinet secretary shall be made during the departments regular business hours by delivery in person or by certified mail postage prepaid return receipt requested or by delivery by a nationally recognized overnight or sameday courier service that obtains receipts .
the copy contemporaneously transmitted to the office of general counsel may be served by the means for serving the cabinet secretary or with prior written agreement of the office of general counsel by facsimile copy or by email transmission .
service of notice or documents made after the departments regular business hours shall not be effective until the next business day .
service upon the district engineer may be made by the means for serving the cabinet secretary or by facsimile copy or by email transmission and need not include the documentation previously submitted at the district level .
num .
certification of claim .
the written request to reconsider the claim shall include a notarized statement from an authorized representative or agent of the contractor certifying under penalty of perjury i have actual knowledge of the truth and accuracy of the claim and the supporting information and records the claim and submittals are true and correct the claim made for work on this contract is true and is made in good faith to the best of my personal knowledge and the claim and the remedies sought are supported by the terms of the contract .
where a claim is a subcontractor passthrough claim the certification shall further include the contractor certifies that the claim being passed through to the department is passed through in good faith has been independently verified by the contractor and is accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief .
num .
claims board .
if the claim is referred to a claims board an informal dispute resolution board by the cabinet secretary the secretary shall appoint three num independent panelists with relevant experience in highway and transportation design construction management engineering surveying construction contract section num control of work page num administration construction oversight work or law .
the claims board shall not include any current employees of the department or the contractor .
the claims board shall apply the contract to the claim and shall conduct an informal hearing in order to facilitate the expeditious and informal resolution of the claim .
attorneys representing the parties are permitted to attend the informal hearing however attorneys shall not participate in the informal hearing unless the claims board specifically addresses an issue to them or unless agreed to by both parties .
notification shall be provided by both parties a minimum of five num days prior to the hearing if legal representation will be attending the hearing .
the claims board shall issue a final written recommendation to the cabinet secretary to resolve the claim .
num .
secretary decision .
if the claim is referred to the departments claims board the cabinet secretary will provide a written decision within num days of the secretarys receipt of a final written recommendation on the claim from the claims board if the cabinet secretary does not provide a written decision within num days unless extended by the secretary in writing prior to expiration of time to issue a decision the claims boards recommendations shall be deemed to have been adopted by the cabinet secretary and shall operate as the secretarys decision .
num .
payment .
contractor is only entitled to payment of its claim pursuant to the cabinet secretarys decision if contractor fully accepts the decision and executes an accompanying change order .
if the contractor fails to execute a change order within num days of the cabinet secretarys decision the department may process a unilateral change order implementing the cabinet secretarys decision .
the contractors proceeding with litigation in state district court or arbitration shall operate as a waiver by the contractor to recover or receive payment pursuant to the cabinet secretarys decision .
num .
additional information .
the secretary retains the right to request additional information from the contractor to support the claim including information as is provided by section num district level i and j regardless of the project managers previous waiver of those subsections .
num arbitration num .
the contractor and department may agree to arbitrate the claim instead of proceeding to litigation in state district court .
arbitration may only be had at the mutual agreement of the contractor and the department .
arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the new mexico uniform arbitration act nmsa num numanum et seq .
and this section .
num .
the contractor may within ten num days of the issuance of the cabinet secretarys decision pursuant to section num secretary level serve upon the department a written request that the claim be submitted to arbitration .
service of the request to arbitrate the claim by the contractor shall be made pursuant to section num secretary level .
if either the contractor or the department fails to provide written notice agreeing to arbitrate the claim within ten num days of the request the request shall be deemed denied .
by the parties electing arbitration the contractor waives the right to redress through litigation filed in state district court .
the contractors proceeding with arbitration shall operate as a waiver by the contractor of recovery under any written decision issued by the cabinet secretary .
denial of a request or failure to agree to arbitrate a claim by any party does not modify any of the deadlines contained in this section .
num .
if the contractor and department agree to arbitrate the claim the arbitration panel shall consist of three num members .
num .
within num days of the agreement to arbitrate the claim the contractor shall submit the name of a panelist .
the contractors panelist shall a .
not be an employee of the contractor b .
have num years experience in highway construction management methods techniques or law or have an active professional license with the state of new mexico as an engineer surveyor or attorney with ten num years experience in highway construction management methods techniques or law section num control of work page num c. be either a resident of the state of new mexico or identify new mexico as the panelists principal place of business and d. agree to serve on the panel num .
within num days of receiving notice of the contractors panelist the cabinet secretary shall submit the name of a panelist .
the cabinet secretarys panelist shall a .
not be an employee of the department b .
have num years experience in highway construction management methods techniques or law or have an active professional license with the state of new mexico as an engineer surveyor or attorney with ten num years experience in highway construction management methods techniques or law c. be either a resident of the state of new mexico or identify new mexico as the panelists principal place of business and d. agree to serve on the panel num .
within num days after the cabinet secretary panel appointment the two num panelists will choose a third panelist .
the third panelist shall a .
be a professional arbitrator who is a member or diplomat of a nationally recognized professional arbitration organization such as the national academy of arbitrators or the american arbitration association or is a retired federal or new mexico district or appellate judge or be a former employee of fhwa b .
not be an employee or a contractor of either the department or the contractor and c. agree to serve on the panel num .
if the two num panelists are unable to agree a district judge from the first judicial district shall choose the third panelist from a list of four num prospective panelists who meet the requirements of the preceding paragraph two num each provided by the department and the contractor .
application to the court for this appointment shall be made by either or both parties within num days of the impasse the parties may agree in writing to extend this deadline .
num .
the panel shall hold the arbitration hearing in santa fe county unless otherwise approved by the department no later than num days after the panel is selected .
if the panel fails to meet this deadline or if the parties agree to extend the deadline the panel retains jurisdiction to hear and resolve the issues in dispute .
num .
each party will pay the expenses and fees of its chosen panelist and attorney .
both parties will share equally the expenses and fees of the third panelist .
if both parties agree they will share court reporter costs .
if not the party requesting the transcription will pay the full cost .
num .
the proceedings and the decision of the panel will be in accordance with the new mexico uniform arbitration act nmsa num numanum et seq .
the decision is final and binding and may be vacated confirmed or appealed only in accordance with the new mexico uniform arbitration act nmsa num numanum et seq .. num litigation if the contractor does not fully accept the cabinet secretarys decision and the contractor and the department do not agree to arbitrate the claim the contractor may within num days of the issuance of the secretarys decision proceed with litigation in state district court by filing a summons and complaint .
the contractor shall properly serve the summons and complaint within num days of the filing of the complaint in state district court .
the contractor shall however exhaust the mandatory mediation procedures of the new mexico public works mediation act nmsa num numcnum et seq .
before seeking judicial relief in state district court .
the contractor shall provide no less than seven num days notice of the convening of a mediation session .
service of notice of a mediation session shall be made upon both the cabinet secretary and the office of general counsel and shall otherwise comply with the new mexico public works mediation act .
failure to timely notice and section num control of work page num convene a mediation session and to timely file and serve a summons and complaint shall operate as a waiver and abandonment of contractors claim shall act as an acceptance of the cabinet secretarys decision and shall bar the contractor from proceeding to litigate the claim .
upon expiration of the time in which to mediate and file a summons and complaint or if a summons and complaint has been filed the expiration of the time in which to properly serve the summons and complaint the department may process a unilateral change order implementing the cabinet secretarys decision based on the contractors abandonment or waiver of its claim .
section num control of materials page num section num control of materials num contractorfurnished aggregate and borrow sources the department may reject material sources or specific areas within sources as identified in the bid package .
the contractor shall provide acceptable materials and shall notify the project manager of the material source prior to delivery to the project .
the project manager may approve materials at the source prior to delivery .
the department may reject sources or specific areas within sources due to failure to provide acceptable materials or due to environmental social or cultural concerns .
if the project manager determines that the sources of previously approved materials do not produce acceptable materials the contractor shall provide acceptable materials from other sources or make changes to the existing source to provide acceptable materials .
no additional compensation or time shall be provided to the contractor for unacceptable materials or for developing alternate source locations .
if the department does not list rejected sources in the bid package and then rejects a source or an area within a source on which the contractor relied to prepare its bid on the project the requirements of section num significant changes in the character of the work shall apply .
exploration and development of material sources by the contractor including related grt and tribal taxes shall be incidental .
requests for approval of sources of material are subject to environmental acceptability requirements .
the contractor shall submit environmental resource studies and cultural resource studies to the project manager and to the environmental program manager .
environmental acceptability requirements do not apply to commercial material sources but do apply to materials within a commercial material source that the contractor obtains with its own forces or forces belonging to its subcontractor .
if the contractor purchases material from a material source established for another project by another contractor working under contract to the department and if the material source must be expanded beyond the area where environmental and cultural resource approvals have previously been obtained pursuant to section num environmental and cultural resource studies and approvals then the requirements for environmental acceptability shall apply to the additional area and requirements of section num environmental and cultural resource studies and approvals must be completed by the contractor .
prior to delivery of materials to the project from an aggregate or borrow source the contractor shall provide the following documentation to the project manager num .
location of source num .
copies of lease agreements purchase orders or pit agreements the contractor has made with the pit owner or supplier num .
evidence of environmental acceptability which includes completing the environmental and cultural resource requirements of section num environmental and cultural resource studies and approvals .
such evidence shall where appropriate also include completing the environmental and cultural resource management recommendations num .
plans for restoration including contouring and revegetation if necessary and num .
testing results from a departmentapproved laboratory .
no material shall be delivered to the project until the project manager notifies the contractor in writing that the materials source is acceptable for use .
num supplier plant inspection section num control of materials page num the department may inspect materials at the suppliers plant .
in this event the contractor shall num .
cooperate and ensure the cooperation of its materials supplier num .
guarantee unrestricted entry at reasonable times to areas where the relevant material is being manufactured or produced num .
arrange for the necessary facilities to be adequately inspected for the production or fabrication of the material and num .
ensure adequate safety measures are implemented for the inspection .
the department may retest materials before or during use in the work and reject materials that when retested do not meet the requirements of the contract even if the materials were tested and accepted at the plant .
num samples tests and cited specifications the contractor shall not incorporate into the work unacceptable or unapproved materials .
the project manager may direct the contractor to remove unapproved or unacceptable materials at no additional cost to the department .
the department will perform tests in accordance with standards methods or specifications current on the advertisement date .
unless otherwise specified the department will take samples and perform tests at its own expense .
the department will provide test results to the contractor .
num certificates of compliance the contractor shall submit certificates of compliance to the project manager before incorporating material in the work and shall ensure each certificate of compliance contains the following information num .
the control number num .
the name of the contractor num .
the date num .
the specification satisfied num .
an item number if applicable num .
a description of the item supplied num .
the quantity num .
the shipment number num .
the heat number lot number or batch number depending on the type of material num .
the seal number if applicable num .
the manufacturer of material num .
the printed name signature and job title of the company official who certified the document num .
written verification that the described material is in accordance with the contract num .
written verification that mtrs manufacturers certificates of compliance and other relevant documents are available to the department and num .
written verification that manufacturing processes associated with the production of steel and iron materials are in accordance with section num preference for domestic materials or special waivers have been granted .
electric items meeting ul approval and underground utility materials meeting astm or awwa specifications that are so certified or stamped will require no further certification unless requested in writing by the project manager .
section num control of materials page num materials inspected and stamped during the manufacturing process by a representative of the department will require the above noted documents for certification .
materials that appear on preapproved lists maintained by the department will require the manufacturers certification literature and shop drawings before fabrication and installation .
materials not permanently incorporated into the work will not require a certificate of compliance unless otherwise stated in the contract but the contractor shall supply materials that are in accordance with the contract .
the contractor may provide material purchased in bulk or left over from previous projects by submitting certificates of compliance for materials .
the materials shall be in accordance with standards methods or specifications current on the advertisement date .
the contractor shall replace or repair materials damaged in transit or during handling at no additional cost to the department .
num foreign materials unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor shall deliver materials manufactured outside the united states to approved locations within the state where they shall remain until sampling and testing are complete .
the contractor shall arrange for testing that the department is not able to perform at no additional cost to the department and shall test foreign materials within the state in the presence of the department .
the contractor shall provide a certificate of compliance for each lot of foreign material in accordance with section num certificates of compliance and if required provide with the certificate of compliance certified mtrs for each lot and clearly identify to which lot they apply .
for structural material requiring mtrs the department will only accept material from foreign and domestic manufacturers that have established adequate inplant quality control to the satisfaction of the project manager .
the project manager may inspect the plant or require the contractor to submit detailed written proof of adequate quality control .
the department will not accept structural materials that do not have certificates of compliance and mtrs .
num storage of materials the contractor shall store materials to preserve quality and fitness for the work and to protect against vandalism or theft .
the contractor shall be responsible for the replacement or repair of materials affected by inadequate protection .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor may with the written approval of the project manager use the row for storage of material for any duration of the project .
the contractor shall request from the project manager written approval to store equipment within the row for the adequate execution of the work .
num handling and transporting materials the contractor shall handle materials in a manner that preserves the acceptability for the work .
the contractor shall transport aggregates from the storage site to the work site in vehicles constructed and operated to prevent loss or segregation of materials .
the contractor shall ensure the transportation of materials is in accordance with state and federal regulations section num control of materials page num and prevent leakage of scattering of or damage to materials .
materials damaged or lost in transportation shall be deemed unacceptable and are not subject to payment by the department .
num departmentprovided materials the department will list departmentprovided materials in the contract .
the pay item in which the contractor uses the materials includes the cost of hauling handling and installing the materials .
the contractor is responsible for loss or damage to department provided materials .
the contractor shall replace lost or damaged materials at no additional cost to the department .
num materials designated by trade name the contract may require material or equipment by trade or manufacturers names .
the department may accept the substitution of materials or equipment of equal or greater quality provided the proposed substitute is fully documented and submitted to the project manager and prior written approval of the project manager is given .
if allowed the contractor shall provide information necessary to establish the comparable quality of the proposed substitute materials or equipment at no additional cost to the department .
no additional contract time or compensation will be allowed for substitution of materials .
num equipment and material guarantees and warranties obtain and assign to the department manufacturer and producer guarantees or warranties for materials and equipment .
warrant for six num months after material or equipment is installed and operational that mechanical and electrical equipment without a manufacturer or producer guarantee are free from defects or imperfections in workmanship and materials .
repair malfunctions or defects that develop during the sixmonth period .
supply manuals for equipment incorporated in the work providing the following information num .
operational procedures num .
complete nomenclature num .
wiring diagrams num .
schematics showing test voltage and procedural methods num .
functional description of circuits num .
parts lists num .
crossreferences to standard part numbers num .
names and addresses of sources for testing procedures where appropriate num .
flow diagrams and num .
other relevant data .
num material safety data sheets msds the contractor shall submit to the project manager the most current msdss for all materials that require msdss upon delivery of the materials to the project .
the msds shall conform to current federal requirements and contain the following information num .
product identification a .
name address and phone number of chemical manufacturer b .
trade name of the product and c. chemical name and formula of the product .
num .
hazardous ingredients section num control of materials page num a .
substances present in the product that are listed as hazardous in the hazard communication standard num cfr num num subpart z and b .
exposure limits for the hazardous ingredient .
num .
physical hazard data a .
fire and explosion data and b .
proper extinguishing equipment num .
health hazard information a .
estimate of the hazard of the product b .
routes of entry of the product c. acute and chronic health effects of exposure and d. emergency firstaid procedures num .
reactivity data num .
spill and leak procedures num .
personal protective equipment necessary for safe handling of the chemical and num .
special precautions .
num preference for domestic materials the contractor shall provide materials in accordance with the buy america requirements num cfr num on federalaid projects .
the contractor shall bear the burden of proof and the cost to prove the origin and place of manufacture of iron and steel products and materials .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public num laws to be observed the contractor shall be fully informed of all federal and state laws all local laws ordinances and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having jurisdiction or authority including those which in any manner control pollution or impacts to the environment affect those engaged or employed on the work or which in any way affect the conduct of the work .
the contractor shall at all times observe and comply with all such laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees and protect and indemnify the state and its officers employees and agents against all claims or liability arising from or based on the violation of such laws ordinances regulations orders or decrees by the contractor or its officers employees or agents .
the contractor shall before the start of work contact the municipal or state agency responsible for air noise and water quality control regulations to determine the standards that shall be followed during construction .
num permits licenses and taxes the contractor shall procure permits and licenses pay charges fees royalties and appropriate taxes and give notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
num compliance with payment of taxes the contractor shall pay all lawful taxes imposed by the state of new mexico or other political entities .
the successful bidder upon returning the executed bid package and after receiving the preliminary award of contract notice shall provide to the department both the bidders taxation and revenue department tax identification number and the bidders motor transportation division account number .
if either of these numbers is unavailable the contractor shall submit a letter of explanation .
a notice to proceed will not be issued until the contractor submits both numbers or a satisfactory letter of explanation .
num gross receipts indian business activity and tribal employment rights organization taxes num new mexico gross receipts tax the department will pay the contractor for applicable new mexico grt and local option tax including tax increases or decreases effective after the contract date and the contractor shall pay applicable taxes to new mexico taxation and revenue department .
the contractor shall show the grt and local option tax as a separate amount added to each request for payment .
the department shall be promptly reimbursed or repaid for any tax including grt that is refunded to the contractor including any refund received by the contractor after final payment to the extent such tax was paid by the department to the contractor .
the contractor shall keep and maintain all documents applications for tax refund and forms filed with submitted to received from or required by the new mexico taxation and revenue department which relate to the payment or refunding of any tax paid pursuant to this section for five num years following final payment .
all of the above material shall be made available to the department or fhwa for review audit inspection and copying and shall be produced upon request at the department general office the district in which the work was performed or an fhwa office as directed .
num tribal taxes section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num all bids submitted shall exclude any tribal business tax tero tax and other tax imposed by a tribal government .
the department will pay the tax or will exercise its prerogative to challenge the tribal governments authority to impose the tax .
if the department exercises its prerogative to challenge the tribal governments authority to impose the tax the department will reimburse the contractor for such tax only if a court of competent jurisdiction rules the tribe has authority to impose the tax .
the department will reimburse the contractor only if the final decision of the litigation or other final disposition of the litigation results in a determination that the tribe has jurisdiction to impose the tax .
the department will be subrogated to the rights of the contractor to claim a refund of or to contest any such tax imposed on the work to the extent any alleged obligation of the contractor or the department to pay such tax arises under this section or through the contractors performance of this contract .
the department will reimburse the contractor for payment of any tribal tax directly related to the performance of the work within the project imposed by a tribe upon tribal verification that the tax was paid by the contractor .
num patented devices materials and processes the contractor shall provide a suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner to cover the use of any patented or copyrighted designs devices materials processes or trademarks .
the contractor shall defend indemnify and hold harmless the department its officers employees or agents from any and all claims including costs expenses and damages the department may be obliged to pay for contractors infringement on such patents copyrights and trademarks during prosecution or after completion of the work .
num restoration of surfaces opened by permit the department reserves the right to construct or reconstruct utility services in the highway street or road or to grant permits to municipal or county authorities corporations firms or individuals to perform such work .
the contractor shall allow parties bearing permits granted by the department for such work to make openings in the highway street or road .
the department will address time extension requests due to work by others in accordance with section num determination and extension of contract time .
when directed by the project manager the contractor shall make all necessary repairs due to such openings in the highway street or road .
the department will pay for such repairs in accordance with section num significant changes in the character of work and section num measurement and payment .
num federal aid provisions when the fhwa or other federal agency is obligated to reimburse the department for all or any portion of the cost of a project the contractor shall observe and be subject to federal law applicable to such reimbursement .
in such situations federal requirements supersede conflicting provisions of state and local laws rules or regulations .
the work shall be subject to inspection and oversight by the appropriate federal agency .
such inspection or oversight shall not make the u.s. government a party to this contract nor shall the u.s. government interfere with the rights of the contract parties .
num sanitary health and safety provisions the contractor shall provide and maintain sanitary accommodations for use by contractor and department employees in accordance with state and local boards of health or other legal entity with jurisdiction .
the contractor shall comply with federal state and local health rules and regulations .
the contractor shall ensure that working conditions are sanitary nonhazardous and not dangerous to the health or safety of workers or authorized visitors on the project .
the section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num contractor shall admit to the project credentialed inspectors from osha or other agencies responsible for health and safety administration .
num public convenience and safety the contractor shall provide for the convenience and safety of the general public for reasonable access by local residents and businesses and for the protection of persons and property in accordance with section num maintenance of traffic .
num railroads if the project affects railroad lines the contractor shall observe the requirements of the following sections and the insurance requirements in accordance with section num insurance requirements .
for the purpose of this section the term immediate construction site shall mean the area of the project within railroad right of way .
num departmentcontractor financial responsibilities the department may be responsible for the costs of the engineering inspection and protection of the railroad right of way within the immediate construction site unless otherwise required by the contract .
work accomplished by the contractor or its subcontractors or agents outside the immediate construction site but within railroad right of way shall be the financial responsibility of the contractor .
num notice to the railroad the contractor shall not begin work in the immediate construction site before accomplishing the following num .
notify the owner of the railroad right of way in writing num days prior to the anticipated date to begin work the anticipated type of work and the anticipated length of time required to complete the work num .
verify that the owner of the railroad right of way has arranged at the contractors request to provide necessary flaggers or other railroad personnel to protect railroad property at the immediate construction site and minimize interference with the safe and timely operation of railroad equipment num .
receive approval from the owner of the railroad right of way and department for any changes or modifications during construction that affect safety or the railroads operations num .
provide the department with a copy of written agreements or directives if any between the owner of the railroad right of way and the contractor modifying the work to protect the railroad right of way num .
take protective measures as necessary to keep railway facilities including track ballast free of sand debris and other foreign objects and materials resulting from his operations .
any damage to railway facilities resulting from the contractor operations will be repaired or replaced by the owner of the railroad right of way and the cost of such repairs or replacement shall be paid for by the contractor num .
during demolition removal and construction of the work the contractor shall not drop or lower material or debris onto the railroads property within num feet measured from the centerline of an adjacent track or measured from the edge of a railroad maintenance roadway or measured from any railroad improvement or measured from a railroad work or staging area and num .
furnish the owner of the railroad right of way for approval five num copies of plans and two num sets of calculations for any shoring or cribbing proposed to be used over under or adjacent to the owner of the railroad right of ways tracks .
the use of such shoring or cribbing shall conform to the standard side clearances required by new mexico regulations or rules .
in case the use of such shoring will impair said clearance the contractor shall ensure that application is made to the appropriate section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num state agency if required for approval of such impairment during the period of construction of the project .
num cooperation with owner of railroad right of way the contractor shall cooperate with the owner of the railroad right of way .
actions by parties beyond the control of the department including the actions of owners of railroad right of way and circumstances beyond the control of the department such as unforeseen railroad emergencies that delay completion of the project shall result in the department awarding additional contract time but not additional compensation to the contractor .
actions within the control of the department which are not the subject of a concurrent delay shall result in the department awarding both additional contract time and additional compensation to the contractor .
a concurrent delay to the completion of the project by the department and the contractor shall result in the department awarding additional contract time but not additional compensation to the contractor .
regardless of the requirements of the contractors construction schedule the owner of the railroad right of way reserves the right to reallocate its labor forces assigned to complete railroad work in the event of an emergency when the owner of the railroad right of way believes such reallocation is necessary to provide for the immediate restoration of railroad operations or to protect persons or property on or near any other property owned by the owner of the railroad right of way .
neither the department nor the owner of the railroad right of way will be liable for any additional costs or expenses of the project resulting from any such reallocation of the labor forces by the owner of the railroad right of way .
the department reserves the right to amend the contract with the contractor as may be necessary subject to advising and coordinating with the owner of the railroad right of way .
the contractor shall coordinate the work each day with the owner of the railroad right of ways operations prior to commencing any construction activity .
the contractor shall provide any notice concerning these requirements in writing .
such notices shall be deemed sufficiently given when sent by electronic means including proof of receipt or certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of the railroad right of way and the department .
num storage of materials or equipment the contractor shall not store material park or use equipment or interfere with the nearest railroad track or overhead line within the following clearance limits unless the owner of railroad right of way provides written permission num .
within ten num feet horizontally from the centerline of track num feet three num inches vertical above top of rail num .
construction or maintenance of electric wires a .
for lines carrying less than num v num feet vertically above top of rail b .
for lines carrying num v num feet vertically above top of rail c. for lines carrying num kv to num kv num feet vertically above top of rail d. for lines carrying more than num kv num feet vertically above top of rail .
when the contractor must maintain or operate equipment inside the above tolerances the contractor shall notify the owner of the railroad right of way of said activities and allow the owner of railroad right of way to provide personnel and devices to protect its property .
the contractor shall notify and obtain approval from the owner of railroad right of way whenever there is excavation below the elevation of the track any activity which may result in settlement or movement of railroad property or whenever the owner of railroad right of way believes the railroad facilities may be endangered so as to allow the owner of railroad right of way an opportunity to provide personnel and devices to protect its property .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num num movement across tracks if for the convenience of the contractor it becomes necessary to move an oversized load across the railroad tracks the contractor shall obtain written permission from the owner of railroad right of way if required by the owner of the railroad right of way .
the contractor shall obtain a private crossing agreement if required by the owner of railroad right of way .
the contractor shall install all crossings and provide flagging and protective devices at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall ensure all agreements are in writing furnish a copy to the project manager before beginning any work under such agreements .
num cleanup before requesting final acceptance of work accomplished on railroad property the contractor shall remove all tools implements and other materials and obtain written release from the owner of railroad right of way showing that the property is clean clear and in a condition acceptable to the owner of railroad right of way .
if unable to obtain a release from the owner of railroad right of way after diligent effort provide the project manager with written evidence of efforts to obtain the release .
num post construction plans when requested by the owner of the railroad right of way the contractor shall furnish one num set of post construction plans prepared in u.s. customary units to the owner of the railroad right of way .
the format of the post construction plans shall be discussed and agreed to at the preconstruction meeting .
the post construction plans shall include plan and profile structural bridge drawings and specifications and drainage plans .
all improvements and facilities shall be shown .
all work associated with this section shall be incidental .
num environmental hazardous materials and cultural resources approval the department will obtain the environmental hazardous material and cultural resource approvals for the project before construction .
the department will describe in the contract any special environmental hazardous material and cultural resource requirements developed to protect resources .
num environmental hazardous materials and cultural resource discoveries the contractor shall terminate operations in the immediate area of environmental hazardous materials or cultural resources not identified in the contract and immediately notify the project manager .
while the project manager environmental geology bureau manager environmental program manager and regulatory authorities complete appropriate mitigation actions the contractor shall continue work in other areas .
the project manager shall provide written notification to the contractor when work may commence in the area of terminated operations .
any adjustments shall be made in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work num contractors responsibility for damage to environmental and cultural resources the contractor shall restore or mitigate all damage to environmental or cultural resources caused by the contractors failure to abide by requirements included in the contract as well as those areas covered under section num contractors responsibility for environmental and cultural resource protection at no additional cost to the department .
the department in coordination with regulatory authorities will determine the extent of restoration or mitigation .
the contractor shall pay any fine imposed on the department by a regulatory agency for a regulatory violation caused by the contractor .
the project manager may suspend the work in areas where environmental or cultural resource violations occur .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num num contractors responsibility for environmental and cultural resource protection num environmental and cultural resource studies and approvals before beginning soildisturbing activities in accordance with section num contractor furnished aggregate and borrow sources the contractor shall obtain the necessary study permits and employ an environmental specialist and a cultural resource professional to conduct environmental and cultural resource studies at any disturbed site including but not limited to the following num .
camp sites num .
plant sites num .
crusher sites num .
stockpile sites num .
equipment yards num .
borrow pits num .
surfacing pits and num .
water sources .
the contractor shall obtain the environmental and cultural resource approvals regardless of land ownership .
for the environmental approval the contractor shall use the departmentfurnished checklist categorical exclusion form or equivalent form furnished by the department which shall be signed by the contractor and the environmental specialist .
for cultural resource reports use the standard site investigation forms approved by the new mexico historic preservation division and the new mexico cultural properties review committee .
the contractor shall ensure that the resource studies meet the standards of the department the state historic preservation officer and any state tribal or federal land managing agency or entity with jurisdiction .
the contractor shall ensure that the resource studies are in accordance with the national environmental policy act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
the national historic preservation act num u.s.c .
num et seq .
and the new mexico cultural properties act nmsa num num to num or any other successor statutes .
the contractor may use previouslycompleted environmental and cultural resource studies provided all other requirements of this section are met .
the contractor shall complete other coordination required by environmental regulations .
the contractor shall submit the documentation prepared for the environmental and cultural resource approvals to the project manager and the environmental program manager .
the department will then submit the documentation to the appropriate agencies for approval and will notify the contractor when approvals have been obtained .
approvals may take num days or more after the contractor delivers the resource studies to the department .
adjustments shall only be made in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work when the time needed to obtain approvals exceeds federal or state law or regulatory requirements containing time limits .
the contractor shall comply with all conditions and commitments for protection of resources contained in resource agency permits and in the environmental and cultural resource approvals .
the environmental approval is the fhwaapproved checklist categorical exclusion or its equivalent .
the cultural resource approval is the concurrence letter signed by the state historic preservation officer or its equivalent .
the contractor shall repair at the contractors expense all damage to environmental or cultural resources caused by the contractors failure to meet the requirements for environmental acceptability or abide by department directives issued to protect resources identified during the environmental and cultural resource evaluation .
the nature and extent of such repairs shall be determined after consultations between the contractor department section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num representatives and the regulatory authorities with management jurisdiction over the subject resources .
num parking and cleaning of equipment for projects that have received environmental and cultural resource approvals through programmatic categorical exclusions e.g .
pavement preservation and rehabilitation guardrail replacements bridge deck replacements signalization upgrades etc .
environmental and cultural resource studies will not have been completed by the department .
these projects will be noted as such in the contract .
for these projects the contractor shall take special care when parking and cleaning equipment as outlined in the following requirement .
the intent of the following requirement is to ensure the protection of sensitive environmental and cultural resources that may be present within the right of way and to encourage the contractor to avoid damaging these resources when parking and cleaning equipment .
the contractor shall ensure that parking and cleaning of equipment within the right of way does not damage environmental and cultural resources in one num or a combination of the following manners num .
park and clean equipment in previously disturbed areas only num .
identify all parking and cleaning locations in previously undisturbed areas prior to construction and complete the environmental and cultural resource approvals as described in section num environmental and cultural resource studies and approvals or num .
park and clean equipment in previously undisturbed areas without completing the environmental and cultural resource approvals as described in section num environmental and cultural resource studies and approvals and assume all risk and liability for any damage to environmental or cultural resources resulting from these actions .
num aquatic resources the department will apply for and obtain permits and certifications required for construction involving waters of the united states as defined by the u.s. army corps of engineers .
the contractor shall comply with the terms of the permit obtained and shall be fully liable for consequences resulting from its failure to comply .
the department will provide a copy of the permits and certifications in the contract .
the contractor shall minimize vegetation removal soil disturbance erosion in the vicinity of live streams water impoundments wetlands or irrigation supplies and crossing of live streams with heavy equipment .
the contractor shall not refuel or perform maintenance activities on equipment near watercourses nor dump or bury demolition concrete asphalt or other materials near watercourses but these activities shall be conducted in proper containment areas .
the contractor shall comply with the new mexico water quality act nmsa num num et seq .
and applicable permits and regulations in accordance with the federal clean water act num usc num et seq ..
the contractor shall comply with the requirements of section num temporary erosion and sediment control and the requirements of npdes and if performing work along or adjacent to live streams it shall do so in accordance with the federal clean water act num usc num et seq .
the regulations and requirements of other authorities with jurisdiction .
num minimization of soil disturbance the contractor shall minimize damage to or removal of vegetation and trees except as approved in section num rights in and use of materials found on the work .
the contractor shall not clear grub disturb or excavate land beyond what is authorized by the contract .
the contractor shall remediate or replace vegetation due to unnecessary clearing or damage at no additional cost to the department .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num num air quality requirements and dust abatement the contractor shall perform dust abatement on the project .
the contractor shall ensure that burning operations dustproducing activities and other operations that produce particulate matter comply with state and federal air quality regulations as administered by the air pollution control bureau of the nmed applicable local air quality regulations and the federal clean air act num usc num et seq .. num noise abatement if specified in the contract the contractor shall not operate equipment that emits noise above num dba measured at a distance of num ft in urban or populated rural areas during those hours specified and shall comply with county or municipal ordinances if they are more stringent than the requirements in the contract .
num disposal of removed asphalt pavement material the intent of the following requirement is to ensure that removed asphalt pavement material does not contaminate a natural watercourse or waters of the united states or surface waters of the state pursuant to the federal clean water act section num the federal clean water act section num general condition num the federal clean water act section num water quality certification the nm solid waste management regulations num nmac num and the nm water quality control commission regulations num nmac num .
the contractor shall dispose of removed asphalt pavement material not including minor sweepings belonging to the department using one num or more of the following methods num .
recycling and mixing it into base course subgrade or hma of the new roadway with approval of the project manager or num .
the contractor shall break down asphalt surfacing removed from the project to a nominal two num inch size or smaller haul and stockpile the material at a location approved by the project manager or as indicated in the contract .
if the material is to be permanently placed within the shoulder or median it shall betreated by using one num of the following methods a. machinecompacted or b .
sealed with an approved rejuvenating agent .
num disposal of other materials and debris the contractor shall move items designated for removal without salvage unsuitable construction materials and debris from clearing and grubbing to an environmentally suitable disposal site secured and coordinated with the appropriate regulatory agencies .
the contractor shall not place any items in wetland areas or areas that may impact endangered species or cultural resources .
the contractor shall obtain an environmental and cultural resource approval in accordance with section num environmental and cultural resource studies and approvals .
num underground storage tanks the contractor shall comply with applicable new mexico and federal regulations governing the discovery and removal of underground storage tanks ust .
the contractor shall report the discovery of usts within the right of way either temporary or permanent pits borrow areas storage or equipment yards within timelines required by the nmed petroleum storage tank bureau pstb .
the contractor shall remove usts in accordance with nmed pstb regulations .
any adjustments shall be made in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work num hazardous waste material and reporting and cleanup of spills section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num the contractor shall immediately report all spills regardless of cause or association with the work to the project manager if on the right of way or to the property owner if outside of the right of way .
the contractor shall clean up and bear all costs of spills associated with the work including gasoline diesel fuel motor oils solvents chemicals toxic and corrosive substances and other materials that may threaten public health or the environment .
failure to report a preexisting spill or spill not associated with the work shall result in the contractor bearing the full cost of remediation and cleanup .
num prime coat tack coat and soil sterilants the contractor shall not contaminate soils outside the roadway prism when applying prime coat tack coat and soil sterilants .
the contractor shall not contaminate arroyos irrigation supplies acequias and ditches wetlands water impoundments and live streams .
num state and federal landmanaging agencies while working within or adjacent to state or federal lands and forests the contractor shall comply with all regulations of the state or federal authority having jurisdiction governing the protection of these areas and observe all sanitary laws and regulations .
the contractor shall keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse and obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of all construction camps stores warehouses residences latrines cesspools septic tanks and other structures in accordance with applicable federal or state regulations .
num prevention of forest and grass fires the contractor shall prevent forest and grass fires .
the contractor shall notify appropriate officials at the earliest possible moment of the location and extent of any fire .
the contractor shall comply with fire regulations applicable to the area of work and furnish and maintain firefighting equipment and tools required in the contract .
the contractor shall suspend firehazardous operations when necessary at the direction of the project manager and in accordance with section num contract adjustments for suspension of work .
num use of explosives the contractor shall exercise extreme care when use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work .
the contractor shall not endanger life or property including new work .
the contractor shall use handle load transport and store explosives and blasting agents in accordance with applicable laws and ordinances as well as title num cfr part num safety and health regulations for construction osha and num cfr part num whichever is more restrictive .
the contractor shall clearly mark explosives and store them securely .
if no local laws or ordinances apply the contractor shall store explosives not closer than num feet from roads buildings camping areas or places of human occupancy .
the contractor shall provide sufficient notice to any public utility and owner of railroad right of way having structures or facilities near the project of the intention to use explosives so that they may take steps to protect their property before detonation .
num protection and restoration of public and private property the contractor shall preserve public and private property including land governmental survey monuments and property markers from disturbance or damage until the project manager has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location and directed their removal .
the contractor shall restore public or private property damaged by the contractor directly or indirectly by any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution of the work or by defective work or materials or by nonprosecution of the work at no additional cost to the department and return such property to a condition equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done by repairing rebuilding or otherwise restoring as directed by the project manager .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num the contractor shall maintain responsibility for damage until the work is completed and accepted or until the department partially accepts the affected unit in accordance with section num partial acceptance or until the affected unit is opened to traffic in accordance with section num maintenance of traffic .
num responsibility for third party claims and duty to defend the contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the department and its officers employees and agents from and against any and all claims and suits liability damages losses or expenses including attorney fees and costs to the extent that they arise out of or are in any way connected with any act or omission of the contractor or its officers employees or agents .
the contractor agrees at its own expense and upon written request by the department to defend any suit action or demand brought against the department on any claim or demand covered herein .
num contractors responsibility until final acceptance of the project by the project manager the contractor shall have the charge and care thereof and shall take every precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from other causes whether arising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to portions of the work occasioned by the above causes before final acceptance and shall bear the expense thereof except as provided in sections num maintenance of traffic and section num partial acceptance .
should the contractor be delayed in the prosecution or completion of the work by contractors on contiguous projects fire flood epidemics quarantine restrictions strikes freight embargoes acts of public enemy acts of governmental authorities other than the department acts of god or documented unavailability of construction material for which the contractor is in no way responsible then the time herein set for the completion of the work shall be extended for a period equivalent to the work time lost by reason of any or all of these causes but the contractor shall not be entitled to damages for such delay .
the extended time period shall be determined and fixed by the department which determination shall be final .
in case of suspension of work from any cause whatever the contractor shall be responsible subject to the provisions of section num maintenance of traffic and section num partial acceptance for the project and shall take such precautions as may be necessary to prevent damage to the project provide for normal drainage and erect necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at the contractors expense .
during such period of suspension of work the contractor shall properly and continuously maintain in a growing condition all living material in newly established plantings including seeding and sod furnished under the contract and shall take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
for physical damage to the work resulting from unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god the public enemy or governmental authorities the contractor will be paid pursuant to section num measurement and payment .
num contractors responsibility for utility property and services the contractor shall not begin work in areas proximate to railroad telecommunication or utility company right of way or facilities or other property where damage from the work might result in expense loss or inconvenience to the owner until arrangements are made with the project manager and the owner of the property for the protection of such property or facilities .
the contractor shall cooperate with the owners of underground or overhead utility lines to facilitate their removal or relocation and conduct operations to avoid duplication of work and unnecessary interruption of utility services .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num where utility conflicts are present the contractor shall provide the project manager on a weekly basis evidence of adequate coordination and cooperation with utilities .
neither time or compensation will be provided where the contractor fails to provide the project manager on a weekly basis evidence of continued cooperation and coordination activities with utilities .
the contractor shall promptly notify authorities of any interruption to water or utility services resulting from exposure lack of support or breakage .
the contractor shall provide continuous repair work to restore water service if interrupted .
the contractor shall not perform work near fire hydrants until provision for service has been approved by the local fire authority .
the contractor shall contact the owner of the railroad right of way and the telecommunications companies to determine whether there is any fiber optic cable systems located within the project boundaries that could be damaged or their service disrupted due to the construction of the project .
the contractor shall pothole all lines either shown on the plans or marked in the field in order to verify their locations .
the contractor shall use all reasonable methods when working with the owner of the railroad right of way rail corridor to determine if any other fiber optic lines may exist .
failure by the contractor to notify pothole or identify these lines shall be sufficient cause to stop construction at no cost to the state or owner of the railroad right of way until these items are completed .
the costs for repairs and loss of revenues and profits due to damage to these facilities through negligent acts by the contractor shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall defend and indemnify and hold the state and owner of the railroad right of way harmless against and from all cost liability and expense arising out of or in any way contributing to these negligent acts of the contractor .
num furnishing right of way the department will secure necessary right of way before construction except as noted in the contract .
num personal liability of public officials department employees shall bear no personal liability in carrying out the provisions of the contract or in exercising powers or authority granted to them by the contract it being understood that in such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the department .
num no thirdparty liability the department and the contractor specifically agree that the provisions of this contract do not make anyone including any subcontractor or materials supplier a thirdparty beneficiary or authorize anyone not a party to this contract to maintain an action for damages under this contract .
num insurance requirements the contractor shall procure and maintain at no cost to the department insurance as detailed below using an insurance company authorized to do business in new mexico .
insurance shall cover operations under the contract whether performed by the contractor the contractors agents or employees or subcontractors .
contractor shall keep insurance in full force and effect for the entire period of the work up to and including final acceptance and the removal of equipment and employees agents and subcontractors .
all insurance required in this section shall be procured from insurance or indemnity companies with an a.m. best company financial strength rating level of a or better class vii or better unless otherwise approved in writing by the department .
in no event shall the department approve the use of an insurance or indemnity company with an a.m. best company financial strength rating level of b or worse .
num liability insurance section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num num .
the contractor shall obtain general liability bodily injury liability and property damage liability insurance coverage applicable in full to the subject project in the following minimum amounts a .
personal and bodily injury liability num each person num each occurrence annual aggregate and b .
property damage liability num each occurrence annual aggregate num .
the insurance coverage shall be documented on a comprehensive general liability form or commercial general liability form which must include the following a .
coverage for liability arising out of the operation of independent contractors b .
completed operations coverage and c. attachment of the broad form comprehensive general liability endorsement num .
if the work includes the use of explosives the contractors insurance must include coverage for injury to or destruction of property arising out of blasting or explosion num .
if the contract includes work next to an existing building or structure the contractors insurance shall include coverage for injury to or destruction of property arising from the collapse of or structural injury to buildings or structures due to the following a. excavation including borrowing filling or backfilling in connection therewith b. tunneling and cofferdam or caisson work and c. moving shoring underpinning razing or demolition of buildings or structures or removal or rebuilding of structural supports thereof and num .
coverage must include injury to or destruction of property arising out of damage to wires conduits pipes mains sewers or other similar property or any apparatus in connection therewith below the surface of the ground if such injury or destruction is caused by or occurs during the use of mechanical equipment for the purpose of excavating digging or drilling .
num automobile liability insurance the contractor shall provide or ensure that all vehicles used in performance of the contract have liability insurance .
the contractor is not responsible for liability insurance for the department or its agents .
the contractor shall provide limits of liability for automobile liability insurance in the following amounts num .
personal and bodily injury liability num each person num each occurrence annual aggregate and num .
property damage liability num each occurrence annual aggregate .
num workers compensation insurance the contractor shall carry workers compensation insurance and otherwise fully comply with the new mexico workers compensation act nmsa num num et seq .
and the new mexico occupational disease disablement law nmsa num num et seq .. num department as additional insured the contactor shall name the department and any third party so designated in the contract as an additional named insured on the comprehensive general liability form or commercial general liability form furnished by the contractor in accordance with section num liability insurance .
the certificate of insurance shall state that the coverage provided under the policy is primary over any other valid and collectible insurance .
the additional insured endorsement shall conform to the most current version of the insurance services offices cg num additional insured endorsement form .
the contractor shall provide to the department a copy of the contractors standard commercial general liability section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num policy showing the additional insured endorsement before the department issues a notice to proceed .
num certificate of insurance the contractor shall provide evidence of insurance coverage conforming to these specifications with a certificate of insurance executed on the form provided by the department to be made part of the contract .
the certificate shall indicate compliance with these specifications and shall certify that the coverage shall not be changed canceled or allowed to lapse without giving the department num days written notice .
the contractor shall provide a certificate of insurance to the department on renewal of a policy or policies as necessary during the term of the contract .
the department shall not issue a notice to proceed until the contractor meets these requirements .
num umbrella coverage the insurance limits cited in this section are minimum limits .
the department does not intend that these specifications define what constitutes adequate insurance coverage for the individual contractor .
the department will recognize excess coverage umbrella as meeting the insurance requirements of section num liability insurance if the limits of the umbrella coverage meet the individual requirements of this section .
num optimal insurance if required by the contract contractor shall procure and maintain form and types of bailee theft insurance such as but not limited to builders risk insurance contractors equipment insurance and riggers liability property insurance .
if so required the contractor shall provide bailee theft insurance in an amount necessary to protect the department against claims losses and expenses arising from the damage disappearance or destruction of property of others in the care custody or control of the contractor including property of others being worked upon by the contractor its agents employees or subcontractors .
num railroad insurance if the work affects railroad property in addition to the above requirements unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor shall obtain at its own cost a railroad protective liability policy in the name of the owner of the railroad right of way or railroad facilities involved .
in addition on those rails used by the national railroad passenger corporation nrpc the contractor shall obtain a railroad protective liability policy in the name of the nrpc .
railroad liability insurance shall be in compliance with num cfr numa .
these limits of liability apply to the coverage as set forth in aashtos railroad protective liability endorsement form subject to the terms conditions and exclusions found in the form .
the policy must afford coverage as provided in the standard railroad protective liability endorsement .
num no waiver of legal rights the department reserves the right to correct measurements estimates certificates or price adjustments made before or after physical completion of the work and to recover overpayment from the contractor or its surety .
the departments waiver of breach of part of the contract does not constitute a waiver of any other breach .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract shall be liable to the department for latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud and for warranty and guaranty .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num num contractors responsibility for the traveling public the contractor shall minimize hazards to the traveling public in the construction zone from the commencement of the work until final acceptance .
minimizing hazards shall include num .
keep equipment materials and workers out of the travel lanes num .
remove hazardous construction debris deposited within the project limits num .
inspect and repair the travel lanes necessary repairs of damage not caused by the contractor will be paid for in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work .
and num .
remove obstacles deposited by the public as they transit the project .
the contractor shall immediately correct hazards reported by project inspections department employees or the public .
the contractor shall maintain and publicly post a num hour contact number to initiate action quickly .
the contractor shall assign an individual by the date of the preconstruction conference readily available during normal working hours to respond to claims from the public for losses alleged to have occurred within the project whether arising from contractor or subcontractor action or inaction .
the contractor shall provide claimants with a written outline of the contractors claims procedure along with a written copy of the contractors name address and telephone number together with the name and title of the individual assigned to handle claims from the public .
the contractor shall maintain a status report of claims filed including the name address and telephone number of the claimant the nature of the claim pertinent findings regarding the claim and a statement regarding the resolution of the claim .
the contractor shall provide the status report to the project manager upon request .
the contractor shall establish a local contact number with area code for filing claims and clearly post the number .
in addition post the name of the contractor address and telephone number at each approach to the project .
the contractor shall ensure that construction vehicles contractor subcontractor and privately owned working on the project have clean unobstructed license plates and shall mark vehicles legibly with the appropriate company name .
num contractor records the contractor subcontractors and all suppliers shall keep and maintain all documents in a useable format including communications books papers records files accounts tax records cost records reports schedules bid documents with backup data including electronic data and all other material relating to the contract project contract compliance or any claim for five num years following physical completion of the work .
unless otherwise specified in the contract all of the above material shall be made available to the department for review audit inspection and copying and shall be produced upon request by the assistant district engineer construction at the department general office the district in which the work was performed or an fhwa office as directed .
the contractor shall insert the above requirement in each subcontract and shall also include in all subcontracts a clause requiring subcontractors to include the above requirement in any lowertier subcontract .
the contractors failure to maintain and timely provide all requested documents to the department waives any claim the basis of which could have either in whole or in part been documented or rebutted by such documents .
resource loading documents financial statements provided by the contractor and escrowed bid documents which have been visibly marked by the contractor as confidential trade secrets shall be deemed confidential as trade secrets and not subject to inspection pursuant to the inspection of public records act nmsa num num .
such information shall not be disclosed by the department in response to a request made pursuant to the inspection of public records act without the written permission of the contractor .
such documents may be disclosed to the department including any inspector project superintendent project manager claim consultant investigator or testifying or consulting expert as necessary to perform their duties or as otherwise required by law .
section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public page num num assigning of contract the contractor may not assign the contract or assign or delegate any contractual obligation or duty without the prior written consent of the department and the surety .
contractor may not make any assignment in connection with the contract including assignment of any payment due contractor or any claim for the benefit of any creditor .
num severability and contract interpretation if any provision of this contract is held to be invalid or unenforceable the remaining provisions or the application of such provision to either party shall remain in full force and effect and if possible the rights and obligations of the parties are to be construed and enforced as if the contract did not contain that term .
if any provision of the contract is found to be superseded by any applicable state or federal law or regulation or court order in whole or in part then both parties shall be relieved of all obligations under that provision only to the extent necessary to comply with the superseding law or ruling provided however that the remaining provisions of the contract or portions thereof shall be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law .
the contractor agrees that any rule of construction to the effect that ambiguities are to be resolved against the drafting party shall not be applied in the construction or interpretation of this contract .
num choice of law this contract is governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state of new mexico .
section num prosecution and progress page num section num prosecution and progress the contractor is wholly and solely responsible and liable for the performance of all work or any act by its subcontractors truckers and suppliers on the project .
num subcontracting any individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture performing work on the project that is not an employee of the contractor is a subcontractor unless otherwise excepted in this section .
a supplier or fabricator is not a subcontractor unless work is being performed on the project .
the contractor shall perform with its own organization at least num of the work based on the total bid amount .
the contractors organization shall include workers employed and paid directly and equipment owned or rented by the contractor but shall not include employees or equipment of its subcontractor assignee or agent .
the contractor shall submit to the project manager a request for subcontractor approval before subcontracting work and shall not circumvent this requirement by placing a subcontractors employees on its payroll .
the department will treat a person or group generally operating as an independent contractor as independent contractors for the purposes of this section .
the department will provide the required forms for a list of intended subcontractors and material suppliers in the bid package .
the contractor shall submit this list at the preconstruction conference and update the list as the work progresses .
the contractor is responsible for ensuring that its subcontractors are prequalified by the department and are also duly licensed for the work to be performed on the project are registered with all of the state agencies as is required to do business in new mexico and to perform work on public works projects including the new mexico taxation and revenue department and the new mexico department of workforce solutions or successor agencies and are in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations including the new mexico public works minimum wage act .
the contractor shall comply with the new mexico subcontractor fair practices act to the extent it is applicable to the project .
a trucker is not a subcontractor unless the contractor is using the trucker to meet the dbe requirement associated with the project .
a trucker is an individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture that transports materials to and from the project and does not perform work on the project site .
transportation of materials within the project site e.g .
never leaves the project limits is work performed by the contractor or a subcontractor .
transportation of materials on or off the project site e.g .
leaving the project does not require a subcontract .
liability of the contractor and the contractors surety under the contract and the contract bonds shall not be waived or diminished by subcontracting or any other assignment of interest .
the contractor shall promptly pay its subcontractors and suppliers for satisfactory performance of their contracts no later than seven num days after receipt of progress payment for the subcontractors work or suppliers materials by the department .
for purpose of this section a subcontractors portion of the work is satisfactorily completed when it is accepted by the department .
in no event shall the contractor and its subcontractors fail to promptly pay their subcontractors and suppliers the amounts due for undisputed accepted work within seven num days of the contractor receiving a progress payment from the department .
the payment by the department to the contractor is not a condition precedent for payment by the contractor to any subcontractor or supplier .
a zero dollar num progress payment by the department does not relieve the contractor from paying the subcontractor or supplier for accepted work .
the contractors failure to make timely or prompt subcontractor or supplier payments for undisputed accepted work is a nonconformance and shall result in the department withholding num of the progress payment and may result in the department rejecting the section num prosecution and progress page num contractors future bids in accordance with section num refusal or rejection of bids .
the contractors repeated failure to make timely subcontractor payment may lead to suspension or debarment in accordance with section num suspension and debarment .
num notice to proceed and preconstruction conference the department will issue the notice to proceed within num days after contract execution unless otherwise agreed to by the parties .
the notice to proceed will identify the date the department expects the contractor to begin work and the start of contract time .
the contractors commencement of the work without a notice to proceed may be deemed a waiver of this notice and in the absence of prior written permission from the project manager shall start the contract time .
in no event shall the contractor commence work until after execution of the contract by all parties .
after the issuance of the notice to proceed the project manager shall provide written notice to the contractor of the date time and location of the preconstruction conference .
the contractor shall provide an authorized contract representative and the project superintendent at the preconstruction conference .
the contractor shall provide the following at a minimum of ten num days before pre construction conference num .
acceptable baseline schedule num. letters of assignment official capacity for project a .
project superintendent b .
company and project safety officer c. traffic control supervisor include current certifications and copy of wallet card num .
a list with samples of authorized signatures and assignments for supplemental agreements change orders progress payments payrolls and related items num .
additions revisions deletions to the traffic control plan a .
proposed changes to the project b .
potential problems with the construction of the project num .
list of subcontractors and material suppliers num .
lump sum breakdowns num .
weighmasters deputy weighmaster certifications must be maintained throughout the duration of the project num .
progress payment cutoff date num .
company eeo policy statement num .
recruitments letters attachments ek of the eeo package num .
superintendents indoctrination letter attachment d of eeo package num .
onthejob training letter attachment r of the eeo package a .
the trainee classification letter must include the number of trainees to be trained the training program to be used the classification of each trainee and the approximate start date num .
the completed civil rights eeo preconstruction report .
complete and sign the portions that are applicable department project personnel num .
preconstruction safety questionnaire and num .
other items and any other documents required by the contract or as directed in the project managers notice of pre construction .
failure by the contractor to provide the above listed items a minimum of ten num days before the preconstruction conference may result in the contractor being in default of contract pursuant to section num default of contract .
contract time shall commence as indicated in the notice to proceed and no additional contract time will be granted .
the section num prosecution and progress page num contractor shall not commence work until the required items are provided to the project manager and accepted .
num schedule num baseline schedule the project shall utilize a cpm format as the baseline schedule unless otherwise specified in the contract .
the project manager will notify the contractor in writing within ten num days of the submittal of a baseline schedule if the schedule is accepted accepted as noted or is rejected .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor is wholly and solely responsible for construction means methods or techniques therefore the project managers review of the baseline schedule will be for compliance with the specifications and contract requirements .
acceptance by the project manager shall not relieve the contractor of any of its responsibilities for the accuracy or feasibility of the schedule .
any baseline schedule which alters contract time shall be deemed rejected .
in no event may approval of a baseline schedule revise the contract documents including contract time unless accompanied by a related change order .
the contractor shall not commence work until the project manager accepts a baseline schedule .
the department will use the baseline schedule to establish major construction operations to determine contract time extensions and to measure the progress of the work .
the contractor shall be responsible for assuring all work including all subcontractor work is included in the baseline schedule .
the contractor shall be responsible for assuring that all work sequences are logical and that the baseline schedule indicates a coordinated plan .
failure by the contractor to include any element of work required for performance of the contract shall not excuse the contractor from completing all work within the required time .
for baseline schedules that are rejected the project manager shall communicate in writing to the contractor all portions of the schedule that are not in compliance with the contract requirements .
the contractor shall within seven num days of receipt of the reasons for rejection of the schedule provide a new baseline schedule and all additional information necessary for the project manager to accept the baseline schedule .
the project manager will notify the contractor in writing within seven num days of the submittal of the corrected baseline schedule if the schedule is accepted accepted as noted or is rejected .
the contractors failure to provide a timely and acceptable new baseline schedule in response to a rejected schedule waives any claim the basis of which would have been documented by an acceptable baseline schedule .
num cpm baseline schedule unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor shall provide a cpm baseline schedule which clearly describes the following num .
a reasonable and workable plan to complete the work within the contract time num .
the order and relationships of activities and the sequence of the work num .
activities in a format prescribed by the department so the department can readily identify the work and measure the progress of each activity num .
the projects critical path num .
the milestones or other key dates specified in the contract and num .
logic diagrams .
the cpm baseline schedule shall consist of network diagrams and associated bar graphs and shall include a tabulation of each activity shown on the detailed network diagrams .
provide at a minimum the following information on the cpm baseline schedule num .
activity description num .
early start date each activity section num prosecution and progress page num num .
late start date each activity num .
original duration in workdays each activity num .
total float and free float each activity num .
sequence and interdependence of activities num .
workdays each week num .
contractor designated holidays num .
number of shifts per day num .
number of hours per shift num .
scheduled completion date num .
anticipated weather events based on historical data and num .
resource loading .
the cpm baseline schedule shall include a report of projected project completion measured in dollars and time on a monthly basis or at each progress payment cutoff date .
float contained in the cpm baseline schedule is not for the exclusive use or benefit of either the department or the contractor .
num schedule format num cpm schedule format the project shall utilize a cpm format as the baseline schedule unless otherwise specified in the contract .
the contractor shall prepare and submit one num electronic copy and two num timescaled color prints of the cpm baseline schedule updated monthly schedule and revised schedules using a project scheduling software as directed by the department that includes the following features num .
ability to display the schedule as a gantt chart num .
ability to clearly display the critical path of scheduled activities apart from the non critical scheduled activities num .
ability to calculate and display total float and free float for each activity num .
ability to clearly display the early start late start early finish and late finish dates for each activity and num .
ability to easily store and transfer the schedule as a file or files from one computer to another .
num bar graph baseline schedule if required by the contract the contractor shall submit the baseline schedule in bar graph form .
the baseline schedule shall list contract features or work activities in sufficient detail to show a reasonable and workable plan to complete the project within the contract time .
the contractor shall show the following on the bar graph baseline schedule num .
each work activity as a bar num .
each activitys planned start and completion dates num .
each activitys estimated cost and percent of total bid amount num .
the overall project cost num .
the planned project completion date num .
the monthly projected percent complete in time and dollars num .
a plot of the monthly projected percent complete in dollars superimposed on the bar chart and num .
any approved project suspensions and time extensions .
section num prosecution and progress page num num monthly and revised schedules for this section schedule refers to cpm or bar graph as required by the contract .
each activity in a monthly or revised schedule shall contain the same information required for the baseline schedule .
the contractor shall include in the schedule a report of projected percent complete measured in dollars and time .
an acceptable schedule shall conform to section num baseline schedule .
in no event may acceptance of a schedule revise the contract documents including contract time unless accompanied by a related change order .
any monthly or revised schedule which alters contract time shall be deemed rejected .
if the contractor fails to timely submit an updated or revised and acceptable schedule the department shall withhold num of the progress payment as a nonconformance .
the department may suspend the work pursuant to section num department authority to suspend work for failure to submit the monthly schedule update or revision .
repeated failure to provide timely and acceptable monthly or revised schedules may result in the department rejecting the contractors future bids in accordance with section num refusal or rejection of bids .
the contractors repeated failure to provide timely and acceptable monthly or revised schedules may lead to suspension or debarment in accordance with section num suspension and debarment .
failure to timely provide a monthly or revised schedule waives any claim the basis of which would have been documented by an acceptable monthly or revised schedule .
float contained in the updated or revised schedule is not for the exclusive use or benefit of either the department or the contractor except as follows float generated on critical path activities due to the acceleration of the contractors performance at the written direction of the project manager shall be for the exclusive use of the department and float generated on critical path activities due to the reduction or elimination of items including any time associated with vecp shall be for the exclusive use of the department .
the department may grant time extensions only to the extent that the activities on the critical path of the cpm baseline schedule in effect at the time of the delay are impacted .
num monthly schedule update the contractor shall submit an updated schedule monthly a minimum of five num days before the progress payment date .
failure by the contractor is a nonconformance and num of the progress payment shall be withheld .
num contractors independent duty to provide schedule revisions the contractor shall provide a revised schedule and recovery plan to the project manager within five num days of when it becomes apparent or should have become apparent to the contractor that the contractor can not complete the work within the contact time when a noncritical item has become critical or can not meet the schedule due to the following section num significant changes in character of work section num differing site conditions section num extra work section num environmental hazardous materials and cultural resource discoveries or any other cause which may give rise to a claim .
if the contractors work falls behind schedule the contractor shall take such steps as may be necessary to mitigate damages and improve its progress including development of a recovery plan .
for an excusable delay noncompensable delay concurrent delay nonexcusable delay or inexcusable delay as those terms are identified in section num compensation for claims the contractor shall consider as a minimum the following potential schedule mitigation techniques increase the number of shifts begin overtime operations work extra days including weekends and holidays or supplement its construction plant and submit as provided in this section a revised schedule with a proposed recovery plan as may be deemed necessary to demonstrate the manner in which the agreed rate of progress shall be regained all at no cost to the department .
if the delay can not be mitigated the contractor shall promptly submit either a written request for an extension of the contract time pursuant section num prosecution and progress page num to section num notice of potential claim and section num administrative remedy or request approval of a late completion schedule and shall be liable for liquidated damages .
the revised schedule shall show contract time project completion date and all additional information necessary for the project manager to accept the revised schedule .
the contractors failure to provide a timely and acceptable revised schedule waives any claim the basis of which would have been documented by an acceptable revised schedule ..
the project manager will provide the contractor with a decision in writing within ten num days of receiving the revised schedule .
the revised schedule shall become the current accepted baseline schedule .
num schedule revisions at request of department if it becomes apparent to the department that the contractor can not meet the schedule or that a noncritical item has become critical the project manager may request a schedule revision and recovery plan from the contractor .
the contractor shall within five num days of receipt of the request provide a revised schedule showing contract time project completion date and all additional information necessary for the project manager to accept the revised schedule .
the contractors failure to provide a timely and acceptable response waives any claim the basis of which would have been documented by an acceptable revised schedule .
the project manager will provide the contractor with a decision in writing within ten num days of receiving the revised schedule .
the revised schedule shall become the current accepted baseline schedule .
num schedule update and revision information the contractors updated monthly and revised schedules shall conform to the requirements of section num baseline schedule and shall show num .
actual start and finish dates of each activity num .
remaining duration of activities started but not yet completed num .
delays and changes resulting from the addition deletion or revisions to activities due to the issuance of a change order change to an activity duration changes to relationship between activities or changes to the planned sequence of work or the method and manner of its performance and num .
narrative report describing a .
processes during the month b .
shifts in the critical activities from the previous update c. sources of delay d. potential problem areas e. work planned for the next update period and f. changes made to the schedule .
num unsatisfactory progress of work the progress of the work is deemed unsatisfactory when num .
the dollars earned by the contractor on the project are num less than the estimated dollars earned as shown on the current accepted baseline progress schedule num .
when the start of an activity on the critical path as shown on the current accepted progress schedule has exceeded its late start date by seven num days num .
when an activity on the critical path as shown on the current accepted progress schedule has exceeded its original duration by ten num or more days or num .
when the project manager determines that the progress of work is unsatisfactory .
the project manager shall issue a notice of unsatisfactory performance to the contractor by certified mail and identify the unsatisfactory performance .
section num prosecution and progress page num when the progress of the work is deemed unsatisfactory the project manager and the contractor shall meet to address the schedule within five num days .
the contractor shall provide a revised schedule with a narrative addressing project progress compliance or anticipated liquidated damages .
the departments approval of a late completion schedule will not operate as a waiver of the departments right to assess liquidated damages .
if a resolution can not be determined within five num days the project manager will issue a notice to the contractor and surety of unsatisfactory performance .
the contractor shall bring progress into compliance in a time frame determined by the project manager not to exceed num days and at no additional cost to the department .
failure to return the project into compliance may result in any or all of the following num .
suspend or debar the contractor in accordance with section num suspension and debarment num .
withhold progress payments in the amount of the projected liquidated damages and withhold num of progress payments pursuant to section num progress payments num .
the contractor being declared in default pursuant to section num default of contract num .
rejection of the contractors bids and num .
other administrative actions that the project manager deems appropriate and in the best interest of the public and the department .
num character of workers methods and equipment num character of workers the contractor shall provide the resources necessary to complete the work as specified .
the contractor shall ensure workers have the experience and skills to perform assigned work .
the contractor shall remove employees who performs the work in an unskilled manner or who is intemperate or disorderly .
the contractor shall rehire these employees only with the project managers written permission .
the project manager may suspend work for failure to remove any employees or to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel necessary to perform the work .
num methods and equipment the contractor shall use equipment of the size and mechanical condition to produce the work .
the contractor shall ensure that the equipment does not damage the roadway adjacent property or other highways streets or roads .
the contractor shall request permission in writing to use methods or equipment other than those specified describe the proposed methods and equipment to be used and the reasons for the change .
the contractor shall perform work under original basis of payment and contract time .
the contractor shall discontinue use of alternate methods or equipment when work does not meet contract requirements .
the contractor shall remove and replace or repair deficient work at contractors expense .
num determination and extension of contract time the department will provide the contract time in the invitation for bids and on the bid form .
if the contract contains a mandatory completion date the project must be substantially complete by that date .
the project manager will provide the contractor with a weekly statement showing the contract time the number of days charged to the contract for the preceding week the accumulated days charged and the number of days remaining to complete the work .
the contractor shall have seven num days after receipt of the statement to file a written protest of section num prosecution and progress page num days charged .
if the contractor fails to timely file a written protest the statement is deemed accepted by the contractor .
the contractor is not entitled to a partial suspension during periods of traffic control operations or when working on any critical path activities .
partial suspension shall be lifted if the contractor works on critical path activities and the project manager shall commence the day count .
quantity overruns in contract items that do not significantly change the character of the work in accordance with section num significant changes in the character of the work shall not result in an extension of contract time .
if completion of the contract requires extra work that impacts the critical path the contractor shall provide the department an updated progress schedule and narrative requesting additional contract time associated with the extra work .
upon adequate justification by the contractor the department will determine if any adjustment in contract time is warranted .
any request for additional contract time shall be made pursuant section num notice of potential claim .
if the project manager rejects a time extension request the contractor may proceed in accordance with section num administrative remedy .
when the project manager completes the final inspection in accordance with section num project closure the daily time charge will stop on the date the contractor completes all pay items as determined by the project manager or in accordance with section num termination of contract time .
num failure to complete on time liquidated damages shall be assessed for each day the work remains incomplete after contract time has expired including approved time extensions .
the department may suspend time charges on the contract when the project is substantially complete .
for work that remains incomplete after the contract time expires the department shall deduct an amount in accordance with section num liquidated damages from dollars due the contractor not as a penalty but as liquidated damages .
the department does not waive its rights under the contract by allowing the contractor to finish the work after the expiration of contract time including approved extensions .
num liquidated damages time is an essential element of the contract and it is important that the contractor pursue timely completion of the work .
the departments contract administration costs including engineering inspection and supervision will be increased as the time to complete the work increases .
the public is impacted and inconvenienced when a project is incomplete and not available for use .
the contractor agrees that the following schedule of liquidated damages unless otherwise specified in the contract represents the reasonable projected value of inconvenience and monetary damage to the public and the department if the contractor does not complete the project within the contract time and does not operate as a penalty to the contractor schedule of liquidated damages total original contract amount charge per day num num section num prosecution and progress page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the department shall withhold payment under the contract and may seek performance from the contractors surety to cover the liquidated damages .
the department shall continue to assess liquidated damages until physical completion in accordance with section num project closure .
when the project manager issues the notice of completion and final acceptance further assessment of liquidated damages will stop .
if the amount of liquidated damages meets or exceeds the remaining dollar amount of work remaining on the contract the department shall cease progress payments .
the contractor remains contractually obligated to complete the work remaining on the project .
the contractor shall reimburse the department for any liquidated damages exceeding the dollar amount withheld from the contractor within num days of physical completion .
num default of contract the department may declare the contractor in default of the contract if the contractor num .
fails to perform the work with sufficient resources supervision workers equipment or materials to assure the completion of the work num .
performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or to correct rejected work num .
fails to begin the work within the time specified in the notice to proceed num .
discontinues the work num .
fails to resume discontinued work after the department issues a request to resume work num .
becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or files for reorganization under the bankruptcy code or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency either voluntarily or involuntarily num .
allows a final judgment in a suit filed in connection with this contract to stand unsatisfied for num days num .
makes an assignment in connection with the contract for the benefit of its creditors num .
fails to carry on the work in an acceptable manner in accordance with the contract num .
fails to comply with contract requirements or willfully violates any term or condition of the contract num .
fails to perform the work or maintain the project in compliance with federal and new mexico occupational health and safety laws and regulations num .
fails to observe or comply with federal and new mexico laws and regulations local laws and ordinances num .
is debarred or suspended in accordance with the section num suspension and debarment or is suspended or debarred by any federal agency num .
communicates that the contractor may not perform under the contract or num .
fails to promptly pay a subcontractor or supplier for undisputed accepted work in accordance with section num .
subcontracting .
the project manager will provide written notice to the contractor and the contractors surety of contractors delay neglect apparent default or anticipatory repudiation .
this notice section num prosecution and progress page num will specify the contract provisions that the contractor violated and the corrective measures to be taken by the contractor .
when reasonable grounds for insecurity arise with respect to the performance of the contract by the contractor the project manager may in writing demand adequate assurance of due performance and until such assurance is received may suspend any department performance .
if the contractor or surety does not proceed with the corrective measures within ten num days or when demanded fails to provide adequate assurance of due performance after receiving the notice the department upon written notification from the project manager has full power and authority without violating the contract to declare the contractor in default to remove the corrective measures from the contractor and to demand compliance by the surety of the terms conditions and obligations contained in the performance bond .
if the department determines that the contractor is in default the surety shall complete the work at its own expense pursuant to the contract and receive the balance of any funds owing to the contractor .
if the surety fails to complete the work the department may complete the project with its forces or may obtain another contractor to complete the work .
the department will deduct costs and charges that the department incurs as a result of the default and the cost of completing the work from contract funds due to or which may become due to the defaulting contractor or surety .
if the total costs for completing the work exceeds the amount that would have been payable under the contract the defaulting contractor and the surety shall be jointly and severally liable for the excess costs .
num termination of contract no fault of contractor the department may terminate by written order all or part of the contract after determining the following num .
that the contractor is prevented from proceeding with or completing the work as originally contracted for reasons beyond the control of the contractor or num .
that termination would be in the public interest .
reasons for termination may include but are not limited to the following num .
executive orders of the president of the united states relating to war or national defense num .
a national emergency that creates a serious shortage of materials as deemed by the secretary num .
orders from duly constituted authorities relating to energy conservation num .
restraining orders or injunctions obtained by third party citizen actions resulting from national or local environmental protection laws or where the issuance of the order or injunction is primarily caused by acts or omissions of persons or agencies other than the contractor or num .
to correct any material errors or omissions in the plans or to correct any discrepancy or contradictions within the contract discovered after execution of the contract by both parties and which could not have been discovered through the exercise of prebid due diligence the failure of which to correct is likely to lead to contractor delay a claim for additional time or a claim for compensation which may exceed the costs recoverable under this section .
when the department orders a contract termination effective on a certain date it will pay for the actual number of units or items of work completed at the bid item unit price or as mutually agreed for items of work partially completed or not started .
for pay items eliminated by the termination the department will pay for items eliminated in their entirety in accordance with section num eliminated items .
the department may obtain from the contractor at a negotiated cost acceptable unused materials obtained by the contractor for but not incorporated into the work .
the contractor shall deliver this material to a prescribed location or dispose of it as mutually agreed .
section num prosecution and progress page num after the contractor receives the termination notice from the department the contractor shall submit any claim for additional damages or costs within num days of the date of the contractors termination or shall waive such claim .
the contractor shall submit the claim in accordance with section num notice of potential claim and section num administrative remedy .
the claim shall be limited to the following cost items num .
idle equipment time using standbytime rental rates at num of the blue book equipment rental rate without the cost of operating personnel num .
actual and direct mobilization costs num .
bidding and project investigative costs num .
accounting charges involved in claim preparation num .
unpaid supplier costs num .
idle labor costs if work is stopped in advance of termination date num .
guaranteed payments for private land usage as part of original contract and num .
an additional ten percent num of the total of the above items num num num and num to cover home office overhead and salaried labor expenses .
the contractor shall provide those records required by section num district level to the department to determine the validity and amount of each claim item .
the contractor shall not be entitled to recover anticipated loss of profits or any category of damages excluded pursuant to section num compensation for claim .
full or partial contract termination does not relieve the contractor of its contractual responsibilities for the completed work nor will it relieve the surety of its obligation for claims arising out of the completed work .
section num measurement and payment page num section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantity work performed under the contract shall be subject to the definitions of quantity in this section .
the department will measure pay items in accordance with the pay units listed in the respective basis of payment provisions at the end of each section within divisions num through num .
the department cautions the bidder to carefully read the bid package to determine units of measurement deviating from the following standard terms .
if the bid package has a special reference to terms for measurement the bid package will supersede the following terms and will control .
otherwise the following terminology controls num .
the distance between stations is num feet measured longitudinally num .
longitudinal measurements are along and parallel to surfaces not horizontal .
for pay items measured by the square yard the department will make no deduction for fixtures in the work with areas less than one num square yard a. transverse measurements for areas of base course and pavements are the neat line dimensions shown on the plans based on the average width of the installed material along the centerline of the roadway b .
structures are measured according to the neat lines shown on the plans or as provided by the department c. for pay items measured by the foot measurements are parallel to the base or foundation num .
the volume of excavation is calculated by using the average end area method the prism modular method or other project manager approved methods num .
a ton equals num lb a barrel equals num lb of cement a sack equals num lb of cement num .
timber and lumber permanently incorporated in the project is measured by the foot and measured on nominal widths and thickness and the length of each piece .
the department will accept lumber and timber conforming to the american lumber standards for rough and dressed sizes as specified in the contract num .
standard manufactured items identified by unit weight or section dimensions are measured using nominal weights or dimensions .
the department will accept manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved unless otherwise stated in the contract .
num .
asphalt materials are measured by the ton .
the weight is based on net certified scale weights or weights calculated from certified volumes .
the certified weights or volumes are subject to inspection and adjustment at the point of delivery num .
portland cement is measured by the ton barrel or sack in accordance with the bid package .
the department will use the net certified scale weight of portland cement as the basis of measurement subject to inspection and adjustment at the point of delivery num .
materials that are measured by weight shall be measured and proportioned by weight using certified and accurate scales that are within tolerances established by state law a .
the contractor shall provide scales or use commercial scales b. scales shall be sealed at least once every num months or each time the scales are relocated or as directed by the project manager c. weighmasters including deputy weighmasters provided by the contractor and certified by the nmda shall operate the scales .
the certified weighmasters shall perform their duties in accordance with the regulations of the nmda division of standards and consumers services .
the cost of the certified weighmasters weighmasters scales scale tickets scale house and verification of the scales accuracy is included in the bid item price for the weighed material section num measurement and payment page num d. empty vehicles used to haul material paid by weight shall be weighed at least twice daily at a minimum once prior to initial material delivery and once prior to final material delivery .
the contractor shall ensure vehicles bear legible identification marks .
on a daily basis the contractor shall provide the project manager with a written list of delivery vehicles showing identification marks number of axles the distance between extreme axles and daily tare weights .
the contractor shall update this information before delivery of the material and when the contractor changes vehicles combination vehicles or axle length relationships e. the department may convert weight to volume or volume to weight for payment purposes .
the project manager will determine the factors for conversion using an acceptable method and obtain the contractors agreement before conversion f. the operator of each weighed vehicle shall obtain a scale ticket certificate of correct weight from the weighmaster and deliver the ticket to the project manager or designee at the point of delivery .
the following information shall be included on the scale ticket i .
project number ii .
date iii .
ticket number iv .
truck trailer unit number v. gross weight vi .
tare weight vii .
net weight viii .
material type ix .
certified weighmasters name x .
signature of weighmaster and xi .
whether the driver was on or off the scale during weighing .
num approved equipment rental rates equipment rental rates shall be paid as shown in the blue book in effect at advertisement date .
the rates in the rental rate blue book reflect current ownership overhead and operation costs based on the average hours of operation per year .
the rates do not include operating personnel .
the ownership cost represents the total cost of depreciation interest insurance taxes storage etc .
calculated to an hourly rate .
estimated operating cost per hour includes fuel lubricants tires and other operating expendables e.g .
the percentage of mechanics wages chargeable to preventive and field maintenance .
the current blue book applies to machinery or special equipment other than small tools and transportation authorized by the project manager .
the blue book rates shall be used for the actual time the equipment is in operation .
the department will add num only to the equipment rental rates .
the department will apply equipment rental rates pursuant to the blue book and in accordance with the following criteria num .
the manufacturers identification plates on the equipment will be used to identify the equipment and its capacities .
if the equipment does not have these plates the contractor shall provide written statements certifying the equipment identification and capacity as shown on the contractors equipment inventory .
the contractor shall submit the type capacity and horsepower of each piece of equipment to correlate with the blue book schedule .
the blue book reflects the maximum rates for equipment of modern design and in goodworking condition section num measurement and payment page num num .
the blue book lists common pieces of equipment .
if the blue book does not list a piece of equipment the use of the blue book rental rate for a comparable piece of equipment shall be used as approved by the project manager .
if no comparable piece of equipment is identified in the blue book the project manager may negotiate a rental rate with the contractor at a fair market rental rate num .
if a piece of equipment not available on the project requires hauling onto the project the contractor shall include the actual transportation cost in and out .
the department will pay the transportation cost for each piece of equipment once .
under unusual circumstances the contractor may provide to the department written justification for additional transportation costs num .
the contractor shall only be paid the operating rate for those hours the equipment is actually in use .
a standby rate for equipment required to be at the work site but not operating may by paid by the department if agreed to in writing in advance by the project manager in which case the department will pay for standby equipment using standbytime rental rates at num of the blue book equipment rental rate without the cost of operating personnel .
num .
the regional difference percentage as described in the blue book does not apply .
however the factors in the rate adjustment tables of the blue book do apply num .
overtime as described in blue book does not apply .
the department will pay for equipment used on extra work at the regular hourly rate in accordance with the rate provided in the blue book .
num scope of payment the contractor shall receive and accept compensation in accordance with the bid for performing the work in an acceptable manner .
the compensation associated with the bid shall include the risks losses damages and expenses that when considering the nature of the work and having exercised prebid due diligence should have been reasonably expected by the contractor in prosecuting the work .
the department will pay for the approved actual quantities of material incorporated into the work unless otherwise provided in method of measurement .
the department will only pay for pay items listed in the contract in accordance with the basis of payment provisions .
the department will not pay separately for work incidental to the completion of a pay item or pay for the incidental work under another pay item except as provided in section num rights in and use of materials found on the work .
the contractor shall not receive payment for corrective work .
corrective work is work required by the department to make previously unacceptable work acceptable .
the department may accept portions of the work at an adjusted price in accordance with the relevant pay adjustment provisions in the contract .
the adjusted price only applies to the specific accepted portion of work .
num compensation for overrun underrun quantities the department will pay the contractor for the actual quantities of material used in the work and accepted by the project manager .
if the accepted quantities of work vary from the quantities in the contract the contractor shall accept as payment in full payment based on the bid item unit price for the accepted quantity .
num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work the department will pay the contractor for extra work and work resulting from significant changes in the character of the work or differing site conditions in accordance with section num significant changes in the character of work section num differing site section num measurement and payment page num conditions or section num extra work and by change order based on the following order of priority for payment num .
bid item unit prices num .
negotiated unit prices num .
negotiated lump sum or num .
force account .
for items of work performed by the contractor the negotiated unit price or negotiated lump sum price shall include all costs associated with the work .
if subcontractors perform work as extra work the department shall only compensate the contractor an additional ten percent num of the total actual cost of the subcontracted work for indirect and administrative costs .
num force account if work is paid by force account the department will pay the contractor in accordance with the following sections .
if subcontractors perform work by force account the department shall only compensate the contractor an additional ten percent num of the total cost of the subcontracted work for indirect and administrative costs .
if the contractor submits a timely notice of potential claim in accordance with section num notice of potential claim the project manager may without admitting liability for the claim direct the contractor to keep a complete and accurate account in detail of the cost of doing the work on a force account basis .
failure to maintain records on a force account basis when so directed by the project manager shall waive any associated claim by the contractor .
num labor the department will pay the contractor for labor the wage rate for force account work actually paid by the contractor during the pay period ending before the issuance of the change order authorizing the force account work .
such payment shall include work by supervisors in direct charge of the force account work .
if there is no wage rate for a labor classification needed to perform the type of work required the department and contractor will negotiate and document a new wage rate before beginning the force account work .
labor shall also include and the department will reimburse for the following actual reasonable costs paid to or on behalf of workers num .
subsistence and travel allowances num .
health and welfare benefits num .
pension fund benefits and num .
other benefits required by collective bargaining agreements or other employment contract applicable to the class of labor .
the department will pay an additional num of the labor cost for overhead and profit .
num bond insurance and tax the department will pay the contractor either option num the actual cost of the following plus six percent num num .
property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums num .
unemployment insurance premiums or contributions num .
applicable payroll taxes not including gross receipts taxes and num .
social security taxes .
section num measurement and payment page num to recover actual costs the contractor shall provide satisfactory evidence of the rates it has paid for bonds insurance and taxes .
option num in lieu of supplying the above evidence and recovering actual costs num .
the contractor shall receive payment at a rate representing num of the labor costs for labor burden and num .
the contractor shall also receive payment for one percent num of the total force account amount for the contract bonds .
num materials the department will pay the contractor the actual cost of materials accepted by the project manager and incorporated into the force account work including transportation charges paid by the contractor exclusive of equipment rentals plus num of the material cost .
num equipment for machinery or special equipment other than small tools as defined by the blue book including fuel and lubricants and transportation costs the department will pay rental rates as determined in accordance with section num approved equipment rental rates unless otherwise agreed in writing .
num miscellaneous the department will not pay for other costs not specifically addressed in section num force account .
num documentation the contractor shall compare and reconcile records with the project manager daily or as otherwise directed by the project manager to determine the amount of force account work completed by the contractor as authorized by the force account change order .
num statements the department will not pay for work performed by force account until the contractor furnishes the project manager with itemized statements of the cost of the force account work detailed as follows num .
name classification date daily hours total hours rate and extension for each laborer and foreman num .
equipment brand year of manufacture attachments operating specifications dates of use daily hours total hours current blue book rental rate and rate of applicable attachment for each piece of equipment num .
quantities of materials and prices and num .
transportation of materials .
statements shall be supported by receipted invoices for all materials used and for transportation charges .
for instock materials the contractor shall provide an affidavit certifying that such materials were taken from the contractors stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
the total payment made as provided above shall constitute full compensation for force account work authorized in writing by the department .
num eliminated items section num measurement and payment page num should pay items contained in the contract become unnecessary for the reasonable completion of the work the project manager may direct the contractor in writing to eliminate pay items from the contract .
this written notification will not invalidate the contract .
the department will reimburse the contractor for actual work completed before the written notification at bid item unit price .
the total cost of return freight handling and restocking for materials associated with that eliminated work will then be increased by num .
if materials can not be returned the department will pay for said materials at contractors actual cost and take ownership .
num progress payments the department will make progress payments at least once each month as the work progresses .
the project manager will prepare and post progress payments based on estimates of the value of the work performed and materials completeinplace and in accordance with section num stockpile and minus price reductions within five num days of the estimate cutoff date .
the department will include in the progress payments monies associated with accepted fully executed change orders this shall be included within the next regularly scheduled progress payment or within num days .
the project manager shall process a progress payment on a monthly basis regardless of the dollar amount including zero dollar num owed the contractor .
the department will not make a payment when the total value of the work completed since the last progress payment is less than num unless the contractor requests such payment in writing and the project manager approves such payment .
num retainage the department will make progress payments to the contractor in accordance with section num progress payments .
the department will pay num of the value of work performed and materials complete in place in accordance with section num stockpile until the sum of the progress payments made equals num of the total original contract amount as amended by change order .
the department will continue to make additional progress payments in the sum of zero dollars num after the total original contract amount as amended by change order equals num and until the contractor completes the work in an acceptable manner .
the five percent num retained when the progress payments equals num of the total original contract amount as amended by change order is the amount considered necessary to protect the interests of the public and the department those interests include ensuring that the work is acceptable on schedule in compliance with the contract and that the work reaches substantial completion and final acceptance .
subject to other deductions the amount retained shall be provided to the contractor in accordance with section num project closure .
num nonconformance if the contractor fails to comply with all material terms and conditions of the contract the department shall withhold an additional num as a nonconformance from each progress payment and subsequent progress payments in addition to retainage until the contractor fully complies with the contract .
release of nonconformance withholdings shall be processed at the next scheduled progress payment after the resolution of the non conformance .
nothing in this section prevents the department from withholding application and certification for payment because of the following unsatisfactory job progress defective construction not remedied disputed work third party claims filed or reasonable evidence that a claim will be filed failure of the contractor to make timely or prompt payments for labor equipment and materials damage to the department reasonable evidence that the work can not be completed for the unpaid balance of the contract or for retainage .
section num measurement and payment page num the contractor is not entitled to late payment charges including late payment charges pursuant to nmsa num num associated with any payment retained under this section .
num stockpile unless otherwise specified in the contract it is the policy of the department and the intent of this contract to provide payment for work for items that have been accepted and placed on the project .
however upon adequate written justification provided from the contractor seeking an exemption to this policy the project manager may approve partial stockpile payment for the following items not yet incorporated and accepted into the work and stored in a manner accepted by the project manager .
num .
bid items prefabricated by a supplier .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the project manager shall not approve partial stockpile payment for the following items or materials not yet incorporated and accepted into the work .
num .
items prefabricated by the contractor or subcontractor unless otherwise specified in the contract num .
items or materials associated with the typical section e.g .
aggregates cement asphalt binder lime etc .
num .
items associated with swppp num .
items associated with signs and num .
any item or material stored off the project .
num stockpile payment after measurement partial stockpile payments to the contractor may be made for items on hand not to exceed num of the bid item price under the following conditions num .
the items will be incorporated in the work num .
the items are delivered to the project or to a storage place approved by the project manager num .
the delivered items meet the requirements of the contract num .
the items are purchased from a supplier or fabricator and are not produced by the contractor or a subcontractor unless otherwise specified in the contract num .
the contractor submits paid invoices certified by the supplier or fabricator to the project manager and num .
unless otherwise specified in the contract partial stockpile payments for items on hand shall not exceed num the bid item price .
num project closure step i .
contractor notice of projected substantial completion date step ii .
department determination of substantial completion step iii .
termination of contract time step iv .
project inspection and development of punch list step v. notice of punch list completion and request of final inspection step vi .
final inspection step vii .
contractor submittal of final documentation step viii .
physical completion and release of retainage and final payment num contractor notice of projected substantial completion date section num measurement and payment page num the contractor shall provide written notification to the adeconstruction of the projected substantial completion date .
this notice shall be provided a minimum of num days prior to the projected date unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
num department determination of substantial completion prior to the projected substantial completion date the adeconstruction and the project manager shall conduct a completion conference with the contractor to review the project and determine conformance with the contract .
the department and contractor will address all outstanding work needed for substantial completion .
the department and contractor will agree on the schedule for completion of all work necessary for project closure pursuant to section num project closure .
within five num days of the completion conference or as directed by the project manager the contractor shall submit for approval by the project manager the contractors proposed updated schedule for project closure .
num termination of contract time the contractor shall provide to the adeconstruction a written request to determine substantial completion .
within two num days of receipt of the request for substantial completion the adeconstruction will issue a determination of substantial completion contract time or if applicable liquidated damages assessments will cease upon substantial completion .
num project inspection and development of punch list the project manager shall inspect the project to verify that all work is complete or develop punch list items upon the determination of substantial completion .
the project manager shall provide the contractor written notice that all work is complete or shall provide a punch list .
contract time shall resume if the contractor fails to provide acceptable work associated with the punch list within the agreed upon schedule or does not complete all items of work by the date specified in the updated schedule .
resumed contract time shall continue until all punch list work is accepted .
num notice of punch list completion and request of final inspection the contractor shall provide written notification to the project manager that the punch list is complete and request final inspection .
num final inspection the final inspection by the project manager and the ade construction will be scheduled and conducted within five num days of the contractor written request for final inspection .
if the project manager and the ade construction are satisfied that the work is complete and acceptable that inspection shall constitute the final inspection .
the project manager shall provide written notification of this acceptance to the contractor within two num days .
if the inspection reveals unacceptable or unsatisfactory work the project manager shall give the contractor written instructions for correction and set the time limit for the contractor to comply with these instructions .
upon the contractors correction of the work written notification shall be provided to the project manager the project manager shall make an additional inspection and notify the contractor of the findings as soon as reasonably practicable .
the department will accept the project as soon as practicable after completion and inspection of the work .
acceptance is final and conclusive except for the following situations num .
latent defects num .
fraud section num measurement and payment page num num .
gross mistakes that amount to fraud or num .
the departments warranty or guaranty rights .
num contractor submittal of final documentation the contractor shall submit all documents required by the contract including the final payment voucher certificate of payment of claims summary to contractor pit release letter insurance bonding release affidavit of wages paid and surety release .
the contractor shall furnish a certificate of payment of claims from persons or firms including the contractor who have filed claims for additional compensation for labor performed or for material supplies or services furnished to the contractor or its subcontractors .
the department shall withhold final payment until the contractor furnishes all documents required by the contract .
num physical completion and release of retainage and final payment the department shall not release retained amounts until physical completion and when the contractor fully complies with all contract requirements .
upon acceptance of punch list all work and receipt of all final documentation the adeconstruction shall provide a written determination of physical completion to the contractor .
within num days of the written determination of the district engineer or the designee adeconstruction that the project has reached physical completion the department may reduce retainage if final payment has not been made .
the project manager shall prepare a proposed final payment statement estimate .
the proposed final payment statement estimate shall correct all prior progress payments and release retainage .
the department shall withhold from the proposed final payment statement estimate any disputed amounts liquidated damages and overpayments .
regardless of a disputed or pending claim the contractor will have the right to sign an alternate final payment statement estimate .
with the departments approval of the final payment under either the regular form or the alternate form the department will pay all remaining undisputed amounts due to the contractor .
the contractor shall approve and return the departments final payment statement estimate or request an alternate final payment statement estimate within num days of receipt .
upon receipt of final payment statement estimate from the contractor or expiration of num days the department shall accept the work pay the balance due on the final payment statement estimate and close the project .
a claim is forever barred if the claim is not timely and properly submitted pursuant to section num notice of potential claim and section num administrative remedy within num days of receipt of the departments proposed final payment statement estimate .
if the contractor has a disputed claim and has fully complied with the administrative remedy provisions of section num notice of potential claim and section num administrative remedy the alternate final payment statement estimate shall constitute a stipulation by the parties that the acceptance of such payment the proffering or acceptance of the alternate final payment statement or the making of such refund does not constitute any bar admission or estoppel or waiver of the claim or any defense thereto or have any effect as to the pending claim between the contractor and the department .
the contractor shall reimburse or refund the department for any overpayment in response to a request for refund of overpayment within num days of the departments demand .
failure by the contractor to comply may subject the contractor to default and to rejection of the contractors bids in accordance with section num refusal or rejection of bids until such time that contractor complies with this section .
num compensation for claims section num measurement and payment page num the contractor is not entitled to payment for work or that portion of work that is the subject of a disputed claim the department shall pay undisputed monies due for accepted work .
the contractor is not entitled to late payment charges including late payment charges pursuant to nmsa num num associated with any claim or disputed construction services and materials .
the department will pay the contractor late payment charges as authorized by nmsa num num for construction services and materials not the subject of a disputed claim or subject to retainage or withheld progress payments and that have been certified by the department to have been received and accepted .
the department will pay the contractor late payment charges on undisputed qualified delayed progress payments for certified approved and accepted work in accordance with section num progress payments that are not the subject of a disputed claim .
the contractor is barred from seeking a claim a remedy compensation time cause of action or any damages except as provided by section num notice of potential claim and section num administrative remedy and this section .
the contractor shall not be entitled to any consequential indirect punitive exemplary special or incidental damages and shall only be entitled to additional compensation and time as specifically provided by the following sections of these specifications section num significant change in the character of the work section num differing site condition section num extra work section num cooperation with owner of railroad right of way section num determination and extension of contract time section num termination of contract no fault of contractor section num measurement and payment and this section .
except as otherwise agreed to by the contractor and the department in a written change order all claims and causes of action arising out of the performance and administration of the contract including claims for delay claims for additional compensation and time contract adjustment claims seeking extension of contract time claims seeking delay damages passthrough subcontractor claims causes of action for breach of contract promissory estoppel equitable estoppel waiver detrimental reliance bad faith breach of contract breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing or any other cause of action arising out of the performance of the work or the contract shall be governed by this section .
the compensation time and damages provided for in this section are exclusive complete and apply regardless of whether such claims are to be resolved pursuant to the procedures set forth in section num administrative remedy or any other legal or administrative procedure whether or not authorized herein including arbitration mediation or appeal .
delay .
the term delay does not include time extensions granted by the department by change order in accordance with section num determination and extension of contract time that do not result in any additional compensation .
the contractors entitlement to compensation and time with regard to a delay is defined limited to and provided as follows num .
excusable delay a delay beyond the contractors control that negatively impacts the critical path of the project and is not caused in whole or in part by the contractors fault or negligence and for which a time extension but not additional compensation may be granted num .
compensable delay an excusable delay that negatively impacts the critical path of the project resulting from the neglect or default of the department or from differing site conditions .
for such delays the department may grant additional time and compensation .
examples of a compensable delay includes delays attributable to design errors not readily discovered through prebid due diligence failure by the department to acquire right of way and departmentinitiated design changes num .
noncompensable delay an unforeseen and unanticipated excusable delay not caused by the fault of either the contractor or the department that negatively impacts the critical path of the project .
for such delays the contractor may receive section num measurement and payment page num an extension of time but not additional compensation .
examples of a noncompensable delay includes delays attributable to utility conflicts widespread materials shortages extreme weather war acts of god and labor strikes .
num .
concurrent delay a delay for which the contractor is not entitled to compensation that occurs when both the contractor and the department independently delay work or that occurs when the contractor is responsible for an excusable or compensable delay and also encounters a differing site condition which negatively impacts critical path activities during approximately the same time period or when separate delays to the critical path occur at approximately the same time .
the contractor is not entitled to compensation due to or arising from a concurrent delay .
the contractor is not entitled to an extension of contract time for any period in which a nonexcusable delay is concurrent with an excusable delay .
when a noncompensable delay is concurrent with a compensable delay the contractor may be entitled to an extension of contract time but not entitled to compensation for the period the noncompensable delay is concurrent with the compensable delay .
num .
inexcusable delay or nonexcusable delay a delay for which the contractor is not entitled to compensation or time that was caused by factors within the contractors control the fault or responsibility of the contractor factors that could or should have reasonably been foreseen by the contractor delays caused by an event that the contractor could have foreseen and prevented but failed to do so or failure to reasonably mitigate a delay .
examples of inexcusable or nonexcusable delays include those attributable to reasonably expected seasonal inclement weather events reasonable time periods necessary for reviews of shop drawings by the department for changes or additions to the work that do not negatively impact the critical path of the project inefficient operation inefficient or ineffective construction management failure by the contractor to properly perform prebid due diligence failure by the contractor to procure materials in a timely manner or failure by the contractor to assign sufficient resources to the project .
num .
noncritical disruption a disruption or interference with contractors performance regardless of cause that does not negatively impact the critical path of the project and therefore does not meet the definition of a delay and for which the contractor receives neither compensation nor time .
additional time for delay .
the department may only extend contract time for an excusable delay compensable delay or a noncompensable delay .
the department may only grant an extension of contract time for an excusable delay using the acceptable updated monthly or revised schedules current at the time the delay occurred .
compensation for delay .
the department may only compensate the contractor for a nonconcurrent compensable delay as provided in this section .
in order to receive compensation for a delay the contractor shall document costs resulting from the delay using actual cost records shall measure expenses using generally accepted accounting principles and shall comply with section num schedule format and section num district level .
the compensation which the contractor may recover for a delay claim is limited to num .
nonsalaried labor expenses num .
material costs num .
equipment costs pursuant to section num approved equipment rental rates num .
costs of extended job site overhead including bonds or num .
an additional ten percent num of the total of items num num num and num to cover home office overhead salaried labor expenses and profit .
the department reserves the right to use innovative bidding approaches as specified in the contract as an alternate means of calculating delay damages including requiring bidders to bid a daily overhead rate cost working day as a bid item unit price .
if the contract requires that the contractor escrow its bid documents the escrow bid documents may be considered in resolving claims .
section num measurement and payment page num if the source of the loss of productivity and compensable delay can not be isolated and priced separately the method by which the department shall calculate the extent of an excusable delay caused by a production rate inefficiency shall be made in the following order of priority num .
measured mile analysis by which the department shall compare actual efficiency production rates in an impacted area to actual efficiency in a comparable non impacted area num .
comparison of actual efficiency to actual efficiency on a comparable project and num .
comparison of actual efficiency to planned efficiency taking into account the contractors baseline schedule and timely submitted acceptable updated monthly or revised schedules .
in no event shall the department make a payment based on application of the eichleay formula the total cost method or other formula including original contract period formula fixed overhead formula burden fluctuation method and comparative absorption rates .
nonallowable damages .
regardless of the basis or cause of the claim the contractor may not recover and is not entitled to recover the following categories of damage num .
any compensation except as provided by section num compensation for claims and for delay num .
loss of anticipated profit incentives or bonuses num .
labor inefficiencies num .
home office overhead regardless of whether it is characterized as absorbed unabsorbed or extended exceeding that provided in section num compensation for claims num .
home office overhead extended home office overhead or delay damages calculated using the eichleay formula or other formula including original contract period formula fixed overhead formula burden fluctuation method and comparative absorption rates num .
any indirect special incidental or consequential damages including but not limited to lost or impaired bonding capacity loss of bidding and contracting opportunities loss of credit standing cost of financing interest paid lost material discounts economic loss loss of reputation loss of other work loss of use loss of business opportunity loss of product or output income loss of profit or revenue cost of capital financing and for loss of management or employee productivity or of the services of such persons other not project direct costs and business devastation bankruptcy or insolvency .
the department waives any entitlement to consequential damages from the contractor other than liquidated damages as provided in the contract num .
acceleration costs and expenses except where the department has expressly and specifically directed the contractor in writing to accelerate the work at the departments expense num .
indirect costs or expenses num .
late payment charges including late payment charges pursuant to nmsa num num related to any disputed claim or on any judgment or award made to the contractor .
this provision does not affect the departments payment of late payment charges on undisputed qualified delayed progress payments for certified approved and accepted work in accordance with section num progress payments that are not the subject of a disputed claim num .
prejudgment or postjudgment interest related to or arising from any disputed claim or on any award made to the contractor or num .
attorneys fees and costs claim preparation expenses and litigation or other costs related to or arising from any disputed claim or prosecution thereof .
division num page num division num earthwork division contents num clearing and grubbing .
num num excavation borrow and embankment num num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures num num subgrade preparation num num linear grading num num blading and reshaping num num excavation and backfill for major structures num num obliterating old road num section num clearing and grubbing page num section num clearing and grubbing num description this work consists of clearing grubbing scalping removing and disposing of vegetation and debris .
this work includes protecting vegetation designated to remain and removal or control of all statelisted noxious weed species identified in the contract .
scalping includes the removal of material such as brush roots sod stumps and the residue of agricultural crops .
num materials num paint use department approved asphalt base paint designed for tree surgery .
num construction requirements num general the department will establish right of way lines construction limits and designate trees shrubs plants and other items to remain .
remove surface debris trees stumps roots organic matter and other obstructions .
when approved by the project manager the contractor may leave undisturbed stumps and other solid objects within the roadway prism that do not extend more than six num inches above existing ground and will be at least four num ft below the finished subgrade elevation .
remove hazardous objects and debris from the project .
backfill and compact stump holes and other holes in accordance with section num embankments .
remove lowhanging branches from trees or shrubs designated to remain .
trim overhanging tree branches to provide a clearance num ft above the roadway surface .
paint the cut or scarred surfaces of trees and shrubs designated to remain in accordance with section num paint .
confine operations including dragging piling and burning of debris to department approved areas .
remove or control all statelisted noxious weed species within the right of way project limits as identified in the contract in a manner that prevents their regrowth and spread .
herbicide use shall comply with all applicable federal state county and municipal regulations and ordinances .
the current new mexico noxious weed list is available at httpplants.usda.govjavanoxiousrpttypestatestatefipsnum num salvageable timber fell and cut timber to the specified length in accordance with the contract .
stack cut logs as directed by the project manager .
num scalping scalp before excavation or placement of embankment .
remove organic material under pipe culvert bedding regardless of embankment height .
num removal and disposal of material remove from the right of way materials that can not be safely or adequately disposed of or burned within the project and dispose at locations outside the project .
obtain written permission from the owners of property used for debris material disposal .
section num clearing and grubbing page num burn materials num .
in accordance with applicable laws and regulations num .
under the constant care of competent watchmen num .
without damage to items designated to remain on the right of way surrounding property or vegetative cover .
the roadway and adjacent areas shall have a neat and finished appearance after any removal and disposal of material .
do not accumulate flammable materials on or adjacent to the right of way .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit clearing and grubbing lump sum num work included in payment the department will consider the following work as included in the payment for clearing and grubbing and no separate payment will be made num .
obtaining disposal locations and in making the disposal num .
when clearing and grubbing is not established as a pay item num .
herbicide applied for noxious weed control num .
delivery to storage site if required of salvageable timber .
section num excavation borrow and embankment page num section num excavation borrow and embankment num description this work consists of performing excavation providing borrow constructing embankment hauling disposing placing and compacting materials .
num materials the department will provide geotechnical investigation and pavement investigation results when available in the contract documents .
use the results for information only .
num material classifications num rock excavation rock excavation is material that meets one num of the following field test criteria num .
ripping test .
material that can not be broken down by one pass with a single tooth ripper mounted on a crawlertype tractor in low gear with a minimum net flywheel power rating of num hp num .
seismic test .
material that has a seismic velocity greater than num fts .
submit the qualifications of the person performing and interpreting the seismic testing for project manager approval at least num days before testing .
perform the ripping test to resolve differences in material classification if seismic velocities fall below num fts num .
handling test .
rock with a volume greater than num ydnum that can not be readily broken down with excavation equipment .
num unclassified excavation unclassified excavation is material other than rock excavation .
num borrow material from contractorprovided sources required for embankment subexcavation replacement or other work approved by the department .
num subexcavation subexcavation is existing material that is unsuitable .
unsuitable material is that with an rvalue less than the contract rvalue or if deleterious material is present .
subexcavation shall consist of excavating unsuitable material below established profile grade or typical crosssection shown on the plans or as designated by the project manager .
voids created by subexcavation shall be backfilled with approved material meeting the rvalue requirements shown in the contract .
num unstable subgrade stabilization unstable subgrade is defined as subgrade that is soft pumping andor displaces with applied loading when encountered in nonborrow sections such as cuts or existing grades due to no fault or neglect of the contractor .
num construction requirements num general finish excavation and embankment for the roadway intersections and entrances to reasonably smooth and uniform surfaces .
do not remove materials from the project limits without the approval of the project manager .
ensure the top num ft of the finished subgrade contains material with the design rvalue .
preserve the materials below and beyond the lines section num excavation borrow and embankment page num and grades while conducting excavation operations .
before beginning excavation grading and embankment operations perform the necessary clearing and grubbing in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
notify the project manager before opening excavation or borrow areas .
take cross section elevations of the ground surface before opening excavation or borrow areas .
terminate operations in the immediate area of environmental or cultural resources not listed in the contract until the department reviews and completes appropriate mitigation actions in accordance with section num environmental and cultural resource discoveries .
place excess or unsuitable excavated material including rock and boulders unsuitable for embankments in the toe of any fills or use to flatten slopes of nearby fills .
place at least num ft of cover soil over the rocks and boulders .
dispose of excess or unsuitable material in accordance with environmental requirements and as approved by the project manager .
num excavation within cut sections remove excavated material from the limits of the cut section to the subgrade elevation for the width of the roadbed .
finish roadbed cut sections to a smooth and uniform surface .
remove unsuitable or unstable material below finished subgrade .
take crosssectional measurements after the removal of unsuitable and unstable material .
num rock cuts perform proper drilling and blasting operations in accordance with the specified practices .
when required perform controlled blasting of rock excavation to produce a clean face on the excavated cut .
ensure subsequent blasting and excavation operations do not affect previously excavated faces .
do not excavate more than six num inches below the specified subgrade elevation for roadbed cuts in rock unless directed otherwise .
do not leave undrained pockets on the roadbed surface .
place and compact base course on the rock cut foundation in accordance with section num base course .
num blasting requirements use controlled blasting to establish a specified backslope with minimal blast damage and production blasting to facilitate excavation .
before the start of blasting notify adjacent property owners and occupants .
num definitions blasting operations .
activities related to blasting including but not limited to the following num .
collaring and drilling blast holes num .
preparing fixing loading and firing explosive charges num .
assessing the blast after detonation and num .
handling misfires .
buffer row .
the first row of production blast holes immediately adjacent and drilled in a plane parallel to the controlled blast line .
the explosive load in the buffer row should be reduced from standard production loads to minimize damage to the backslope of the final excavation .
controlled blasting .
the controlled use of explosives and blasting accessories in carefully spaced and aligned blast holes to provide a free surface or shear plane in the rock along the specified backslope and to limit fly rock permanent ground displacement air concussion and overbreak .
controlled blasting methods include presplitting and cushion blasting .
cushion blasting trim blasting .
the simultaneous detonation of one num line of blast section num excavation borrow and embankment page num holes along a specified excavation backslope after the main excavation is complete .
this method is performed to trim the excavation to the final backslope .
final line controlled blast line .
refers to the row of controlled blast holes drilled in the plane of a specified excavation backslope .
the controlled blast holes drilled in this plane constitute the basis for payment under the controlled blasting pay item .
the department considers the blast holes drilled in front of the final line blast holes to be production blast holes which are incidental to the rock excavation pay item .
presplitting .
the simultaneous detonation of one num line of blast holes drilled along a specified excavation backslope before production blast holes are fired .
production blasting .
fragmentation blasting in the main excavation area .
num submittals num blaster in charge do not begin drilling or blasting work until the project manager approves of the blaster in charge .
submit the name and qualifications of the proposed blaster in charge to the project manager for approval at least num days before the delivery of explosive material to the project .
provide the following information num .
proof of a license by the applicable state andor local regulatory agencies to possess transport and use explosives num .
a list of and references for at least three num blasting projects of similar complexity successfully completed within the previous five num years .
the blaster in charge must be on site during blasting operations .
num blasting plans submit a general blasting plan to the project manager for each cut that requires blasting at least two num weeks before the start of drilling and blasting operations on a specified cut .
provide the following information in the general blasting plan num .
description of the proposed blasting operation num .
preliminary design criteria for production and controlled blasting including blast hole depths and patterns and num .
details regarding the proposed explosives and blasting accessories submit a detailed blasting plan at least num h before an individual blast .
provide the following information in the detailed blasting plan num .
station limits of the proposed location of the blast including the bench elevation if applicable num .
date and time the blasting will occur num .
required removal of overburden if applicable num .
plan and cross section diagrams of proposed drill pattern for controlled and production blast holes including buffer rows free face burden blast hole spacing blast hole diameters blast hole angles lift height and subdrill depth .
draw these plans and cross sections to scale num .
loading diagram showing the type and amount of explosives primers and initiators and the location depth and type of stemming num .
initiation sequence of controlled and production blast holes including delay times and the delay system num .
manufacturers data sheets for the explosives primers and initiators to be used .
submit the blasting plans to the project manager for review and approval .
the project manager will review and provide comments to the contractor .
submit revisions to the blasting plans for final review and approval .
do not proceed with drilling and blasting operations section num excavation borrow and embankment page num related to a general blasting plan or loading of blast holes associated with a detailed blasting plan without written approval .
cease blasting operations and submit revised blasting plans if the department determines that the blasting operations under the employed methods are causing property damage in and beyond the right of way .
num blasting records prepare and submit to the department a blasting record for each blast on the day of the blast .
provide the following information in a blasting record num .
actual dimensions of the shot including blast hole diameters and depths burden spacing subdrilling depths stemming powder loads powder factors and timing num .
a drawing or sketch showing the direction of the face and the physical shot layout num .
the location of the blast in relation to project stationing and elevation num .
the date and time of loading and detonation num .
the name and signature of the person responsible for loading and firing num .
comments by blaster in charge regarding misfires fly rock occurrences unusual results or effects and damage to existing facilities adjacent property or completed work num .
vibration and blast monitoring results and num .
any complaints received due to the blasting .
num explosives transport store handle and use explosives in accordance with applicable federal state and local laws and regulations .
purchase explosives and accessory devices from industry recognized suppliers and manufactures .
use explosives and accessory devices in accordance with manufacturer instructions .
do not use expired products .
the cfr specifies responsibility for the following federal agencies regarding the administration of regulations involving explosive materials num .
bureau of alcohol tobacco firearms and explosives atf .
storage and accountability of record keeping and security in accordance with num cfr part num num .
osha .
transportation worker safety and health in accordance with title num cfr storage and safe blasting practices in handling and use in accordance with num cfr part num et seq num .
federal department of transportation usdot .
transportation and public safety num cfr .
the fire marshal sheriff or other local officials may have additional regulations for explosive materials .
num safety follow safe practices including the following num .
federal state and local regulations pertaining to the transportation storage and use of explosives must be strictly followed num .
when required the blaster in charge must obtain a blasting permit from the local regulatory agency before blasting num .
only persons authorized and qualified based on training and experience will handle and use explosives num .
no person will smoke carry matches or other flame producing devices or carry firearms or loaded cartridges while in or near a motor vehicle that is transporting explosives num .
keep track of explosives at all times .
explosives must be stored and locked in an approved magazine facility in accordance with the applicable provisions of the section num excavation borrow and embankment page num department atf and osha until used in blasting num .
post appropriate signs in the required areas and vehicles in accordance with federal regulations num .
safely station the necessary guards or flag persons on highways during blasting to control highway traffic num .
before starting work in the cut observe the entire blast area for at least five num minutes after each blast .
remove potentially dangerous rocks or other material located beyond the excavation limits .
cease blasting operations if the required slopes are not stable or if the safety and convenience of the public are being jeopardized .
num vibration risk survey for each cut that requires blasting perform a vibration risk survey of nearby buildings structures utilities water supplies or environmentally sensitive areas that may be at risk of blasting or construction damage .
perform the vibration risk survey in accordance with section num vibration monitoring .
obtain written approval for the vibration risk survey from the project manager before drilling blast holes .
num blasting test sections demonstrate the adequacy of proposed blasting plan with a blasting test sections for material of different geologic characteristics .
for projects involving multiple cuts in similar geologic materials the project manager may reduce the requirement for a blasting test section in each cut .
blasting test sections include drilling blasting and excavating cut sections approximately num ft long to determine the optimal combination of method blast hole spacing and charge .
when field conditions warrant the project manager may direct the contractor to use test section lengths less than num ft long .
blasting test section requirements include the following num .
perform the blasting test section in accordance with section num blasting requirements .
prepare and submit a detailed blasting plan for the test section to the project manager at least num h before the planned time of the blast .
do not start blasting the test section until the project manager approves the detailed blasting plan num .
unless the contractors detailed blasting plan indicates otherwise begin the tests with the controlled blast holes spaced at num inches num .
after blasting remove a sufficient amount of material from the test section to determine if the blast hole diameter blast hole spacing and amount of explosives are adequate to provide the required backslope .
do not continue drilling of the test section area until the test section is excavated and the department evaluates the results .
if at any time during the progress of the main blasting operation the methods of drilling and blasting do not produce the desired results revise and retest the blasting techniques until a technique produces the required results .
the department will consider the results to be unsatisfactory if num .
there is an excessive amount of breakage beyond the indicated lines and grade num .
there is excessive flyrock num .
the final backslope within the specified tolerances is not uniform num .
ground vibration and air blast levels exceed limits as stated in section num vibration monitoring num .
there are violations of other requirements of the specifications num .
the slopes are unstable num .
the safety of the public is jeopardized num .
property or natural features are endangered .
section num excavation borrow and embankment page num num blasting execution num notification and schedule the following requirements will apply to the notification and scheduling of blasting procedures num .
coordinate blasting operations with the project manager and notify the project manager a minimum of num h before the blast .
provide a onehour timeframe for the blast .
for example if the contactor notifies the project manager by num a.m. the blast may occur between num a.m. and num a.m. num .
provide notice to the required federal state and local agencies before each blast as required by the blasting permits num .
notify occupants of buildings and owners of structures and utilities of the blast time and location at least num h before the start of drilling or blasting num .
detonate blasts at the planned time unless approved otherwise by the project manager .
num general requirements cover the blast area with blasting mats soil or another equally serviceable material before firing blasts in areas where flying rock may result in personal injury or damage to property or the work .
num controlled blasting requirements perform controlled blasting in accordance with the detailed blasting plans that produced acceptable results in blasting test sections .
perform control blasting using either presplitting or cushion blasting in accordance with the following requirements num .
if the overburden does not support the drill holes completely remove the overburden soil and loose rock along the top of the cut to expose the rock surface before drilling the controlled blast holes num .
mechanically monitor the blast hole angles num .
drill and space blast holes with a nominal diameter from two num inch to three num inch in accordance with the blasting test sections or the results achieved in similar geologic materials .
do not exceed three num ft num .
use proper equipment and technique to ensure that no blast holes deviate from the plane of the backslope shown in the plans by more than eight num inches parallel or normal to the slope .
the department will not pay for blast holes exceeding these limits unless the project manager approves the obtained slopes num .
drill the controlled blast holes at the required slope inclination to the full depth of the cut or to a predetermined stage elevation .
the maximum drill depth is num ft. use shallower holes if the directional control is inadequate .
if more than five percent num of the controlled blast holes are misaligned in any one num lift reduce the height of the lifts until the eight num inch tolerance is met .
the length of controlled blast holes may be incrementally increased once satisfactory directional control and blast results are demonstrated num .
drill unloaded and unstemmed guide holes to the same diameter in the same plane and to the same tolerance as the controlled blast holes num .
the department will allow a maximum offset of num inches from the bottom of each lift to allow for drill equipment clearances when the cut requires more than one num lift .
begin drilling the control blast hole at a point that allows the necessary offsets and adjust at the start of lower lifts as necessary to compensate for drift in the upper lifts num .
do not use horizontal blast holes for controlled blasting num .
use explosive charges detonating cord and other items necessary for the blasting operation in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and instructions section num excavation borrow and embankment page num num .
before placing charges ensure the hole is free of obstructions .
use casing if necessary to prevent the walls of the hole from collapsing num .
use only standard explosives manufactured especially for the type of controlled blasting cushion or presplitting .
do not load ammonium nitrate and fuel oil in the controlled blast holes .
use explosives and blasting accessories appropriate for the conditions of the blast hole including water in the holes and necessary to achieve satisfactory results num .
assemble and affix continuous column cartridgetype explosives to the detonating cord in accordance with the explosive manufacturers instructions num .
the bottom charge in a blast hole may be larger than the charges above but not large enough to cause overbreak .
place the top charge far enough below the collar and sufficiently reduced in size to avoid overbreaking or heaving num .
use a dry angular and granular material that passes a num inch sieve to stem the controlled blast holes from the top charge to the hole collar .
num presplit blasting perform presplit blasting in accordance with section num controlled blasting requirements and the following requirements num .
detonate the presplit blast holes before drilling for production blasting or fire the presplit blast holes at least num ms before the production holes if detonated in the same blast num .
fire presplit blast holes simultaneously unless ground vibrations noise or air blast are excessive .
fire presplit holes in delayed sections and reduce the charge weight per delay to mitigate excessive effects num .
the line of presplit blast holes will extend beyond the limits of the production blast holes to be detonated .
the minimum length of this extension will be num ft or to the end of the cut but will not be greater than onehalf of the distance of the expected blast advance num .
do not perform presplit blasting if the distance between the controlled blast line and free face is less than num ft or less than three num times the blast hole depth whichever is greater .
num cushion blasting perform cushion blasting in accordance with item no .
num of section num controlled blasting requirements and the following requirements num .
perform cushion blasting as part of the final shot after other blasting is finished num .
if the final shot includes production blast holes detonate the cushion blast no more than num ms or less than num ms after the production blast num .
fire cushion blast holes simultaneously unless ground vibrations noise or air blast are excessive .
fire cushion blast holes in delayed sections and reduce the charge weight per delay to mitigate excessive effects .
num production blasting perform production blasting in accordance with the blasting plan that produced acceptable results in blasting test sections and the following requirements num .
minimize blast damage to the final excavation backslope num .
drill buffer rows of production blast holes on a plane approximately parallel to the controlled blast line num .
place the buffer row of production blast holes no closer than num ft to the controlled blast line unless the contractor can prove the final excavation backslope will not be damaged by the production blast num .
where necessary to minimize damage to the excavation backslope load blast holes in the buffer row lighter than other production holes section num excavation borrow and embankment page num num .
ensure the bottoms of production blast holes are not lower than the bottom of controlled blast holes except in the lowest lift num .
ensure the diameter of production blast holes does not exceed six num inches unless approved by the project manager num .
before placing charges ensure the hole is free of obstructions .
use casing if necessary to prevent the walls of the hole from collapsing num .
use a dry angular and granular material that passes a num inch sieve to stem the holes from the top charge to the hole collar num .
detonate production blast holes in a controlled delay sequence toward a free face num .
do not use horizontal holes for production blasting except for equipment access num .
use explosives and blasting accessories appropriate for wet or dry blast hole conditions as necessary to achieve satisfactory results .
num scaling and stabilization of slopes established by controlled blasting perform scaling and stabilization of slopes established by controlled blasting in accordance with the following requirements num .
observe the entire blast area following a blast before starting work in the cut .
if any rocks are loose hanging or potentially dangerous within a blast area the contractor shall remove them .
scale slopes by hand using a standard steel mine scaling rod .
use other methods to supplement or in lieu of hand scaling such as machine scaling hydraulic splitters or light blasting if approved by the project manager num .
slopes shall be scaled and stabilized before further construction activities take place .
scale slopes throughout the span of the contract and as often as necessary to keep the slopes free of hazardous loose rock or overhangs num .
cease blasting operations if the following conditions exist num .
there is an excessive amount of breakage beyond the specified lines and grade num .
there is excessive flyrock num .
the final backslope within the specified tolerances is not uniform num .
ground vibration and air blast levels exceed limits specified in section num vibration monitoring num .
there are violations of other requirements of the specifications num .
the slopes are unstable num .
the safety of the public is jeopardized num .
property or natural features are endangered .
num borrow obtain the borrow source unless otherwise specified .
use roadbed excavated material for embankment before using borrow material unless approved by the project manager .
if the contractor places more than the specified amount of borrow and causes a waste of excavation the department will deduct the wasted amount from the borrow volume as measured in the borrow area .
after excavation is complete blade the borrow areas and leave in a condition to allow accurate payment measurements by cross sectioning .
restore right of way fencing removed for borrow operations to its original condition or better .
prevent livestock from entering right of way .
num embankments do not place embankment material on frozen earth or incorporate frozen soils in embankments .
suspend embankment construction if embankment materials become frozen .
do not resume until the materials are thawed and suitable for compaction .
before beginning embankment construction perform scalping in accordance with section num clearing and section num excavation borrow and embankment page num grubbing .
bench new embankments into the following num .
natural slopes including rock num .
existing embankments or num .
phased embankment construction .
ensure benches are wide enough to allow operation and placement of compacting equipment .
recompact new embankment material and material that is cut out at no additional cost to the department .
do not place rock broken concrete or other solid materials in embankment areas where driven pilings drilled caissons utility lines or other structures are specified in the plans .
num roadbed embankments break up the original ground surface to at least six num inches by plowing scarifying or stepping up .
compact this area to num of maximum density in accordance with section num moisture and density control .
place material for roadbed embankment in horizontal layers not exceeding eight num inches thick and compact in accordance with section num moisture and density control .
the department will allow rocks no larger than three num ft in any dimension as long as the contractor distributes and fills the interstices to form a dense mass .
if the interstices between the rock fragments can not be completely filled and compacted use bridging geotextile over the top of the rock fragments to prevent the overlying embankment material from filling the interstices .
do not use rock fragments that may degrade with time or may be water sensitive such as shale or gypsum as rock fill in roadbed embankments .
the department considers this material to be unsuitable .
place large rocks in the toe of the slope in accordance with the following requirements num .
no rock is larger than onehalf the embankment height or ten num ft num .
no rock is placed in fill height less than eight num ft measured at the edge of the roadway shoulder num .
place rocks inside a line six num inches from the slope stake space a minimum of three num ft from edge to edge and cover with approved embankment material .
construct rock embankments to a maximum of six num inches below subgrade elevation .
consolidate rock fills by using the appropriate equipment and methods approved by the project manager .
num nonroadbed embankment construct nonroadbed embankments in accordance with section num roadbed embankments except if the embankment material consists of rock place the rock in layers of sufficient depth to contain the largest rock in the material and carefully distribute and fill the interstices to form a dense mass .
num subexcavation remove unsuitable materials from the subgrade unless an alternative treatment is agreed upon by the project manager .
num unstable subgrade stabilization areas that have been proof rolled and lack sufficient stability in the opinion of the project manager shall be treated as unstable subgrade .
prior to placement of the base material the stabilized subgrade shall be proof rolled with a roller having a minimum weight of num tons and shall exhibit no displacement when proof rolled .
section num excavation borrow and embankment page num the contractor shall stabilize unstable subgrade using acceptable chemical or mechanical methods meeting an equivalent rvalue as approved by the state pavement design engineer .
num moisture and density control maximum dry density of all soil types encountered or used will be determined in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified and aashto t num .
construct roadbed roadbed embankment nonroadbed embankment and roadway median excavation or embankment with moisture and density control .
compact each layer of embankment to at least num of maximum density .
ensure the moisture content of the soil at the time of compaction is not greater than or five percent num less than the optimum level .
for soils with a plasticity index of num or greater ensure the moisture content of the soil at the time of compaction is from optimum moisture to optimum moisture plus four percent num .
if the moisture content at the time of compaction is not within the specified range moisten or dry the material then thoroughly mix the material to the full lift depth before recompacting .
roadbed embankments that contain mostly rock or coarsegrained material num or greater retained on the no .
num sieve does not require moisture and density control except the top six num inches of the embankment construct in accordance with section num construction requirements .
nonroadbed embankments of rock material will not require moisture and density control unless otherwise specified .
ensure field densities are in accordance with aashto t num or other approved methods .
measure densities at each lift before the next subsequent lift is placed in accordance with material testing requirements .
num method of measurement num rock excavation the department will measure rock excavation based on the estimated percentages if shown in the contract unless otherwise requested by the contractor .
if the contractor requests the department will measure rock excavation in its original position for material classified as rock excavation in accordance with section num rock excavation .
before excavation the contractor and project manager must agree on the limits of material classified as rock excavation .
calculate volumes in accordance with section num unclassified excavation borrow and subexcavation .
include in measurements the overbreakage in rock excavation a maximum of ten num inches beyond the backslope specified in the plans or directed by the project manager .
the department will use the blasters drillhole log cards to determine the quantities of rock excavation covered by soil or overburden .
provide these log cards as part of the surveying records .
num controlled blasting the department will measure controlled blasting by the blast holes drilled along the final line whether loaded or not and will measure the lengths from the top of the rock surface to the elevation of the roadway ditch or to a bench elevation set by the project manager .
the department based the quantities for controlled blasting shown in the plans on assumed blast hole spacing the actual quantities depend on field conditions and the results from test sections .
num unclassified excavation borrow and subexcavation measure unclassified excavation borrow and subexcavation in its original position .
the measurements for subexcavation will include approved excavation of rock shale muck or other unsuitable material and its placement in the required embankment or disposal as directed by the project manager .
crosssectional measurements for subexcavation shall be taken before backfill is placed .
section num excavation borrow and embankment page num within cut sections excavated material removed from the limits of the cut section to the subgrade elevation for the width of the roadbed shall be paid as unclassified excavation .
submit the original ground surface and final surface data for each phase of construction using an electronic xmlcompatible format approved by the project manager .
submit volume summary reports to the project manager based on this electronic data for each phase of construction including a report that summarizes the basis for the final volumes .
use a licensed new mexico professional engineer or professional surveyor to certify these volumes .
for borrow from commercial sources use weight converted to cubic yards at minimum specified density .
num unstable subgrade stabilization unstable subgrade stabilization shall be measured by the square yard .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit rock excavation cubic yard unclassified excavation cubic yard borrow cubic yard subexcavation cubic yard unstable subgrade stabilization square yard controlled blasting linear foot num extra work the department will pay for stabilization necessitated by existing geological conditions and for base course and geotextile if necessary as required to backfill rock subgrade conditions .
the department will pay for excavated materials that require more than one num handling as identified within the contract before final placement including fertile topsoil required to be stockpiled and reserved for later use in the work num .
at the bid item unit price for unclassified excavation for each handling approved by the project manager or num .
as another item of work for the second handling if specified in the contract .
however if the contractor handles excavated and borrow materials more than once at the contractors request or at the convenience of the contractor there will be no additional cost to the department .
num work included in payment for excavation backfill and embankments the department will consider as included in the payment for the pay items listed in this section and will not measure or pay separately for the following work num .
controlled blasting drill holes through overburden num .
production blasting num .
scaling within the limits of a final backslope established by controlled blasting num .
mobilization of any equipment and testing of rock in accordance with section num rock excavation num .
time delays to perform testing of rock in accordance with section num rock excavation num .
material required to fill the voids and irregularities in the subgrade below the tolerance limit from the specified elevation except where the project manager section num excavation borrow and embankment page num requires removal of unsuitable materials designated as subexcavation num .
surveying for the purpose of payment is considered incidental to the excavation work and is the contractors responsibility num .
hauling related to rock excavation unclassified excavation borrow and subexcavation num .
fence removal and replacement num .
damage resulting from blasting .
num .
suitable backfill material for subexcavation .
num .
the removed materials shall be hauled and disposed of at the sites designated in the contract or as determined by the project manager .
num .
proof rolling for unstable subgrade stabilization shall be considered incidental to the contract and will not be measured or paid for separately .
section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures page num section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures num description this work consists of excavating placing and compacting select backfill and disposing of material related to construction of box and pipe culverts storm drains cattle guards and other drainage structures .
excavation includes dewatering pumping bailing draining sheeting bracing and incidentals required for proper execution of the work .
ditches required at culvert inlets and outlets and other locations indicated in the plans are included under the item for unclassified excavation .
num materials num select backfill select backfill material is composed of stone crushed stone crushed or screened gravel caliche sand or a combination of these materials and must be free of organic matter silt clay balls lumps or stones numinch diameter or greater and other deleterious materials .
provide materials that are in accordance with aashto soil classifications anum or anumas determined by aashto m num unless otherwise specified in the contract .
do not use recycled asphalt pavement rap as select backfill materials .
num flowable fill the contractor may substitute flowable fill for select backfill in accordance with section num flowable fill at no additional cost to the department .
secure culverts and minor structures to prevent flotation .
num bedding bedding material is composed of loose sand or sandy soil meeting the gradation requirements of table num sand bedding .
the material shall be nonplastic .
table num sand bedding standard sieve percent passing num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no.num num num num construction requirements num general remove unstable foundation material below the specified bottomofstructure elevation and replace with approved material as directed by the project manager .
use backfill material to backfill culverts in accordance with section num select backfill or section num flowable fill unless otherwise shown on the plans .
ensure the moisture content of the soil at the time of compaction is not greater than or five percent num less than the optimum level .
compact the top six num inches of existing ground to at least num of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
maintain the density approved surface elevation and shape of the foundation immediately before placing structures and forms .
distribute backfill material in uniform layers each no more than eight num inches deep loose measurement and compact to num of maximum density at optimum moisture to optimum moisture three percent num in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified and aashto t num .
test for field density and moisture content using nuclear methods in accordance with aashto t num .
before placing section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures page num backfill material against new masonry or concrete structures wait until the concrete has developed its specified design strength as determined in section num concrete strength .
maintain structure alignment and integrity during backfill compaction .
do not place backfill on frozen earth or with frozen materials .
suspend operations until material is thawed and dried so that the moisture content meets requirements above .
remove sheeting and bracing before placing backfill .
the project manager may reduce the density requirement if the deflections for pipe exceed the manufacturers tolerances .
num pipe culverts storm drains and structural plate pipe remove rock and other unyielding foundation material a minimum of four num inches maximum num inches below the bottom of the structure .
backfill this added depth with an approved material as identified in the contract .
excavate trenches wide enough to allow for pipe joining and compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe in accordance with section num construction requirements general .
ensure that the trench width for pipes and culverts conforms to the trench widths requirements in section num .
uniformly compact the trench for its full length and width .
if specified in the plans provide the longitudinal camber of the specified magnitude for cross drains .
num box culverts and other drainage structures excavate material to the elevations established by the contract plans .
do not remove material except unstable material below the final grade if placing footings on excavated surfaces other than rock .
remove rock and other unyielding foundation material a maximum num inches below the bottom of the structure .
clean rock seams and cavities and fill with concrete or grout .
use concrete of the same class as the footing to backfill areas outside the neat lines or below the final grade of the footing bottom at no additional cost to the department .
notify the project manager after each footing excavation .
do not place footings until the project manager approves the excavation depth and the foundation material .
maintain the density and the approved surface elevation and shape of the foundation before installing reinforcing steel .
num method of measurement the project manager will measure the inplace quantity of unstable material excavation below the bottomofstructure elevation .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit unstable material excavation cubic yard the department will pay for rock excavation in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment .
num work included in payment excavation disposal of unstable material backfill and select backfill material placement and compaction of select backfill for culverts storm drains other drainage structures box culverts and minor structures shall be included in the contract unit price per linear foot of culvert .
excavation shall include all dewatering pumping bailing draining sheeting bracing and incidentals required for proper execution of the work .
select backfill shall include the use of section num flowable fill .
backfilling with concrete of the same class as the footings where the contractor excavates below the established final elevation for bottom of footings or beyond the neat lines of the footings in rock or other hard foundation material shall be included in the contract unit price per linear foot of culvert .
unrippable rock or unyielding material will be defined and paid for as covered in section num excavation borrow and embankment .
section num subgrade preparation page num section num subgrade preparation num description this work consists of compacting and finishing the subgrade .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements maximum dry density of all soil types encountered or used will be determined in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified and aashto t num .
ensure the top two num ft of the finished subgrade contains material with the design r value .
for subgrade material not meeting design rvalue perform subexcavation in accordance with section num .
compact the top six num inches of the roadbed to num of maximum density .
ensure the soil moisture content at the time of compaction is from optimum to optimum minus five percent num .
for soils with a pi of num or greater ensure the moisture content of the soil at the time of compaction is from optimum moisture to optimum moisture plus four percent num .
conduct field density tests at locations according to minimum testing requirements in accordance with aashto t num or by other departmentapproved methods .
num tolerances ensure the top surface of the finished subgrade is within num ft of the plan subgrade elevation .
the department will measure tolerances on the finished surface at right angles to the centerline .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit subgrade preparation square yard num work included in payment no payment will be made for rehandling or reworking material to meet moisture and density requirements .
section num linear grading page num section num linear grading num description this work consists of constructing or restoring and shaping roadbeds and side ditches to the specified grade and typical section .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num general use a motor grader to move existing material in the roadway prism to bring the existing roadbed surfaces to grade and section .
material haul of more than num ft is not required .
use material that is free of deleterious material and frozen lumps for constructing or reshaping the roadbed .
num compaction compact the top six num inches of the roadbed to num of maximum density per aashto tnum method d ttcp modified .
num tolerance the horizontal distance for a typical section from the roadbed centerline to the completed edge of the shoulder shall not differ by more than six num inches from the dimension shown on the plans .
num method of measurement the project manager will measure linear grading along the roadbed centerline .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit linear grading mile section num blading and reshaping page num section num blading and reshaping num description this work consists of restoring existing roadbed to the specified grade and typical section .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements bring the surface of the existing roadbed to the specified grade with approved materials .
reshape shoulders to the specified width .
num compaction perform the following to the top six num inches of the roadbed after restoring the grade and typical section num .
scarify the surface num .
water when required num .
compact to num of maximum density per aashto tnum method d ttcp modified num .
smooth and finish the roadbed to a uniform grade and typical section .
num method of measurement the department will measure blading and reshaping along the roadbed centerline .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit blading and reshaping mile section num excavation and backfill for major structures page num section num excavation and backfill for major structures num description this work consists of excavating backfilling and disposing of materials related to the construction of bridges cast in place retaining walls and cbcs num feet or greater measured along the centerline of the roadway .
all excavation for major structures below the designed slope or subgrade lines as shown on the plans is included under this contract item .
excavation for major structures includes pumping bailing draining sheeting bracing and incidentals required for proper execution of the work .
num materials num select backfill use select backfill material composed of stone crushed stone crushed or screened gravel caliche sand or a combination thereof .
use material that is free of deleterious materials and that does not contain lumps or stones with diameters larger than two num inches .
provide select backfill materials in accordance with aashto soil classifications anum or anum as determined by aashto m num unless otherwise shown in the contract .
num approach slab use aashto soil classifications anuma material or base course under the approach slab and extending ten num feet beyond the end of the approach for the full width of the abutment and to the depth indicated in the plans and in accordance with section num compaction .
do not use recycled asphalt pavement rap as select backfill materials .
num construction requirements num general excavate material to the elevations established by the contract plans .
do not remove material except unstable material below the final grade if placing footings on excavated surfaces other than rock .
remove rock and other unyielding foundation material a maximum num inches below the bottom of the structure .
clean rock seams and cavities and fill with concrete or grout .
use concrete of the same class as the footing to backfill areas outside the neat lines or below the final grade of the footing bottom at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor may use excavated surpluses of suitable material in the construction of embankments but must dispose of unsuitable material .
notify the project manager after each footing excavation .
do not place footings until the project manager approves the excavation depth and the foundation material .
dewater wet pits for inspection and for construction of footings .
when necessary install wellbraced cofferdams built as watertight as practical .
do not use timber or bracing inside cofferdams that can not be removed without damage to the concrete .
make temporary structures large enough to provide ample room for pile driving form construction inspection and sump pumps .
straighten or move cofferdams that threaten to damage the structure .
submit to the project manager working drawings showing proposed methods of constructing cofferdams cribs shoring or similar temporary structures .
the submittal of working drawings does not relieve the contractor of any responsibility .
backfill excavated areas not occupied by piers abutments or other permanent structures to the adjoining finished surface elevation .
do not use rock in backfill that is within num ft of the structure .
place backfill material in approximately level layers for the length and width of the backfilled area .
when necessary to prevent wedge action bench the slopes bounding the area being backfilled in accordance with section num roadbed embankments .
dispose of unstable excavated material outside of the roadway prism as directed by the project manager .
before placing backfill material against new masonry or concrete structures wait until the concrete has developed its specified design strength as section num excavation and backfill for major structures page num determined in section num concrete strength .
prevent unbalanced loading while placing backfill material .
num compaction make layers of uncompacted backfill no more than eight num inches thick .
before placing the next layer compact to num of the maximum density near optimum moisture content for aashto soil classifications anuma material and roadway embankment as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
use nuclear methods to determine field densities in accordance with aashto t num .
num contractor certification of backfill unless otherwise specified in the contract provide contractor certification of backfill .
the certification of backfill will be required for all backfill placed within num feet of the structure .
provide an independent new mexico professional engineers stamped letter of certification to include num .
oversight of all backfill operations as covered under section num were performed num .
compacted lift heights were performed and maintained as specified num .
proctor curves developed for material backfill were completed as specified and represent material placed and compacted and num .
field densities were performed on each lift height as specified based on proctor curve for material supplied .
the independent new mexico professional engineer providing the letter of certification to produce proctor curves and field density tests utilized for the material backfill as covered .
attach to the letter of certification copies of all daily logs verifying backfill placement lift heights material properties proctor curves field density tests and testing frequency .
num method of measurement the department will measure excavation and backfill for major structures as excavation in its original position from the ground surface after excavation of any overburden material to final plan grade to the bottom of the structure or structure footings in accordance with the limits shown in the standard drawings .
for this measurement ground surface is defined as the bottoms of channel excavations the template sections of the roadway cuts or the undisturbed natural ground surface .
this method applies whether or not the contractor elects to excavate for the roadway or channel before making the excavation for the structure .
the department will measure excavation and backfill for major structures for all grade separation structures in its original position between the template section of the lower roadway and the bottom of the footings .
measure contractor certification of backfill by the lump sum for the certification letter .
the certification letter will cover all backfill specified on the project to have contractor certification of backfill .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit excavation and backfill for major structures cubic yard unsuitable material excavation cubic yard the department will not pay for material excavated outside the area num .
bounded by vertical planes num inches from and parallel to the footings num .
the neat lines for footings in rock or num .
for material excavated below the established final elevation .
section num excavation and backfill for major structures page num the department will pay for rock excavation in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment .
num work included in payment excavation and backfill for major structures includes the following num .
compaction to num of maximum density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified for num ft approach to bridge abutments num .
any temporary shoring of excavations required for construction phasing num .
contractor certification of backfill and num .
dewatering of excavations for structure backfill .
section num obliterating old road page num section num obliterating old road num description this work consists of obliterating old road .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements after the old road is no longer needed for traffic remove and stockpile existing surfacing materials to subgrade in an environmentally acceptable manner .
fill ditches rough grade the road to blend with the surrounding terrain and form natural rounded slopes approved by the project manager .
next scarify or plow to thoroughly mix the remaining surfacing material with earth harrow and smooth the roadbed .
num method of measurement measure obliterating old road along the centerline of the old road .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit obliterating old road mile division num page num division num bases division contents num processing placing and compacting existing pavement num num base course num num portland cement or lime treated subgrade num section num processing placing and compacting existing pavement page num section num processing placing and compacting existing pavement num description this work consists of processing placing and compacting existing pavements .
num materials the following gradation requirements apply table num gradation requirements sieve size inch passing num num num num num num construction requirements process the existing pavement in place to a homogeneous mixture and a depth in accordance with the plans .
mix the existing pavement and underlying aggregate to a homogeneous mixture and a depth in accordance with the plans .
place and compact the mixed materials on the existing subgrade .
perform compaction and provide a final surface in accordance with section num base course .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit processing placing and compacting existing pavement square yard section num base course page num section num base course num description this work consists of providing hauling and placing base course .
num stockpiling this work consists of providing hauling and stockpiling base course at specified locations .
num removing processing and placing base course this work consists of removing hauling processing placing existing base course material .
num materials num general base course consists of one num or more of the following num .
crushed stone num .
crushed or screened gravel num .
caliche num .
sand num .
recycled asphalt pavement rap not to exceed num recycled concrete pavement rc not to exceed num and the combined rap and rc not to exceed num by weight .
num .
processed glass aggregate .
base course does not contain organic matter or other deleterious materials including silt and clay balls .
the department will allow a maximum of num by weight processed glass aggregate uniformly distributed in composite base course .
processed glass aggregate shall meet physical properties and deleterious substance requirements in accordance with aashto m num .
num aggregate acceptance the department will accept base course based on periodic random samples taken by the department from the roadway .
unless the contract specifies otherwise combine the aggregate materials including processed glass aggregate if used in proportions that produce a homogeneous composite blend in accordance with table num type i base course gradation band .
table num type i base course gradation band sieve size passing num inch num ¾ inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num section num base course page num table num type ii base course gradation band sieve size passing num inch num ¾ inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num ensure that at least num of the materials retained on or above the no .
num sieve have at least two num fractured faces when evaluated in accordance with aashto tnum determining the percentage of fracture in coarse aggregate .
provide base course from a material source with a maximum ai of num when calculated in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa a maximum ll of num and a maximum pi of num .
determine the ai for the untreated natural aggregate source .
num construction requirements num preparation of subgrade clear the subgrade of loose and deleterious material .
ensure that the top six num inches of the roadbed meets the density requirements of section num subgrade preparation .
proofroll the subgrade with equipment described in the contractors quality control plan and approved by the project manager to expose and correct soft areas .
num mixing and placing mix the base course material to a homogenous mixture .
place maximum six num inches compacted lifts unless specified otherwise .
do not place on frozen subgrade .
compact base course to at least num of maximum density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
the department will take field density tests and gradation samples at random locations .
the department will use nuclear testing methods to determine inplace densities in accordance with aashto t num and ttcp procedures .
num surface tolerance the department will allow a surface tolerance of ½ inch within ten num feet .
if the depth is deficient the project manager can accept the work and reduce the contractors payment or reject the work with subsequent replacement by the contractor .
num plan base course and subbase depths monitor and record base course depth during the placement in accordance with the departments minimum testing and acceptance requirements .
if the placed thickness deviates from the requirements by more than minus ½ inch the project manager may num .
accept and approve the payment for the measured quantity only or num .
allow contractor to add material and reprocess to correct the deficiency to meet specification required in section num .
num stockpiled base course stockpile material at locations shown on the plans .
prevent segregation of materials at each stockpile .
maintain each stockpile in accordance with section num stockpiling .
num removing and processing base course minimize contamination of base course material when removing it from the roadway .
section num base course page num num sampling and testing sample and test the base course in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa and the departments minimum testing requirements for base course .
department personnel may test locations other than the random locations generated for statistical analysis .
these tests will not be used for pay factor determination but may be used to determine acceptance or rejection of localized material .
num contractor quality control develop and administer a quality control plan that ensures the product meets the requirements of section num contractor quality control .
ensure that the quality control plan addresses the following elements num .
contractor management and process control personnel num .
testing equipment and lab facilities num .
aggregate production num .
aggregate quality num .
stockpile management num .
proportioning num .
mixing and processing num .
transporting num .
placing and spreading num .
compaction num .
line and grade control and num .
criteria for the correction or rejection of unsatisfactory materials .
provide copies of ttcp wallet cards or certifications for personnel who are responsible for sampling and testing the base course .
update the list as required if personnel substitutions are made .
use test results inspections and other quality control practices to assure the quality of each material source and to control processes for crushing mixing proportioning processing transporting placing spreading and compacting quality .
num acceptance the department will accept base course materials based on samples taken in accordance with the departments minimum testing requirements after placement but before compaction .
acceptance will be in accordance with section num construction requirements .
if necessary rework the base course until all requirements are met .
num method of measurement when calculating the square yardage the department will use the average base course width and the stationtostation length along the centerline .
the dimensions will show on the typical section of the plans .
when calculating the weight of the material the department will deduct the weight of moisture that exceeds the optimum moisture content plus two percent num .
no additional payment shall be made for the stockpile pad .
num basis of payment the department will pay for the accepted quantities of base course as determined in section num acceptance .
pay item pay unit base course cubic yard or ton base course _____inch depth square yard remove process and place base course square yard or ton section num base course page num stockpiled base course cubic yard or ton section num portland cement or lime treated subgrade page num section num portland cement or lime treated subgrade num description this work consists of the following num .
preparing the roadbed num .
providing applying mixing and processing portland cement or lime and num .
compacting the mixture .
num materials num portland cement treated subgrade provide portland cement in accordance with section num or num portland cement concrete mix designs num lime treated subgrade num hydrated lime provide hydrated lime in accordance with aashto m num .
when dry sieved in a mechanical shaker for num min num s a num lb test sample of hydrated lime shall conform to the gradation requirement in table num hydrated lime gradation requirements .
table num hydrated lime gradation requirements sieve size passing no .
num num num no .
num num num num quicklime provide quicklime in accordance with aashto m num .
when dry sieved in a mechanical shaker for num min num s ensure a num lb test sample of quicklime is in accordance with table num quicklime gradation requirements .
table num quicklime gradation requirements sieve size passing num inch num num no .
num num num num limeslurry provide limeslurry as a suspension of solids in water that can be pumped .
the water or liquid portion of the slurry is free of dissolved material .
limeslurry shall be a mixture of quicklime and water .
the hydrated lime solids in the mixture shall meet the following requirements num .
chemical composition .
limeslurry with a solids content of at least num by weight calcium and magnesium oxides num .
residue .
limeslurry mixture with a retained solids content residue in accordance with table num lime slurry solids content gradation requirements section num portland cement or lime treated subgrade page num table num limeslurry solids content gradation requirements sieve size passing no .
num num num no .
num num num num .
grade .
provide limeslurry with a minimum dry solids content of num .
num construction requirements num subgrade preparation treat the subgrade in accordance with the state materials bureaus mix design .
identify and correct soft areas then shape the subgrade to the grades shown in the plans before adding portland cement or hydrated lime quicklime or limeslurry .
ensure that the scarified depth of the treated subgrade shown in the plans is free of deleterious material and stones retained on a num inch sieve .
do not perform work during wet or inclement weather .
mix and place the portland cement or limetreated subgrade only if when the air temperature is at least num f and rising in the shade .
do not mix or place cement or limetreated subgrade on frozen subgrade .
when the air temperature is forecast to fall below num f within a numhour period cease work or ensure the subgrade temperature will not fall below num f. proofroll the material with equipment approved by the project manager to expose and correct the soft areas .
where unstable subgrade is encountered in cuts or existing grades due to no fault or neglect of the contractor subexcavation and borrow will be paid for and measured as per section num excavation borrow and embankment .
engineered designs will be measured and paid for on an item by item basis or as specified in the contract .
conduct operations in such a way that the project manager can take the necessary crosssectional measurements before the backfill is placed .
num portland cement treated subgrade prior to the addition of portland cement pulverize the subgrade to the specified depth so that at least num by weight passes through a no .
num sieve .
apply portland cement at the specified application rate and to the depth shown on the plans .
when processing the portland cementtreated subgrade ensure that cement dust is not a hazard to the public or workers .
perform mixing placing compacting and finishing on the same day as the cement placement .
num mixing mix the portland cement soil and water with a selfpropelled rotarytype mixing machine approved by the project manager to provide a uniform mixture .
overlap at least six num inches between passes .
the department will consider streaks and pockets of portland cement as evidence of unacceptable mixing .
ensure the material moisture content ranges between optimum to five percent num over optimum within the entire treated depth .
num finishing operations section num portland cement or lime treated subgrade page num compact to num maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified immediately after mixing is complete .
finish to num ft along centerline and num ft at right angles to the centerline .
correct deviations from these tolerances .
final roll the surface to finish the completed work and prevent hairline cracking .
finish within four num h of adding the portland cement .
allow the cementtreated subgrade to cure for at least seven num days .
maintain a moist not saturated condition during the entire curing period to prevent drying .
if permitted by local jurisdiction the contractor may use an alternate curing procedure by applying a cssnum or ssnum emulsified asphalt to the surface so that the surface is fully covered and sealed as approved by the project manager .
num lime treated subgrade use a distributor that will apply a uniform application and automatically adjust the spread rate for variable travel speeds .
apply hydrated lime or quicklime dry within num of the specified percentage by weight shown on the approved mix design onto the prepared scarified subgrade .
do not use a tailgate spreader .
when used apply quicklime at the equivalent percentage to hydrated lime num ton quicklime is equivalent to num tons hydrated lime .
apply limeslurry at the specified percentage of dry solids content onto the prepared scarified subgrade with a distributor having a pump and a spray bar .
continuously circulate the slurry in transit and during application .
apply the limeslurry within num h of its production .
after num h the slurry is considered expired .
dispose of the expired slurry in an environmentallyacceptable manner and do not use it on the project .
replace limeslurry that is left exposed on the ground to the open air for more than ten num hours and shows excessive moisture loss .
num initial mixing process the hydrated lime quicklime or limeslurry so as not to present a hazard to the public or workers .
mix immediately after applying the lime treatment using a selfpropelled rotarytype mixing machine .
provide a loose uniform mixture with clods and lumps no larger than two num inch that when compacted will meet the required depth and width shown in the plans .
overlap at least six num inches between passes .
the department will consider visible streaks and pockets as evidence of unacceptable mixing .
immediately following mixing ensure the entire treated subgrade depths moisture content is three percent num to five percent num above optimum in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
lightly compact the surface to minimize water loss or gain and lime carbonation .
num curing allow the treated lightly compacted subgrade to cure for at least num h. apply a seal during the cure period using either num .
a water curing seal that maintains moisture content at not less than three percent num or more than five percent num above optimum as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified or num .
an ss or css emulsified asphalt seal using a rate between num to num gal per square yard as determined by the project manager .
treated subgrade temperature must remain above num f during the entire curing period .
num final mixing section num portland cement or lime treated subgrade page num ensure by additional pulverization the stabilized limesoil mixture meets the requirements of table num limetreated subgrade gradation requirements before final compaction .
table num limetreated subgrade gradation requirements sieve size passing one num inch num no .
num num num num finishing operations compact immediately after final mixing is complete to num of the maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
the project manager will verify the compacted depth of limetreated subgrade with a contractorprovided phenolphthalein indicator chemical or beet juice .
finish to num ft along the centerline and num ft at right angles from centerline .
lightly roll the completed section to prevent hairline cracking .
num protection of treated subgrade allow only sprinkling or spraying equipment on the treated subgrade during the curing period unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
install a base subbase or wearing surface before opening the roadway to the public unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
num method of measurement the department will pay for lime as hydrated lime using the following conversion one num ton of quicklime equals num ton of hydrated lime .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit cementtreated subgrade square yard portland cement ton lime treated subgrade square yard hydrated lime per section num ton division num page num division num surface treatments and pavements division contents num pavement smoothness measurement num num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material num num open graded friction course nonqla num numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course nonqla num num rubberized open graded friction course num num detour pavements num num tack coat num num prime coat num num hotpoured crack sealant num num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement remixing method num num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num num cold milling num num pavement surface restoration num num minor paving num num miscellaneous paving num num hotmix asphalt superpave qla nonqla num num warm mix asphalt num num portland cement concrete pavement qla num num portland cement concrete pavement num num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints num num cracking and seating concrete pavement num num diamond grinding and diamond grooving of portland cement concrete pavement pccp num section num pavement smoothness measurement page num section num pavement smoothness measurement num description this work consists of providing and using profile testing equipment that incorporates the mean roughness index mri measurement for the established categories provided within this section .
unless otherwise specified in the contract category one num table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i hmawma projects will be applicable to all hot mix asphalt hmawarm mix asphalt wma projects .
unless otherwise specified in the contract table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i pccp projects will be applicable to all portland cement concrete pavement pccp projects .
this specification applies to all construction projects with one num opportunity for pavement smoothness .
an example of one num opportunity for pavement smoothness is a single lift of paving operations for hmawma or pccp .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num profile measurements collect raw profile data utilizing profiler settings used in certification by ttcp certification of intertila profilers .
export all raw profile data to create files conforming to the university of michigan transportation research institutes engineering research division erd format using an upper wavelength cutoff filter of num ft for hmawma .
for pccp data collection use a butterworth bandpass filter short cutoff wavelength of seven num ft and a long cutoff wavelength of num ft and the current calibration documentation to the accompanying department representative within one num hour after the data has been collected on either a cd or universal serial bus usb memory storage device .
provide additional data files or text files upon request .
if the contractor does not submit the profile measurements files within this time period the department may alter the pay adjustments resulting from table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i hmawma projects table num mri based pay adjustment schedule for category ii hmawma projects table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i pccp projects or table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category ii pccp projects by applying an additional five percent num price deduction of the total price reduction for the profiled area in question .
num profile measurement device provide operate and maintain a profile measurement device that uses equipment and computer programs in accordance with aashto m num inertial profiler or an equal approved by the state materials bureau .
num profile measurement device calibration and certification certify the profile measurement device in accordance with the departments standard practice certification of inertial profilers .
profile measurement devices used for acceptance testing on nmdot projects shall have a current ttcp annual calibration sticker or manufacturers calibration and certification certificate .
the manufacturers certificate is valid only until the date of the next ttcp sponsored profile measuring device certification .
verify calibration of the profile measurement device .
verify both horizontal and vertical calibration before each use .
perform verifications in the presence of the departments representative as determined by the project manager and in accordance with the manufacturers approved procedures and maintain copies of the verification documentation section num pavement smoothness measurement page num and manufacturers procedures with the machine and provide the calibration documentation and verification documentation to the project manager .
the project manager may require additional calibrations or verifications .
remove the profile measurement device from the project if it does not meet manufacturers calibration requirements .
the project manager will report the ttcp profile measurement device certification number to the ttcp administrator in order to provide notification that the contractor can not use the machine on other projects until the contractor obtains recertification .
once the manufacturer recertifies the profile measurement device provide a copy of the certificate to the departments ttcp administrator .
the ttcp administrator will provide a temporary ttcp certification valid until the next scheduled certification .
num technician certification the departments ttcp will certify individuals performing profile measurement .
the department will base certification on demonstrated ability and a written test .
the ttcp will establish the term and expiration date of certification and requirements for renewal .
the department state materials engineer through the ttcp will investigate any concerns submitted in writing as to the competence of a certified individual and implement corrective action if necessary in accordance with the ttcp board of directors established procedures .
num profile measurement operations the department will consider profile testing as part of the paving operation .
include the proposed frequency and schedule for profile testing with the paving plan submittal at the pre paving conference .
allow the departments representative to witness the collection of raw data by riding in the vehicle while collecting the data .
obtain the project managers written approval and sweep the roadway surface before beginning profile operations .
final surface is the surface immediately behind the paving operation prior to any surface modification .
measure the longitudinal smoothness of the final surface of hma wma ogfc and pccp using a department certified profile measurement device .
operate the profile measurement device in accordance with aashto r num operating inertial profiling systems and manufacturers recommendations .
using dualsensors with single point lasers or bar lasers one num inch or less measure the profile traces for each wheel path .
locate outside trace three num feet from and parallel to the approximate location of the pavement edge line .
ensure the centerline distance between sensors is num inches one num inch .
at transverse joints commence profile traces at the joint location .
operate the device on the driving surface of the roadway at the manufacturers recommended speed without interfering with traffic or its own operation .
on hmawma projects perform profile measurements and corrective actions on the final surface of hmawma .
on pccp projects perform profile measurements and corrective actions on the finished surface after tining or grooving .
maintain the profile data files .
take additional profiles to retest paved surfaces that have received corrective work .
the project manager may require additional profiles to check previously submitted data or to identify the limits of surface irregularities .
include the following information for each data file num .
project number num .
date num .
lane profiled num .
beginning and ending stations num .
net total linear feet of each lane section num pavement smoothness measurement page num num .
filter settings and num .
operators signature .
num proval profile data analysis by the department the department will use the fhwas current version of proval software to determine the mri for each num mile section of each lane reported to the nearest num inch per mile using the average of the two wheel paths iris using ride quality analysis .
using the proval software the department will not use any further filter settings .
do not use the num mm filter in proval .
data obtained through analysis by the department will be used for evaluations of all must grind work corrective work and pay adjustments .
num straightedge measurements category iii test the final surface of hma wma or pccp with an approved ten num foot straightedge at both right angles and parallel to the centerline advancing the straightedge in five num foot increments .
in lieu of a physical ten num foot straightedge measuremet and at the direction of the project manager a profile measurement device that complies with section num profile measurement device can be used for the ten num foot straightedge measurement .
correct surface deviations greater than num inch within ten num ft as directed by the project manager .
num evaluation for must grind work and corrective work evaluate the pavement in nummile sections for determining needed must grind work corrective work and pay adjustments .
num diamond grinding diamond grinding equipment uses diamond tipped saw blades composed of industrial diamonds and metallurgical powder that are gang mounted on a cutting head ranging in width from num inches to num inches .
the diamond grinding equipment shall use water to cool the cutting head .
the slurry or residue resulting from the grinding operation shall be contiuously removed from the pavement with a wet vacuum process .
the slury or residue shall not be allowed to flow across lanes occupied by traffic or to flow into gutters or other drainage facilities .
diamond grinding equipment shall be selfpropelled selfcontained and without external attachments acting as cutting grinding devices .
diamond grinding operations shall not dislodge aggregate or binder creating rock pockets or deviations on pavement surface .
num must grind work identify potential must grind locations using ride quality analysis under the analysis type with the continuous feature of the latest version of the fhwas proval software .
use a mri threshold inchmi of num and a segment length of num feet .
identify must grind locations for each lane using the mri ride quality index feature of proval .
any locations with a mri of num to num will be evaluated by the project manager and the contractor to determine if diamond grinding is required final determination will be made by the project manager .
all locations with an mri above num must be included in the corrective action plan .
develop and submit an appropriate written corrective action plan including methods and procedures utilized to diamond grind and achieve the specified mri values proposed by the contractor to the project manager for review and written approval .
do not begin must grind work until the project manager approves the methods and procedures in writing .
failure to submit and obtain approval of the corrective action plan will result in the contractor correcting all locations identified by proval regardless of the smoothness value for the num mile section .
the project managers approval does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to comply with the specifications .
section num pavement smoothness measurement page num correct all must grind locations on the project identified by the approved written corrective action plan then measure and evaluate roadway profiles for smoothness pay adjustment .
use diamond grinding to bring the reported average measured smoothness value to an acceptable level .
do not reduce planned pavement thickness by more than num inches without written approval of the project manager .
grind must grind areas across the lane width to produce a smooth transition to the surrounding pavement .
if the must grind area is not the full width of the lane only half of the lane containing the roughness shall be ground and smoothly feathered into the surrounding pavement .
for hmawma if the contract does not require an ogfc or ogfc will not be placed before project suspension apply a fog seal to the ground areas as approved by the project manager .
fog seal and all operations necessary to apply it is included in the bid item unit price for hmawma the department will make no separate payment .
num corrective work develop and submit an appropriate written corrective work plan including methods and procedures utilized to diamond grind and achieve the specified mri values proposed by the contractor to the project manager for review and written approval if the measured smoothness value falls within the corrective work required cwr value of the applicable pay adjustment table and category as indicated in the contract .
if approved complete elected corrective work including necessary traffic control at no additional cost to the department .
after completion of the approved corrective work reprofile the corrected area to verify compliance with specification requirements .
limit corrective work to diamond grinding overlaying or removing and replacing rejected nummile sections .
do not begin corrective work until the project manager approves the methods and procedures in writing .
the project managers approval does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to comply with the specifications .
perform corrective work in accordance with the following num .
surface diamond grinding .
use diamond grinding to bring the measured smoothness value to an acceptable level in accordance with the applicable tables and categoryies as indicated in the contract .
do not reduce planned pavement thickness by more than num inches without written approval of the project manager .
grind corrective work areas to produce a smooth transition to the surrounding pavement .
if the corrective work areas are not the full width of the lane only half of the lane containing the corrective work area shall be ground and smoothly feathered into the surrounding pavement .
for hmawma if the contract does not require an ogfc or ogfc will not be placed before project suspension apply a fog seal to the ground areas as approved by the project manager .
fog seal and all operations necessary to apply will be incidental to the bid item unit price for hmawma the department will make no separate payment .
for pccp perform additional diamond grinding as necessary in the following situations num .
the transverse direction so the lateral diamond grinding limits are at a constant offset from and parallel to the nearest lane line or pavement edge and num .
the longitudinal direction so the diamond grinding begins and ends at lines perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
maintain diamond grinding locations as neat rectangular areas of uniform appearance .
if tining is eliminated by section num pavement smoothness measurement page num diamond grinding machine groove the hardened concrete in the same pattern as adjacent tining at no additional cost to the department .
num .
overlaying .
if the contractor uses an additional lift of hmawma to correct rough pavement the hmawma shall meet the requirements of the appropriate specification .
extend the overlay lift the full width of the underlying pavement surface to a finished compacted thickness sufficient to correct the existing pavement roughness .
the department will not allow a second overlay if the first overlay does not meet the longitudinal smoothness requirement .
correct a corrective overlay that does not meet the smoothness requirement by diamond grinding or removing and replacing as specified in section num corrective work .
num .
removing and replacing .
remove pavement the full width of the lane and the full thickness of the course .
the removal area shall begin and end with a transverse saw cut perpendicular to centerline .
use the type of approved hma wma or pccp as originally specified in the project contract as replacement material .
reprofile the num mile section of travel lane after performing corrective work and use the reprofiles reported measured smoothness data to represent the particular section for pay adjustment purposes .
num ogfc placement and profile measurement ensure hmawma profile measurements and corrective work has been completed before placing ogfc .
pay adjustment will be based on the mri of the hmawma unless the measured mri of the ogfc is greater than the measured mri of the hmawma on the same num mile section then the department will base the pay adjustment for the hmawma section on the ogfcs measured mri .
num method of measurement the department will determine smoothness pay adjustments on the calculated square yards of the surface area of the travel lane bound by the plan typical section travel lanes and nummile lane length .
num basis of payment surface smoothness testing and corrective work to bring the final surface within specification smoothness in accordance with the applicable tables and categoryies as indicated in the contract is incidental to the bid item unit price for hma wma or pccp the department will make no separate payment .
all traffic control required to determine and correct pavement smoothness is incidental to the hma wma or pccp item .
all adjustments of manhole and utility valves for the facilitation of pavement smoothness shall be performed after paving of the finish grade .
this work shall be paid in accordance with section num manholes and num utility items .
num pay adjustments the department will calculate a pay adjustment for each num mile section of travel lane .
the pay adjustments will apply to the total accepted area of each num mile section of hma wma or pccp constructed for the plan typical section travel lane width and roadway length .
the department will not include shoulder and turnout areas for payment purposes .
if the pay adjustment for a num mile section is not equal to cwr but less than num the contractor shall accept the designated pay adjustment .
num pay adjustment for category i and category ii hmawma projects section num pavement smoothness measurement page num the department will base pay adjustments on the final mri for each num mile section in accordance with table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i hmawma projects and table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category ii hmawma projects after the contractor performs and measures corrective work .
table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i hmawma projects pay adjustment per square yard mri mean roughness index inchnummi category i num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num corrective work required table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category ii hmawma projects pay adjustment per square yard mri mean roughness index inchnummi category ii num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num corrective work required section num pavement smoothness measurement page num num pay adjustment for pcc pavement the department will base pay adjustments on the final average mri for each num mile section in accordance with table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i pccp projects and table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category ii pccp projects after the contractor performs and measures corrective work .
table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category i pccp projects pay adjustment per square yard mri mean roughness index inchnummi category i num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num corrective work required table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category ii pccp projects pay adjustment per square yard mri mean roughness index inchnummi category ii num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num pavement smoothness measurement page num table num mri based profile pay adjustment schedule for category ii pccp projects num to num num num to num num num to num num num corrective work required section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material page num section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material num description this work consists of providing mixing and applying asphalt materials hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
num materials num sampling and testing the department will sample and test the materials unless otherwise shown in the contract .
the sampling testing and inspecting of materials will conform to the requirements of section num control of work and section num control of materials .
the department may waive its testing responsibilities and require the contractor to provide certified test reports ctrs .
sample and test performancegraded asphalt binders in accordance with the departments standard practice for certifying suppliers of performancegraded asphalt binders and in accordance with section num performancegraded asphalt binder pgab of the standard specifications .
the department will assume no obligation to accept the ctrs and may additionally test the certified materials .
the department may test asphalt materials at the manufacture shipping or project storage location .
num acceptance the department will accept asphalt cement in accordance with the departments standard practice for certifying suppliers of performancegraded binders and in accordance with section num performancegraded asphalt binder pgab of the standard specifications .
num shipping ship asphalt material in sealed insulated tank vehicles with convenient access to the material so that it may be sampled .
keep the shipping tanks free of foreign matter .
the department will reject contaminated asphalt material .
the project manager may conditionally accept each delivery of asphalt material upon receiving the loading certificate test which is subject to the provisions of section num sampling and testing .
ship the performance graded binder as shown in the requirements of departments standard practice for certifying suppliers of performancegraded asphalt binders .
num asphalt cement asphalt cement binders are uncracked petroleum asphalts .
prepare asphalt cement binders by refining petroleum at a maximum temperature of num f. do not use materials that are prone to cracking .
the asphalt cement will be num .
free of thermal decomposition products num .
free of residue from nonasphalt sources num .
homogeneous and free from water num .
nonfoaming when heated to num f and num .
conforming to the requirements of performancegraded asphalt binder .
num performancegraded asphalt binder pgab provide performancegraded asphalt binder in accordance with aashto m num .
the contractor may substitute a performancegraded asphalt binder with a highend or lowend temperature grade in excess of that shown in the plans at no additional cost to the department .
section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material page num num sampling the contractor shall perform all quality assurance sampling using aashto t num standard method of test for sampling bituminous materials under the direct supervision of ttcp certified sampling personnel and witnessed by the project manager or his designee .
the samples will be taken either from the discharge side of the storage tank or from the delivery trucks .
the samples will be taken after a sufficient amount a minimum of one num gallon of pgab is run out to clear any residual pgab or other asphalt material andor solvent that may have built up in the sampling valve .
all approved sample containers shall be identified using department form mtnum .
the minimum sampling frequency for pgab shall be one num sample during the test strip operation and every num tons of hma or wma thereafter .
one num sample of pgab shall be taken representing ogfc operations .
a minimum of two num samples shall be taken per project representing asphalt binder from hma or wma and a minimum of one num sample representing asphalt binder for ogfc .
a sample shall consist of num separate numquart sub samples .
all samples shall be maintained in a secure dry location at the project office or at a preagreed upon location that is satisfactory to the contractor and project manager .
num testing one num subsample shall be tested by nmdot chemistry unit when the test strip is performed .
another randomly selected subsample shall be tested by the nmdot chemistry unit during the course of the project .
if the results of any of the subsamples designate failing material the second subsample shall be submitted to and tested by the nmdot chemistry unit .
if the second subsample does not meet specifications in accordance with aashto m num table num pay adjustment factor based on pgab test results will be implemented by the project manager .
the pay adjustment factor will represent the total asphalt binder used for num tons of hma or the tonnage of hma used for the test strip .
if there are multiple failures for each binder test on the same sample the project manager will base the adjustment on the lowest pay factor of all the tests .
the price adjustment will be executed with a change order field sheet .
table num pay adjustment factornum based on binder test results binder property measured value pay factor applied dsr on original binder gsin kpa min .
num kpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or removal num dsr on rtfo aged material gsin kpa min .
num kpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or removal num dsr on pav aged material g sin kpa max .
num kpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or removal num bbr slope value m of pav aged binder min .
num num num num num num num section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material page num table num pay adjustment factor num based on binder test results num num num num num num num num or removal num bbr stiffness of pav aged binder s mpa max .
num mpa num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or removal num elastic recovery on rtfo aged material num min num num num num num num or removal num numprice reduction will be applied to contactors invoice price of asphalt binder .
numthe assistant district engineerconstruction will determine if the noncompliant hma material will be removed .
removal and replacement will be at no additional cost to the department .
if the noncompliant material is accepted a price reduction factor of num will apply .
numelasticrecovery is only applicable to pg and pgr binders .
num appeal procedure asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite base materials only if desired the contractor at no expense to the department may submit the third sub sample referee to a mutually agreed upon independent laboratory .
the independent laboratory shall be currently accredited to perform such testing by the aashto accreditation program aap .
if the contractor desires to appeal the price adjustment for a particular pgab grade production lot num tons of hma or wma the contractor shall submit a written request to the project manager with a copy to the qc engineer within ten num calendar days of the reported test results .
the request must describe in full the grounds of circumstances for the appeal .
the appeal request will be reviewed by the project manager and assistant district engineerconstruction and either accepted or denied .
if the appeal is denied a letter from the project manager stating the grounds for denial will be sent to the contractor and the price adjustment will be executed with a change order field sheet .
num polymermodified asphalt binder provide a polymermodified asphalt binder that meets the requirements for a pg num per aashto m num in addition to the requirements in table num ogfc polymer modified asphalt binder .
table num ogfc polymermodified asphalt binders properties requirements pg num pg numr terminalblended tire rubber content minimum num styrenebutadienestyrene sbs polymer content by weight of total formulation minimum num solubility in trichloroethylene minimum note num astm d num num num section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material page num table num ogfc polymermodified asphalt binders elastic recovery num of minimum aashto t num num num note num if the solubility of the binder is less than num percent test the base asphalt binder .
the solubility of the base asphalt binder shall be greater than num percent .
num emulsified asphalt emulsified asphalt consists of uncracked petroleum asphalt uniformly emulsified with water and an emulsifying or stabilizing agent .
ensure that emulsified asphalt is homogenous after mixing .
provide anionic emulsified asphalt in accordance with aashto m num and cationic emulsified asphalt in accordance with aashto m num .
num highfloat emulsions provide highfloat emulsions hfenum hfenum hfenum and hfenum in accordance with table num highfloat emulsions requirements .
table num highfloat emulsions requirements test hfe num hfenum hfenum hfenum viscosity saybolt furol at num f seconds num num num num sieve test retained on no .
num sieve num num num num settlement num days num num num num storage stability test num day num num num num demulsibility num fl oz num n cacl num num residue from distillation test to num f num num num num oil distillate by volume of emulsion num num num num coating test num minutes grades stones coated thoroughly tests on residue from distillation test penetration at num f num oz .
num sec num mm num num num num float test at num f seconds num num num num num polymermodified highfloat emulsions this material is a highfloat emulsion containing polymermodified asphalt and water in accordance with the requirements of table num polymermodified highfloat emulsions requirements .
table num polymermodified highfloat emulsions requirements test hfe nump hfe nump hfe nump hfe nump viscosity saybolt furol at num f seconds num num num num sieve test retained on no .
num sieve num num num num storage stability test num day num num num num demulsibility num fl oz num n cacl num num residue from distillation test to num f num num num num oil distillate by volume of emulsion num num num num tests on residue from distillation test section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material page num table num polymermodified highfloat emulsions requirements test hfe nump hfe nump hfe nump hfe nump penetration at num f num oz .
num s num mm num num num num ductility num f num inchmin num num num elastic recovery num a num a num b num b float test num f seconds num num num num atest in accordance with aashto t num at a test temperature of num f. btest in accordance with aashto t num at a test temperature of num f. num polymermodified highfloat emulsion rapid set provide a highfloat rapidset polymerized emulsion hfrsnump that contains polymer modified asphalt water and an emulsifier .
provide highfloat rapidset polymerized emulsion hfrsnump in accordance with table num rapidset polymermodified highfloat emulsion requirements .
table num rapidset polymermodified highfloat emulsion requirements test hfrsnump viscosity saybolt furol at num f seconds num sieve test retained on no .
num sieve num demulsibility num fl oz num n cacl num residue from distillation test to num f num oil distillate by volume of emulsion num tests on residue from distillation penetration at num f num oz .
num s num mm num ductility num f num inchmin num elastic recovery a num float test at num f seconds num atest in accordance with aashto t num at a test temperature of num f num asphaltemulsified prime aep provide aep designated asphaltemulsified prime in accordance with table num asphalt emulsified prime .
table num asphalt emulsified prime test aep viscosity saybolt furol at num f seconds num settlement num h num residue from distillation test num oil distillate by volume of emulsion num tests on residue from distillation solubility in trichloroethylene num num penetrating emulsified prime pep provide pep designated penetrating emulsified prime in accordance with table num penetrating emulsified prime .
section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material page num table num penetrating emulsified prime test pep viscosity saybolt furol at num f seconds num sieve test retained on num in sieve num residue from distillation test num oil distillate by volume of emulsion num num cutback asphalts mediumcuring type provide cutback asphalt in accordance with aashto m num .
do not use mcnum .
num hydrated lime provide hydrated lime in accordance with astm c num with the following exception num .
delete astm c num section num and num .
substitute the following hydrated lime dry or slurry will have a maximum of three percent num retained on a no .
num sieve and a maximum of num retained on a no .
num sieve .
determine the fineness of hydrated lime in accordance with aashto t num .
use a ¼ pound sample to perform tests in accordance with aashto t num sections num and num .
num anhydrite based material provide anhydrite based material in accordance with tables num anhydrite based material chemical composition and table num anhydrite based material physical properties .
use astm c num for the chemical analysis .
table num anhydrite based material chemical composition chemical compound percent by weight sionum num to num alnumonum num to num fenumonum num to num mgo num to num cao num to num sonum num to num table num anhydrite based material physical properties property range loi num to num passing num sieve num to num passing num sieve num to num specific gravity num to num num construction requirements submit the material suppliers name and address to the project manager .
if required by the project manager submit representative samples of each grade or classification of asphalt materials for testing .
mix and apply asphalt materials within the approved temperature range .
do not make changes in the crude stock source manufacture method or the supplier without written approval from the project manager .
num method of measurement section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material page num if asphalt materials are not stored in tanks for exclusive use on the project the department will determine the acceptable quantity of virgin asphalt material per lot based on the following equation x t q num where q is the quantity of virgin asphalt material in tons t is the quantity of placed and accepted asphalt pavement in tons x is the average percent virgin asphalt content in the asphalt pavement per lot num basis of payment pay item pay unit virgin asphalt material ton hydrated lime ton anhydrite based material ton section num open graded friction course nonqla page num section num opengraded friction course nonqla num description this work consists of constructing an opengraded friction course ogfc on a prepared surface .
num materials num general provide ogfc composed of aggregate asphalt binder and hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
num aggregate the aggregate is crushed stone or crushed gravel composed of hard durable pebbles or fragments .
ensure the aggregate meets the grading requirements in table num ogfc gradation requirements when tested in accordance with aashto t num and aashto t num .
the department will determine aggregate acceptance by testing samples of the combined aggregates and lime taken before adding asphalt materials .
table num ogfc gradation requirements sieve size passing num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num accepted aggregate material must also meet the following requirements num .
at least num of the material retained in the no .
num sieve will be composed of particles that have at least two num fractured faces .
fractured faces will be determined in accordance with nmdot method ffnum fractured face determination for coarse aggregate num .
the aggregate is free of organic matter lumps of clay or other material that prevents thorough coating with asphalt material num .
the aggregate is obtained from a source with an ai of num or less when calculated in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
num .
the department will allow the combination of materials from two num or more sources to produce coarse aggregate only when each source independently meets the requirements of item three num above .
num asphalt material use either a pg num or pg numr as specified in the contract in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material provide hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
num mix design the district laboratory will develop the ogfc mix design .
the jmf gradation will be section num open graded friction course nonqla page num within the master range for the specified type of ogfc .
the mix design will establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size and a single percentage of asphalt material to be added to the aggregate .
the mix design will specify whether to add hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and how much to use .
if hydrated lime or anhydrite based material is added include it in the gradation for establishing the mix design .
if liquid antistrip is required compensation will be by change order .
num construction requirements num general use the strap method to determine the quantity of asphalt material and maintain the percentage of asphalt material specified in the mix design within num .
num preparation of roadbed before placing ogfc clean deleterious materials from the existing surface .
num temperature and weather limitations do not place ogfc on wet surfaces or when the project manager determines that the weather conditions prevent proper handling and finishing .
place ogfc when the chill factor is at least num f. if the air temperature is num f or warmer do not consider the chill factor .
num mixing requirements ensure that num .
hot mix plants conform to the requirements of section num hotmix asphalt superpave qla nonqla and are of a size that is proportional to the scale of the work num .
the mineral aggregate is free of oily or carbonaceous coatings num .
the moisture content of the mixed material does not exceed one percent num by weight of the dry aggregate num .
the aggregate is mixed with asphalt material until the aggregate particles are thoroughly and uniformly coated num .
the mixture temperature does not vary by more than num f from the placement temperature established by the project manager num .
the placement temperature for the mixture does not exceed the asphalt binder suppliers recommendation or fall below num f num .
if the contract requires hydrated lime or anhydrite based material add it to the aggregate in accordance with section num hotmix asphalt superpave qla nonqla within the production tolerances specified .
num placement and finishing place the ogfc with a paving machine in accordance with section num pavers .
the project manager may require an external reference of at least num ft to improve the rideability .
immediately following the ogfc placement roll the surface with a steelwheeled selfpropelled roller that weighs enough to achieve adequate consolidation of the aggregate without excessive breakage .
the finished surface shall be smooth and in accordance with section num profile measurement operations .
use a ten num foot straightedge to ensure the surface is free of irregularities larger than num inch .
immediately remove low and defective areas replace them with new hot ogfc and compact the corrected work to conform to the surrounding area .
num plan surfacing depths monitor and record plan depths throughout the surfacing operations at intervals specified section num open graded friction course nonqla page num by the project manager .
the department will not pay for any excess course depth .
courses will be rejected if less than num inch .
num sampling and testing num contractor quality control sample the stockpiled aggregate at a point agreed to by the project manager and shall conduct testing on those samples in accordance with applicable test procedures .
this sampling and testing will be accomplished by qualified testing personnel using equipment furnished by the contractor that meets all applicable astm and aashto requirements .
the applicable test procedures performed as described in the nmdot technician training and certification manual are as follows aashto t num sampling aggregates aashto t num materials finer than no .
num sieve in mineral aggregates by washing aashto t num sieve analysis of fine and coarse aggregates aashto t num reducing field samples of aggregate to testing size nmdot ffnum fractured face determination for coarse aggregate sample test at the rate of at least one num test per num tons of material produced for the first num tons of production and test at least num tons of material produced thereafter .
num suspension of operations if one num or more properties listed in subsection num department quality assurance testing fail to meet the specification requirements for a period of one num day or a maximum production of num tons the production will be halted by the project manager .
use the gradation information to determine causes or factors that may be a contribution to the problem and prepare a plan to solve the problem .
approval of the plan must be obtained from the project manager before resumption of paving operations .
upon approval of the proposed plan the contractor may resume operations to determine if the actions taken have corrected the problem .
limit production to num tons that will be tested in num ton increments .
if that testing indicates that the problem has been corrected the contractor may resume full operations .
if the problem has not been corrected further trial runs and testing as described herein will be required .
take corrective action to remedy any property of the mix that is out of specification .
contractors who elect to produce material that is not within the specification limits do so at their own risk .
price reductions due to out of specification material being placed will be deducted from the unit price of the item in accordance with the departments current acceptance and price reduction procedures .
all material that is rejected shall be removed and replaced with specification material at the contractors expense .
material that is improperly graded or segregated or fails to meet the requirements herein provided shall be corrected or removed and disposed of immediately as directed by the project manager at the contractors expense .
num department quality assurance num acceptance after the mix design has been issued and approved control the mixture production on the project such that the tolerances of table num are met .
the department will conduct quality assurance sampling testing and monitoring to ensure that the contractor provides a mix that meets the tolerances .
acceptance for gradation will be based on testing of samples obtained from combined aggregates and lime if used before addition of asphaltic materials .
acceptance for asphalt content will be based on strap method .
acceptance for lime content will be based on daily strap totals .
the testing will be conducted in accordance with the departments minimum acceptance testing requirements .
acceptance test results will be provided to the contractors quality control representative or designee by the end of the section num open graded friction course nonqla page num workday after the samples are taken .
table num acceptance limits and factors characteristic specification limits asphalt content num a hydrated lime or anhydrite based material content if required by the mix design num a num inch gradation band num inch gradation band no .
num gradation band no .
num gradation band no .
num gradation band no .
num gradation band apercent difference from tv of approved jmf .
num method of measurement num ogfc ogfc will be measured by the square yard or ton .
the average width of the ogfc in place will be used in computing the quantities .
the length used in computing the area shall be station to station along the centerline of the roadway .
all dimensions shall be as shown on the typical section of the plans .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of the ogfc will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or ton .
the accepted quantities complete in place will be considered full compensation for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment testing and any appurtenances necessary to complete the work as directed by the project manager .
materials shall be considered to include all aggregate bituminous material and hydrated lime .
the checking of the depth of the courses for process control and cutting of the test cores that include the refilling and compacting with acceptable materials shall be done by and at the expense of the contractor under the direct supervision of the project manager .
payments will be made under pay item pay unit opengraded friction course square yard or ton num price adjustments a price reduction in accordance with the departments price reduction guidelines will be applied if the ogfc bituminous material or hydrated lime are not produced mixed or placed in accordance with the contract requirements .
section numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course nonqla page num section numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course non qla warm mix asphalt wma is a generic term used to describe the reduction in production paving and compaction temperatures achieved through the use of one num of the nmdot approved wma technologies .
some modification to hma plants may be necessary to accommodate the wma technologies as noted in section num construction requirements .
numa.num description this work consists of constructing a warmmix asphalt opengraded friction course wmaogfc on a prepared surface with a warmmix additive or technologies approved by the new mexico department of transportation and included the most current approved products list apl .
warmmix asphalt shall be produced in a mixing plant and stored hauled placed and compacted in accordance with the requirements of this section and as shown on the plans .
a technical representative of the warm mix additive supplier including contact information shall be provided in writing to the district prior to mix design process .
the representative is expected to ensure that the warmmix additive is handled properly .
this representative does not have the authority to allow any deviation from the department specifications and project requirements .
numa.num materials numa.num general provide wmaogfc composed of aggregate asphalt binder and hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
wma may be produced by one num or a combination of several technologies which may include wma plant foaming processes and equipment mineral additives or chemicals that allow the reduction of the production temperatures .
numa.num aggregate the aggregate is crushed stone or crushed gravel composed of hard durable pebbles or fragments .
ensure the aggregate meets the grading requirements in table numa.num ogfc gradation requirements when tested in accordance with aashto t num and aashto t num .
the department will determine aggregate acceptance by testing samples of the combined aggregates and lime taken before adding asphalt materials .
table numa.num ogfc gradation requirements sieve size passing num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num accepted aggregate material must also meet the following requirements num .
at least num of the material retained in the no .
num sieve will be composed of particles that have at least two num fractured faces .
fractured faces will be determined in section numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course nonqla page num accordance with nmdot method ffnum fractured face determination for coarse aggregate num .
the aggregate is free of organic matter lumps of clay or other material that prevents thorough coating with asphalt material num .
the aggregate is obtained from a source with an ai of num or less when calculated in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa num .
the department will allow the combination of materials from two num or more sources to produce coarse aggregate only when each source independently meets the requirements of item three num above .
numa.num asphalt material use either a pg num or pg numr as specified in the contract in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
numa.num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material provide hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
numa.num mix design a department approved private testing lab will develop the wma ogfc mix design in accordance with astm d num standard practice for open graded friction course ogfc mix design as modified by the new mexico department of transportation state asphalt engineer .
the mix design shall be signed by a professional engineer licensed by the nm board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors .
the jmf gradation will be within the master range for the specified type of wmaogfc .
the mix design will establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size and a single percentage of asphalt material to be added to the aggregate .
the mix design will specify whether to add hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and how much to use .
the mix design shall identify the minimum and maximum mixing and placement temperatures of the mix .
add a minimum of one percent num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material include it in the gradation for establishing the mix design .
numa.num warm mix additive or technology only warm mix additives or technologies approved by the product evaluation program and currently listed on the approved products list can be used on department projects .
to be placed on the approved products list the wma additive supplier shall verify that the binder with the additive meets the pg grade of the specified binder .
the potential additive supplier shall demonstrate this to the department by evaluating the asphalt binder and wma additive for compliance with the rheological properties for low and high temperatures for the specified pg grade in accordance with aashto mnum table num and section num polymermodified asphalt binder .
the type and dosage of warm mix additives shall comply with the requirements of the warm mix additive supplier .
the type andor dosage of the wma additives shall be provided to the project manager two num weeks prior to the commencement of pavement operations .
warm mix additive dosage rates shall not deviate from those designated by the warm mix additive supplier .
if a terminal blend warm mix additive is used the dosage rate shall be shown on the materials certificate of compliance .
after the warm mix additive is introduced the pg grade of the binder shall comply with the pg grade as specified in the contract .
for foamed asphalt systems water used as directed by the foamed asphalt system manufacturer shall be considered to be the warm mix additive .
only foam systems on the departments approved products list shall be used .
section numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course nonqla page num numa.num construction requirements numa.num general use the strap method to determine the quantity of asphalt material and maintain the percentage of asphalt material specified in the mix design within num .
numa.num preparation of roadbed before placing wmaogfc clean deleterious materials from the existing surface .
numa.num temperature and weather limitations do not place wmaogfc on wet surfaces or when the project manager determines that the weather conditions prevent proper handling and finishing .
place wma ogfc when the chill factor is at least num f. if the air temperature is num f or warmer do not consider the chill factor .
numa.num mixing requirements ensure that num .
hot mix plants conform to the requirements of section num hotmix asphalt superpave qla nonqla and are of a size that is proportional to the scale of the work .
some modification to hma plants may be necessary to accommodate the wma technologies as noted in section num construction requirements num .
the mineral aggregate is free of oily or carbonaceous coatings num .
the moisture content of the mixed material does not exceed num by weight of the dry aggregate num .
the aggregate is mixed with asphalt material until the aggregate particles are thoroughly and uniformly coated num .
the mixing and placement temperature for the mixture do not exceed or fall below the temperatures established in the approved mix design and num .
indicate which warm mix technologies are to be incorporated into the mix design .
the mix design will specify whether to add hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and how much to use .
numa.num placement and finishing place the wmaogfc with a paving machine in accordance with section num pavers .
the project manager may require an external reference of at least num ft to improve the ride ability .
immediately following the ogfc placement roll the surface with a steel wheeled selfpropelled roller that weighs enough to achieve adequate consolidation of the aggregate without excessive breakage .
the finished surface shall be smooth and in accordance with section num profile measurement operations .
use a ten num foot straightedge to ensure the surface is free of irregularities larger than num inch .
immediately remove low and defective areas replace them with new hot ogfc and compact the corrected work to conform to the surrounding area .
numa.num plan surfacing depths monitor and record plan depths throughout the surfacing operations at intervals specified by the project manager .
the department will not pay for any excess course depth .
courses will be rejected if less than num inch .
numa.num sampling and testing numa.num contractor quality control section numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course nonqla page num sample the stockpiled aggregate at a point agreed to by the project manager and shall conduct testing on those samples in accordance with applicable test procedures .
this sampling and testing will be accomplished by qualified testing personnel using equipment furnished by the contractor that meets all applicable astm and aashto requirements .
the applicable test procedures performed as described in the nmdot technician training and certification manual are as follows aashto t num sampling aggregates aashto t num materials finer than no .
num sieve in mineral aggregates by washing aashto t num sieve analysis of fine and coarse aggregates aashto t num reducing field samples of aggregate to testing size nmdot ffnum fractured face determination for coarse aggregate sample test at the rate of at least one num test per num tons of material produced for the first num tons of production and test at least num tons of material produced thereafter .
numa.num suspension of operations if one num or more properties listed in subsection numa.num department quality assurance testing fail to meet the specification requirements for a period of one num day or a maximum production of num tons the production will be halted by the project manager .
use the gradation information to determine causes or factors that may be a contribution to the problem and prepare a plan to solve the problem .
approval of the plan must be obtained from the project manager before resumption of paving operations .
upon approval of the proposed plan the contractor may resume operations to determine if the actions taken have corrected the problem .
limit production to num tons that will be tested in num ton increments .
if that testing indicates that the problem has been corrected the contractor may resume full operations .
if the problem has not been corrected further trial runs and testing as described herein will be required .
take corrective action to remedy any property of the mix that is out of specification .
contractors who elect to produce material that is not within the specification limits do so at their own risk .
price reductions due to out of specification material being placed will be deducted from the unit price of the item in accordance with the departments current acceptance and price reduction procedures .
all material that is rejected shall be removed and replaced with specification material at the contractors expense .
material that is improperly graded or segregated or fails to meet the requirements herein provided shall be corrected or removed and disposed of immediately as directed by the project manager at the contractors expense .
numa.num department quality assurance numa.num acceptance after the mix design has been issued and approved control the mixture production on the project such that the tolerances of table numa.num are met .
the department will conduct quality assurance sampling testing and monitoring to ensure that the contractor provides a mix that meets the tolerances .
acceptance for gradation will be based on testing of samples obtained from combined aggregates and lime if used before addition of asphaltic materials .
acceptance for asphalt content will be based on strap method .
acceptance for lime content will be based on daily strap totals .
the testing will be conducted in accordance with the departments minimum acceptance testing requirements .
acceptance test results will be provided to the contractors quality control representative or designee by the end of the workday after the samples are taken .
table numa.num acceptance limits and factors characteristic specification limits asphalt content num a hydrated lime or anhydrite based num a section numa warm mix asphalt open graded friction course nonqla page num table numa.num acceptance limits and factors characteristic specification limits material content if required by the mix design num inch gradation band num inch gradation band no .
num gradation band no .
num gradation band no .
num gradation band no .
num gradation band apercent difference from tv of approved jmf .
numa.num method of measurement numa.num wmaogfc wmaogfc will be measured by the square yard or ton .
the average width of the wmaogfc in place will be used in computing the quantities .
the length used in computing the area shall be station to station along the centerline of the roadway .
all dimensions shall be as shown on the typical section of the plans .
numa.num basis of payment the accepted quantities of the wmaogfc will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or ton .
the accepted quantities complete in place will be considered full compensation for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment testing and any appurtenances necessary to complete the work as directed by the project manager .
materials shall be considered to include all aggregate bituminous material and hydrated lime .
the checking of the depth of the courses for process control and cutting of the test cores that include the refilling and compacting with acceptable materials shall be done by and at the expense of the contractor under the direct supervision of the project manager .
payments will be made under pay item pay unit opengraded friction course square yard or ton numa.num price adjustments a price reduction in accordance with the departments price reduction guidelines will be applied if the wmaogfc bituminous material or hydrated lime are not produced mixed or placed in accordance with the contract requirements .
section num rubberized open graded friction course page num section num rubberized open graded friction course num description rubberized open graded friction course rogfc shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of open graded aggregate materials and asphaltic cement binder to form a permeable pavement surface course .
section num open graded friction course nonqla shall be complied with except as modified herein num materials num general terminal blended asphalt rubber binder shall consist of a uniform homogeneous mixture of tire rubber obtained from recycled tires and compatible pg num asphalt binder .
all binder components shall be thoroughly blended and reacted prior to use .
num asphalt cement the pg num asphalt cement for the asphalt rubber binder shall comply with the requirements of section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based materials for pg numr .
num tire rubber modifier tire rubber modifier trm shall be produced from the recycling of automobile andor truck tires .
the specific gravity of the trm shall be num num .
the fiber content shall be less than num by weight for all other applications .
the trm shall contain no metal particles .
mineral contaminates shall be less than num by weight .
the metal content shall be determined by thoroughly stirring a num gram sample of the trm with a magnet .
determine the mineral contaminate by saline float separation method stir a num gram sample of trm into a one num liter glass beaker filled with a saline solution num part table salt into num parts distilled water and allow the sample to stand undisturbed for num minutes .
the mineral contaminate is that material which does not float to the top of the solution .
num asphalt rubber binder formulation design the asphalt rubber binder shall contain a minimum of ten percent num trm and a minimum of two percent num styrenebutadienestyrene sbs polymer by weight of total formulation that shall comply with the requirements of table a .
the design for the asphalt rubber binder formulation shall be performed by the asphalt rubber supplier .
the terminalblended asphalt rubber binder shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum as well as the requirements in table a .
if the solubility of the terminal blended asphalt rubber binder is less than num the base asphalt binder shall be tested .
the solubility of the base asphalt binder shall be greater than num .
the contractor shall provide the project manager with a copy of the terminalblended asphalt rubber binder formulation design at least num calendar days prior to use .
the design shall include a .
source b. grade c. type section num rubberized open graded friction course page num d. proportion expressed as a percentage of total weight of the formulation for each component material e. physical properties of the asphalt rubber binder in accordance with table num and f. recommended mixing and compaction temperatures for intended use .
table num test properties specification minimum maximum whole ground tire rubber content num coc flash point ºc ºf num num aashto tnum elastic recovery num ºc num ºf numcmmin hold num minutes and cut recovery after num hour num aashto tnum solubility in trichloroethylene num aashto tnum original dsr gsinδ num ºc num radseckpa num aashto tnum rtfo aging gsin δ num ºc num radseckpa num aashto tnum pav aging gsinδ num ºc num radseckpa num aashto tnum creep stiffness s mpa num aashto tnum mvalue nums ºc num aashto tnum num mix design a department approved private testing lab will develop the rubberized ogfc mix design in accordance with astm d num standard practice for open graded friction course ogfc mix design as modified by the new mexico department of transportation state asphalt engineer .
the mix design shall be reviewed and signed by a professional engineer licensed by the new mexico board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors .
the jmf gradation will be within the master range for the specified type of ogfc .
the mix design will establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size and a single percentage of asphalt material to be added to the aggregate .
the mix design will specify either hydrated lime or anhydrite based material as an antistrip at a minimum of one num percent by weight .
the mix design shall indicate the amount used and it shall be included in the aggregate gradation for establishing the mix design .
the mix design shall identify the minimum and maximum mixing and placement temperatures of the mix .
mix aggregate with asphalt at three num asphalt contents in num increments .
three num specimens should be compacted to optimum and three num specimens each at both num above and num below the estimated optimum asphalt content .
estimate the optimum asphalt content as follows for num aggregate absorption use estimated optimum ac num for num aggregate absorption use estimated optimum ac num .
determine the maximum specific gravity gmm of the loose mix in accordance with aashto t num using a companion sample mixed with the middle increment of ac content .
perform the drain down test in accordance with aashto tnum .
if the sample has a drain down in excess of num make the necessary adjustments in the ac content or aggregate gradation and repeat the test .
evaluate the stripping potential in accordance with the static immersion test described below .
if less than num of the binder is retained repeat the test using an appropriate section num rubberized open graded friction course page num adjustment to the type of antistrip agent used andor the amount of antistripping agent .
retention greater than num of the binder is required in order for the rogfc mix to be approved for use on this project .
the mix design shall provide the terminalblended asphalt rubber binder formulation design including a .
source b. grade c. type d. proportion expressed as a percentage of total weight of the formulation for each component material e. physical properties of the asphalt rubber binder in accordance with table num and f. recommended mixing and compaction temperatures for intended use .
num static immersion test procedure num scope this method describes coating and static immersion procedures for determining the retention of a bituminous film on an aggregate surface in the presence of water .
num significance and use the purpose of the test is to evaluate the effectiveness of an antistrip additive in the asphalt coating of aggregate used for open graded friction course ogfc .
this test evaluates the effectiveness of the antistrip additive with specific asphalt and a specific aggregate .
different asphalts and aggregates will give variable response to this test with the same additive .
this procedure is to be used as a gonogo test at the ninetyfive percent num level .
no attempt shall be made to evaluate the retention of a film below num .
if both hydrated lime and anhydrite based material provide retention of num or greater the contractor may choose which antistrip material will be used .
this test is a static immersion test and should not be confused with the immersion compression test .
num apparatus num .
containers for mixing such as stainless steel bowls or seamless tin cans .
num .
hot plate or oven for bringing the asphalt and aggregate to suitable mixing temperatures .
num .
oven or water bath capable of maintaining a constant temperature of num of for num hours .
num .
pyrex beakers or other suitable glass containers num ml capacity .
num .
spatula for mixing .
num sample preparation select a representative sample of the aggregate passing the num sieve and retained on the no .
num sieve .
dry and weigh the aggregate then add sufficient water num to num to obtain proper coating of the aggregate with the proposed antistrip material .
when aggregate is thoroughly moistened weigh in one percent num antistrip by weight of dry aggregate and thoroughly mix to coat all aggregate surfaces with the antistrip material .
air or oven dry as time permits .
section num rubberized open graded friction course page num place num num grams of the antistrip treated minus num inch plus num material into a clean mixing container and heat in the oven or on the hot plate to proper mixing temperature .
add sufficient heated pg numr to completely cover all aggregate surfaces .
mix asphalt and aggregate with heated spatula until aggregate is thoroughly coated .
place mixed material into a pyrex beaker and allow cooling for at least two num hours .
num procedure cover mixed material in the beaker with about num num inches of distilled water at room temperature .
place the beaker in an oven or water bath at num of for num hours .
remove the beaker from the oven or water bath and without disturbing or agitating the coated aggregate remove any film on the surface of the water .
place the beaker in an area with good light and position it to eliminate glare from the surface of the water .
by observation through the water from above estimate the percentage of the total visible are of the aggregate which remains coated as greater than or less than num .
report the estimated coated area as greater than num or less than num .
num construction requirements num placement and finishing place the rogfc with a paving machine in accordance with section num pavers .
the project manager may require an external reference of at least num ft to improve the ride ability .
immediately following the rogfc placement roll the surface with a steelwheeled selfpropelled roller that weighs enough to achieve adequate consolidation of the aggregate without excessive breakage .
the finished surface rogfc shall be smooth and in accordance with section num profile measurement operations .
use a ten num foot straightedge to ensure the surface is free of irregularities larger than num inch .
immediately remove low and defective areas replace them with new hot rogfc and compact the corrected work to conform to the surrounding area .
note all requirements for ogfc section num pavement smoothness measurement shall apply to rogfc .
num method of measurement rogfc will be measured by the square yard or ton .
the average width of the rogfc in place will be used in computing the quantities .
the length used in computing the area shall be station to station along the centerline of the roadway .
all dimensions shall be as shown on the typical section of the plans .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of the rogfc will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the accepted quantities complete in place will be considered full compensation for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment testing and any appurtenances necessary to complete the work as directed by the project manager .
materials shall be considered to include all aggregate bituminous materials binders modifiers asphalt cement hydrated lime and anhydrite based material if required .
the checking of the depth of the courses for process control and cutting of the test cores that include the refilling and compacting with acceptable materials shall be done by and at the expense of the contractor under the direct supervision of the project manager .
section num rubberized open graded friction course page num payments will be made under pay item pay unit rubberized open graded friction course complete ton num price adjustments a price reduction in accordance with the departments price reduction guidelines will be applied if the rogfc bituminous material hydrated lime or anhydrite based material are not produced mixed or placed in accordance with the contract requirements .
section num detour pavements page num section num detour pavements num description this work consists of the following num .
providing and placing surfacing materials including subgrade preparation base course prime coat asphalt material tack coat and ogfc if required num .
maintaining removing hauling and disposing of detour pavements in an environmentallyacceptable manner num .
hauling and stockpiling salvageable detour pavements as directed by the project manager .
unless otherwise noted in the contract detour pavements do not include detour embankments drainage and major structures .
embankment drainage and major structures will conform to their applicable sections .
num materials num general obtain surfacing material for the detour construction from a suitable source in accordance with section num control of materials .
num approval of pavement section the department based the detour pavement section in the contract on the subgrade design rvalue for the project .
if the contractor or department finds that the subgrade rvalue of the existing material is different from the subgrade design rvalue shown in the contract the contractor shall use material with a suitable subgrade rvalue .
the department will use the contractorproposed subgrade rvalue to determine the appropriate new structural number using the structural coefficients shown in table num acceptance testing tolerances and adjust the thickness of the detour section accordingly .
the structural number of a pavement layer is the thickness multiplied by the structural coefficient .
detour section material within two num ft of the finished subgrade will meet or exceed the subgrade design rvalue specified by the state materials bureau .
num alternate pavement section two num weeks before constructing the detour submit the pavement section proposal to the project manager for approval .
the proposal shall include the surfacing thickness and the types of materials .
the approved alternate detour pavement section must have at least the same structural number specified in the contract .
determine the structural number in accordance with the structural coefficients in table num acceptance testing tolerances .
table num acceptance testing tolerances description structural coefficient base course num hotmix asphalt hma num coldmixed asphalt pavementª num ªthe contractor may use coldmixed asphalt pavement in lowtraffic areas with the district construction engineers written approval .
num construction requirements section num detour pavements page num num general construct the detour pavement in accordance with the following applicable specifications num .
section num subgrade preparation num .
section num base course num .
section num open graded friction course num .
section num tack coat and num .
section num prime coat .
detours shall include a final surface of ogfc if specified in the contract .
num contractor testingdesign requirements provide subgrade rvalues for the top two num ft of the detour subgrade .
use the departments procedures to determine the subgrade rvalues from sieve analysis and atterberg limits .
obtain referenced documents and manuals from the departments state materials bureau web site .
num maintenance of detour section ensure that the maintenance and repair of the detours do not impact the public .
maintain safe traffic flow during construction .
if the project manager determines that the detour surfacing is damaged correct the problem immediately .
if the project manager determines that the corrective actions failed overlay the detour with additional hma at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractor does not immediately fix the detour surfacing as directed by the project manager the department will assess liquidated damages in accordance with section num prosecution and progress for each day that the detour remains unacceptable to the project manager .
num removal of detours when removing the detour dispose of the surfacing material in an environmentally acceptable manner or salvage the material as shown in the contract .
the salvage of the detour pavement material includes hauling and stockpiling .
num method of measurement the department will measure the detour pavement construction actually placed and maintained on the top width and length of the detour if paid by the unit of the contract item .
if no contract item exists for detour pavement construction payment will be incidental to section num traffic control management and section num construction control devices .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit detour pavement construction square yard num work included in payment the following work or items will be considered as included in the payment for detour pavement construction and will not be measured or paid for separately submittals maintenance of detours furnishing and placement of hmawma ogfc on detours if designated in the contract base course removal of detour materials including surfacing section num detour pavements page num earthwork and drainage structures furnishing and placement of prime and tack coat subgrade preparation testing hauling and stockpiling of salvageable materials .
section num tack coat page num section num tack coat num description this work consists of providing and applying asphalt material to an existing hotmix asphalt or portland cement concrete pavement surface .
num materials use one num of the following asphalt materials types for the tack coat num .
cssnum cssnumh or ssnum or ssnumh emulsified asphalt num .
performancegraded asphalt binder or num .
project manager approved selection from the departments approved products list .
provide the asphalt materials in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
num construction requirements the project manager will determine the tack coat application rate .
num temperature and weather limitations do not apply tack coat on a wet surface .
do not apply emulsified asphalt when the air temperature is below the manufacturers recommended application temperature .
num equipment the equipment shall include an asphalt distributor and equipment for heating asphalt material .
provide equipment that is in accordance with section num prime coat .
num preparation of surface the surfaces and edges to be tack coated shall be dry patched cleaned and free of dirt surface moisture vegetation and other deleterious materials or irregularities .
num application of asphalt material uniformly apply asphalt material with a pressure distributor at a rate determined by the project manager to provide a residual asphalt cement content of from num gal per square yard to num gal per square yard .
ensure that the nozzles on the pressure distributor are fully open and at the same angle from the spray bar approximately num .
keep the spray bar at a height above the pavement surface to provide for a double or triple lap of the applied asphalt material .
keep traffic off of the tack coat unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
if the roadway being paved is closed to traffic the contractor may place tack coat a maximum of num h ahead of the laydown operation .
if the roadway being paved is open to traffic place the tack coat only over the area that can be paved during that days laydown operation .
if the contractor uses an emulsified asphalt tack coat the contractor may begin paving operations after the emulsified asphalt is cured .
reapplication of tack coat damaged by traffic or construction equipment will be at no cost to the department .
num method of measurement the department will consider any water added to further dilute emulsified asphalts incidental to asphalt material for tack coat and no separate payment will be made .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit asphalt material for tack coat ton section num prime coat page num section num prime coat num description this work consists of providing and applying asphalt material and blotter material if required to an existing surface .
num materials provide one num of the following types of prime coat asphalt material num .
asphalt emulsified prime aep num .
penetrating emulsified prime pep num .
mcnum or num .
other material approved by the project manager .
provide prime coat asphalt material in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
num certification provide a manufacturers written certification that the prime material is chemically identical to those identified on the departments approved products list .
num blotter material provide fine aggregate sand blotter material in accordance with table num blotter material unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
table num blotter material sieve size passing num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num construction requirements num temperature and weather limitations do not apply the prime material in the following conditions num .
if the surface has standing water num .
if the air temperature is less than manufacturers recommendation or num .
if weather conditions prevent the proper placement of the prime coat .
the project manager may waive these temperature and weather limitations due to wet weather conditions or to protect work in progress during department approved suspensions .
num equipment provide a distributor and equipment for heating bituminous material .
ensure the distributor is capable of maintaining the prime material at an even temperature and can uniformly distribute the material on variable widths with uniform pressure .
ensure that the distributor can apply the material as required .
section num prime coat page num ensure that the distributor circulates the prime material within the tank the spray bar and other accessories when not spraying .
ensure that the distributor has a hand spray gun with a precisecontrol single or double nozzle and a positive shutoff valve .
ensure that the distributor has the following equipment num .
a tachometer num .
pressure gauges num .
accurate volumemeasuring devices or a calibrated tank num .
a thermometer that measures the temperature of tank contents num .
a power unit for the pump and num .
laterally and vertically adjustable spray bars .
num preparation of surface shape the surface to be primed in accordance with the plans and ensure that it is free of ruts corrugations segregated materials or other irregularities .
uniformly compact the surface in accordance with section num base course .
ensure that the surface is slightly moist but not saturated when applying the prime .
num application of prime material do not apply the prime coat until the project manager has approved the quantities application rates material temperature and locations .
apply the prime material in a uniform and continuous layer using a pressure distributor .
ensure the nozzles on the pressure distributor are fully open and at the same angle from the spray bar approximately num .
keep the spray bar at a height above the pavement surface to provide a double or triple lap of the prime material .
if using a handheld wand ensure the application is uniform .
if distribution irregularities occur cease operations and take corrective action .
if the department allows traffic on the surface maintain oneway traffic on the untreated section of the roadbed until the treated surface has absorbed the prime material then transfer traffic to the treated portion and prime the untreated section .
perform work and procedures in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num application of blotter material if the prime material fails to penetrate the surface within num h after its application spread blotter material to absorb the excess material .
the project manager may approve the use of blotter material on roadway sections that must be opened to traffic before the num h waiting period .
num method of measurement the department will consider any water added to further dilute emulsified asphalts incidental to asphalt material for prime coat and no separate payment will be made .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit prime coat material ton section num hotpoured crack sealant page num section num hotpoured crack sealant num description this work consists of preparing and cleaning cracks and joints in the existing roadway surface and sealing these cracks with hotpoured sealant .
num materials for crack and joint seals use hotpoured sealant in accordance with the general and physical requirements of astm d num as specified in the contract .
the contractor shall have the supplier sample and test the sealant in accordance with astm d num and provide certified test results for each lot or batch of sealant supplied .
provide sealant packaged in containers and labeled in accordance with astm d num .
bulk shipments of sealant must be accompanied by documents that state the following num .
manufacturers name num .
trade name of the sealant num .
batch or lot number num .
pouring temperature and num .
safe heating temperature .
do not mix more than one num lot or batch within a bulk shipment of sealant .
num construction requirements num temperature and weather limitations apply the sealant in the following conditions num .
when the air temperature is at least num f and rising and num .
when the temperature of the existing pavement surface is above num f during application .
do not place the sealant during inclement weather on wet surfaces or when the wind conditions prevent satisfactory sealing .
num equipment provide router bits of at least numinch diameter that cut to one num inch deep .
use air compressors that provide uncontaminated air at a pressure capable of cleaning approved cracks .
equip air compressors with traps to prevent oil and moisture from entering the air stream .
the equipment for heating and preparing the sealant mixture shall provide a continuous supply of the prepared mixture and maintain a continuous uniform and homogeneous mixture during the sealing operation .
provide continuous mechanical agitation as necessary to maintain homogeneity .
use application devices that provide uniform application of the sealant materials without clogging or causing other irregularities in distribution .
application devices and equipment shall meet the requirements of the sealant manufacturer .
num preparation of cracks route and clean cracks to the satisfaction of the project manager .
route cracks with an average clear opening less than num inch to provide a minimum sealant reservoir of num inch wide and to a depth of from num inch to one num inch unless section num hotpoured crack sealant page num otherwise directed by the project manager .
center routers over the cracks during routing operations .
clean cracks with an average clear opening num inch or greater with highvelocity compressed air to a depth of from num inch to one num inch unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
immediately before placing the sealant clean loose particles dust and other deleterious materials from the sealant reservoirs with highvelocity compressed air .
num application of sealant control the application to confine sealant within the reservoirs .
apply sealant to the clean drysurfaced reservoirs to a depth of from num inch to num inch below the existing surface of the roadway .
if the project manager determines that the method of filling results in an excessive amount of sealant on the pavement surface stop filling and change the method .
clean excess sealant material from the pavement surface .
if application devices clog or irregularities in the application occur halt operations until corrective action is taken .
follow special preparation or placement requirements indicated by the manufacturer .
num resumption of traffic cure sealant in accordance with the manufacturers requirements before placing traffic on the pavement surface .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit hotpoured crack sealing pound section num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement remixing method page num section num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement remixing method num description this work consists of recycling the existing inplace asphalt surface in a multistep process of cleaning heating milling rejuvenating if required spreading and leveling .
this work also consists of placing and compacting the new hmawma over the recycled surface .
the contract may require the contractor to blend recycled material with an asphalt rejuvenating agent .
num materials num rejuvenating agent provide an agent that will rejuvenate the existing roadways binder properties .
the existing roadways asphalt material shall be extracted recovered and combined with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto m num appendix a such that the combination of the rejuvenating agent with the existing roadway asphalt binder will meet the full aashto m num requirements for the required pg asphalt grade in the approved mix design .
num hmawma provide the hma material and mix design in accordance with section num hotmix asphalt qla nonqla or wma material and mix design in accordance with section num warm mix asphalt qla nonqla .
num construction requirements num equipment num general at the preconstruction conference notify the project manager of the necessary types of equipment .
deliver the equipment to the project in time for the project managers evaluation .
demonstrate the rate depth and recycling operations on a roadway test section before beginning production operations .
submit a quality control plan in accordance with the most recent departments contractor quality control guidelines for the project managers approval .
if equipment or recycling operations do not meet requirements correct or replace the deficiency .
num heating units ensure the heating units can heat the existing asphalt pavement high enough to mill the material to the minimum specified depth without the following results num .
breaking aggregate particles num .
charring the existing asphalt or num .
producing undesirable pollutants .
apply the heat under an enclosed or shielded hood .
do not heat the pavement surface with a direct flame .
num milling units use milling units that can mill to the specified depth .
equip the units with automatic height controls to clear utility manholes and other obstructions in the pavement surface .
use units with enough power to mill through high spots and create a leveled surface .
num rejuvenating agent storage unit section num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement remixing method page num use a thermostaticallycontrolled storage unit to maintain the rejuvenating agent at a constant supplierspecified temperature .
num metering unit use a unit that can uniformly apply the rejuvenating agent to the milled material .
the unit shall incorporate a meter for continuous quantity verification .
vary the applied amount in direct proportion to the recycling systems operating speed and synchronize with the amount of material milled .
do not vary the rejuvenating agents application tolerance by more than num of the specified application rate .
num blending unit use a twinshaft pugmill unit that can uniformly mix the milled material rejuvenating agent and virgin hmawma .
num spreading and leveling unit use a unit with automatic grade controls capable of spreading and leveling the material uniformly over the specified surfaces .
num compaction equipment use compaction equipment in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
num construction details num cleaning of existing pavement surface before beginning hot inplace recycling clean the existing pavement surface of non asphalt materials by blading and brooming or use methods approved by the project manager .
num heating milling and processing heat mill and process the inplace asphalt surface in a uniform manner to the widths and depths in accordance with the plans .
control the heat to assure a uniform heat penetration without the following results num .
differential softening of the pavement num .
breaking of the aggregate particles num .
charring of the asphalt or num .
producing undesirable pollutants .
if required uniformly apply the rejuvenating agent to the milled material before the addition of new hma or wma .
determine the actual amount of rejuvenating agent needed to address field conditions and to optimize the properties of the inplace pavement .
uniformly mix the milled material rejuvenating agent and hma or wma to produce a homogeneous mixture .
num placing and compacting uniformly spread and level the recycled mixture to the width grade and slope specified in the plans .
immediately after leveling the recycled material compact the material in accordance with section num placement operations .
num temperature requirements ensure the temperature of the asphalt materials immediately behind the laydown machine is between num f and num f. section num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement remixing method page num num joints the heating unit shall heat a minimum of four num inches beyond the width of recycling .
construct joints in accordance with section num joints .
num debris and waste material disposal dispose of debris and waste material in an environmentally safe manner at locations approved by the project manager .
num weather limitations do not perform hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement when the roadway surface is wet or when weather conditions prevent the proper handling finishing and compacting of the asphalt mixture .
num surface tolerance provide a compacted surface in accordance with section num surface tolerances .
num plan surfacing depths monitor and record the depth of the compacted recycled pavement material including new hma material if specified during the placement operations .
perform this task in accordance with the departments minimum testing and acceptance requirements and as approved by the project manager .
the project manager will address deficiencies of more than num in by num .
accepting the inplace compacted thickness at an adjusted price or num .
rejecting the inplace mixed material and requiring the contractor to remove and replace .
num contractor quality control num contractor quality control for materials provide new hma or wma materials in accordance with section num contractor quality control except take random test samples from the hma windrow before the material goes through the paver .
num contractor quality control for compaction see section num contractor quality control for compaction .
num suspension of operations see section num acceptance .
num project verification testing place new hma materials in accordance with section num independent assurance testing or wma materials in accordance with section num independent assurance testing .
num department quality assurance num department quality assurance testing for hma mix new hma materials shall meet the requirements of section num sampling and testing with the exception that the department will base acceptance on random test section num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement remixing method page num samples taken from the hma windrow before the material goes through the paver .
new wma materials shall meet the requirements of section num sampling and testing with the exception that the department will base acceptance on random test samples taken from the wma windrow before the material goes through the paver .
num department quality assurance testing for hma or wma compaction the department will test in accordance with section num or num sampling and testing .
the target density is a mean density of at least num of the theoretical maximum density .
the project manager will grant an exception to the target if the contractor can demonstrate that the target density is not reasonably obtainable because of the conditions of the existing pavement structure or subgrade materials .
if the department grants this exception construct a roadway test strip and develop a hma compaction process to obtain the highest possible target density based on an approved rollers density gain per pass in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
do not begin paving operations except for the roadway test strip until the project manager approves the process .
the inplace density shall not exceed num of the theoretical maximum density or be more than three percent num below the target density .
if a lots mean density does not meet this density requirement the project manager may do the following num .
require the contractor to remove and replace the defective lot of hma or wma at no additional cost to the department or num .
accept the hma or wma material and pay the contractor num of the bid item unit price .
if the project manager determines that the mean measured densities are consistently higher not exceeding num of the theoretical maximum density or lower than the current lots target density the project manager may establish a new acceptance lot on the project .
num department quality assurance testing for hmawma smoothness if the contract requires two num or more layers of new hmawma material place in accordance with section num pavement smoothness measurement .
for the purposes of this section hot recycled insitu material is not defined as hma .
num method of measurement the department will measure hma in accordance with section num method of measurement or wma in accordance with section num method of measurement .
num basis of payment the department will pay for new hma material in accordance with section num basis of payment or wma material in accordance with section num basis of payment .
pay item pay unit hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement square yard rejuvenating agent gallon section num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving page num section num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num description this work consists of recycling the existing asphalt surface in a simultaneous multistep process of cleaning heating milling scarifying rejuvenating if required spreading and leveling .
this work also consists of placing and compacting new hma or wma material over the recycled surface .
the contract may require the contractor to blend the recycled material with an asphaltrejuvenating agent .
num materials num rejuvenating agent provide an agent that will rejuvenate the existing roadway binder properties .
extract recover and combine the existing roadways asphalt material with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto m num appendix a such that the combination of the rejuvenating agent with the existing roadway asphalt binder will meet the aashto m num requirements for the required pg asphalt grade in the approved mix design .
num hma provide hma material in accordance with section num hotmix asphalt qla non qla or wma material in accordance with section num warm mix asphalt qla non qla .
provide a hma mix design in accordance with subsection num materials or a wma mix design in accordance with subsection num materials .
the state materials bureau must approve the hma or wma mix design before the beginning of the work .
num construction requirements num equipment num general at the preconstruction conference notify the project manager of the type of equipment that will be used .
deliver the equipment to the project in time for the project managers evaluation .
submit a quality control plan in accordance with the most recent departments contractor quality control guidelines for the project managers approval .
provide a machine with a single selfpropelled mobile unit capable of heating scarifying rejuvenating mixing leveling the existing surface material and immediately laying new hotmix material over the recycled surface .
demonstrate the rate depth and recycling capabilities on the roadway before beginning operations .
if equipment or recycling operations do not meet requirements correct or replace the deficiency .
num heating unit use a heightadjustable heating unit that is specifically designed to heat the upper layer of asphalt pavement .
the unit shall heat the asphalt pavement in a manner that num .
will not burn char coke or scrub the recycled mix num .
will meet state and local air quality requirements num .
will not pose health risks or damage to property num .
will not break aggregate particles and num .
will produce enough heat to soften the pavement to at least a depth of one num inch .
apply the heat under an enclosed or shielded hood so that blasting or scrubbing of the existing pavement is eliminated .
use equipment that can apply heat uniformly under controlled atmospheric conditions to eliminate free oxygen under the heating chamber .
section num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving page num num millingscarifying unit use a unit that can remove pavement to a minimum depth of one num inch .
the unit shall loosen the inplace asphalt pavement to a minimum depth of one num inch without excessively breaking the aggregate .
use a unit equipped with automatic height grade and cross slope controls with enough power to push the scarifiers through the high spots and create a leveled surface .
num rejuvenating agent storage unit use a thermostaticallycontrolled storage unit to maintain the rejuvenating agent at a constant supplierspecified temperature .
num metering unit use a unit that can uniformly apply the rejuvenating agent to the milled and scarified material .
the unit shall incorporate a meter for continuous quantity verification .
vary the applied amount in direct proportion to the recycling systems operating speed and synchronize with the amount of material milled or scarified .
do not vary the rejuvenating agents application rate by more than num of the rate defined in the mix design .
num blending unit use a unit that can mix the scarified material with the rejuvenating agent to produce a uniform consistent final product .
num spreading and leveling unit use a unit equipped with automatic grade controls capable of uniformly spreading and leveling the blended recycled material .
use a unit equipped with a leveling blade and auger capable of moving recycled material in a transverse direction to the center of the windrow .
equip the unit with a recycling screed to partially compact the recycled mix before placing the top layer of new hma or wma .
coordinate the repaver speed with the production of the hma or wma plant to achieve a continuous operation .
num compaction equipment use equipment in accordance with section num equipment .
num construction details num cleaning of existing pavement surface before beginning hot inplace recycling clean the existing pavement surface of non asphalt materials by blading and brooming or other methods approved by the project manager .
num heating millingscarifying and processing evenly heat mill scarify and rework the inplace asphalt surface to a minimum depth of one num inch in accordance with the plans .
heat the existing pavement surface with continuously moving heaters to scarify the pavement to at least a one num inch average depth in a single pass .
keep the surface temperature of the remaining inplace pavement below num f and produce reclaimed mix at a temperature of at least num f. extend the heating operation at least four num inches beyond the width of scarification on both sides .
immediately scarify the heated pavement with scarifying shanks spaced so that they cover the surface without leaving ridges .
mount the shanks to allow control from the operators platform .
scarification shall cut through the pavement at a level that comes within num inch of the section num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving page num finished pavements grade and cross slope .
if required uniformly apply the rejuvenating agent to the material immediately after milling and scarifying .
num placing and compacting uniformly spread and level the recycled mixture to the width finished grade and cross slope shown in the contract .
after partially compacting the recycled mixture with the recycling screed place a new layer of hma or wma on top of the recycled paving material using a foursection vibratory screed .
perform this in one num continuous operation while the temperature of the recycled mix is at least num f. compact the material in accordance with section num placement operations .
num temperature requirements maintain the temperature of the asphalt material between num f and num f when measured immediately behind the laydown machine .
num joints the heating unit shall heat a minimum of four num inches beyond the width of recycling .
construct joints in accordance with section num joints .
num debris and waste material disposal dispose of debris and waste material in an environmentally safe manner at locations approved by the project manager .
num weather limitations do not perform hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement when the roadway surface is wet or when weather conditions prevent the proper handling finishing and compacting of the asphalt mixture .
num surface tolerance place the compacted surface of recycled pavement material or new hma material in accordance with section num surface tolerances .
num plan surfacing depths monitor and record the material depth of the compacted recycled pavement material or new hma or wma material throughout the placement operations .
perform this task in accordance with the departments minimum testing and acceptance requirements and as approved by the project manager .
the project manager will address a deficiency of more than num inches inplace compacted thickness as follows num .
accept the inplace compacted thickness at a reduced payment or num .
reject the inplace mixed material .
num contractor quality control num contractor quality control for materials place new hma materials in accordance with section num contractor quality control or wma materials in accordance with section num contractor quality control except take random test samples from the hma or wma windrow before the material goes through the paver .
num contractor quality control for compaction see section num contractor quality control for compaction .
section num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving page num num project verification testing new hma material is subject to independent assurance testing in accordance with section num independent assurance testing .
new wma material is subject to independent assurance testing in accordance with section num .
independent assurance testing .
num department quality assurance num department quality assurance for hma new hma materials shall meet the requirements of section num acceptance and new wma materials shall meet the requirements of section num acceptance with the exception that the department will base acceptance on random test samples taken from the hma or wma before the material goes through the paver .
num department quality assurance testing for hma compaction meet the requirements of section num acceptance or section num acceptance .
the project manager will grant an exception to the mean density requirement of at least num of the theoretical maximum density if the contractor can demonstrate that a minimum of num can not be reasonably obtained because of the conditions of the existing pavement structure or subgrade materials .
if the project manager grants this exemption construct a roadway test strip and develop a hma or wma compaction process to get the highest possible density based on an approved rollers density gain per pass in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
the project manager will approve the process except for the roadway test strip before paving operations begin .
in no case shall the percentage of theoretical maximum density exceed num nor fall more than num percentage points lower than the target density .
if a lot does not meet either of these density requirements the project manager will do the following num .
accept and pay for the lot of hma or wma material at num of the bid item unit price or num .
reject the inplace material and require the contractor to remove and replace .
if the project manager determines that the mean measured densities are consistently higher but not to exceed num or lower than the current lots target density the project manager may establish a new acceptance lot on the project .
num department quality assurance testing for hmawma smoothness if the contract requires two num or more lifts of new hmawma material place in accordance with section num pavement smoothness measurement .
for the purposes of this section hot recycled insitu material is not defined as hma .
num method of measurement if the contract requires hma the department will measure it in accordance with section num method of measurement .
num basis of payment the department will pay for new hma material in accordance with section num basis of payment .
pay item pay unit singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving square yard hma or wma sampling and testing by the contractor lump sum rejuvenating agent gallon section num cold milling page num section num cold milling num description this work consists of cold milling pavement surfaces and removing hauling and disposing of coldmilled materials .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num equipment use a pavement profiler that has cross slope elevation controls and can accurately control profile grades and cross slopes within a num inch tolerance unless otherwise shown in the contract .
the equipment must control profile grades by using an independent grade control or a num ft minimum external reference .
use equipment that provides an enclosed cutting area and dust control .
the milling equipment must produce a uniform milled surface .
maintain the equipments teeth and spacing to produce the desired texture .
immediately replace broken damaged or excessively worn teeth .
num operations cold mill the existing pavement surface in accordance with the contract .
adjust the specified depth in maximum increments of num inch as directed by the project manager .
minimize gouges grooves and ridges to create a uniform surface without deviations greater than num inch when measured with a ten num ft straightedge .
keep the milled surface free of loose material .
perform milling operations in accordance with the departments pavement dropoff guideline .
immediately remove any standing water .
do not expose the milled surface to traffic for more than num hours before beginning further surface operations .
correct unacceptable work and damage to adjacent structures caused by the operations .
obtain project managers approval of corrected work .
perform additional milling or patching to repair damage to the milled surface as directed by the project manager .
if the project manager determines that damage is due to conditions beyond the contractors control the department will pay for the required milling or patching for milled surfaces at the bid item unit price .
remove the cold milled pavement material and dispose of the surfacing material in an environmentally acceptable manner or stockpile in accordance with the contract .
the contractor may also use cold milled pavement material as rap or recycled concrete rc in accordance with the contract .
num method of measurement the department will measure cold milling to the nearest num inch if by the square yard inch .
num basis of payment section num cold milling page num pay item pay unit cold milling asphalt square yardinch or square yard cold milling concrete square yardinch or square yard patching of milled surface ton section num pavement surface restoration page num section num pavement surface restoration num description num general this specification covers the requirements for num .
option a insitu cold recycling of existing surfacing and num .
option b cold milling with hotmix asphalt hma or warm mix asphalt wma inlay .
choose either option .
the contractor may change options once during the project at no additional cost to the department .
num option a insitu cold recycling of existing surfacing this work consists of the following num .
pulverizing the existing surfacing num .
mixing an emulsified binder agent with the pulverized surfacing num .
mixing hot hydrated lime slurry with the pulverized surfacing num .
spreading and compacting the mixture and num .
sealing the compacted surface .
num option b cold mill with hma inlay this work consists of the following num .
cold milling num .
applying a tack coat and num .
placing an inlay of hma or wma .
num materials num option a insitu cold recycling of existing surfacing use an emulsified binder agent that is polymerized highfloat emulsion hfenump unless otherwise specified .
changing one num grade up or down will change the bid item unit price based on the difference in invoice prices between the grades of emulsion .
change the grade only with the approval of the project manager and district laboratory supervisor .
use polymerized highfloat emulsion in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
use cold recycled material that meets the following gradation requirements table num cold recycled pavement gradation requirements sieve size passing num num inchª num one num inch num ªallow num num inch if pavement with fabric is recycled .
use sealing emulsion that is diluted highfloat emulsion cssnum or another approved equal .
use hot hydrated lime slurry meeting the following requirements num .
highcalcium pebble quicklime meeting the requirements of astm c num num .
clean water in accordance with section num water and num .
slurry with a minimum dry solids content of num by weight and consisting of a uniform pumpable suspension of solids in water .
num option a mix design section num pavement surface restoration page num provide a laboratory mix design developed and tested in accordance with the departments procedures .
the mix design will establish the initial target addition rate for the emulsified binder agent and for the hot hydrated lime slurry .
provide copies of the laboratory mix design along with supporting documentation to the project manager the district laboratory supervisor and the state materials bureau .
do not use the mix design without state materials bureau approval .
the department will consider the laboratory mix design a starting point only .
the contractor may adjust the target addition rates for emulsified binder agent and hot hydrated lime slurry as necessary with the project managers approval .
num option b cold mill with hma inlay cold millings removed during the surface restoration process will become the property of the department unless used on the project or otherwise specified .
the contractor may use cold milling material from this project as rap in the hma or wma inlay .
provide hma or wma in accordance with a departmentrecognized hmawma mixture type with a nominal size of at least num inch or greater and section num hotmix asphalt qla nonqla or section num warm mix asphalt .
use a tack coat in accordance with section num tack coat .
use hma mixture containing performancegraded asphalt material in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
num option b mix design provide a mix design developed and approved in accordance with section num hotmix asphalt qla nonqla or section num warm mix asphalt qla nonqla .
num equipment num option a insitu cold recycling of existing surfacing num cold insitu machinery use a selfpropelled machine capable of pulverizing insitu asphalt materials to the specified depth in one num pass .
ensure that the machine provides a minimum rotor cutting width of num ft with automatic grade and slope control .
use a machine with screening and crushing capabilities to reduce or remove oversized particles before mixing with emulsion .
the department will allow the removal of a maximum of two percent num oversize material before adding emulsion with the project managers approval .
use a mixing machine capable of mixing the pulverized material and the emulsified binder agent in a homogeneous mixture and placing in a windrow while preventing segregation .
use a positive displacement pump capable of accurately metering the required quantity of emulsified binder agent into the pulverized material .
equip the pump with a positive interlock system that will permit addition of the emulsified binder agent only when the pulverized material is present in the mixing chamber and that will automatically shut off when the material is not in the mixing chamber .
equip each mixing machine with a meter capable of registering the rate of flow and total delivery of the emulsified binder agent introduced into the mixture .
calibrate the meter in the presence of the project manager before beginning recycling operations and check or calibrate the meter as directed by the project manager .
num lime slurry equipment produce lime slurry at the job site using a batch type process .
ensure the equipment accurately proportions the quicklime and water mixes the two num to obtain proper slaking and maintains homogeneous slurry .
provide horizontal mixing shafts in the transports used to convey the slurry to maintain a homogenous mixture .
add the lime slurry to the pulverized surfacing with a spray bar located at the cutting head on the milling machine .
use a metering device that accurately measures the amount of slurry delivered to within ten percent num by weight .
num pavers section num pavement surface restoration page num place the recycled asphalt base course with a selfpropelled asphalt paver in accordance with section num pavers except do not heat the screed .
use equipment capable of spreading the recycled asphalt base in one num continuous pass without segregation to the section shown on the plans .
when using a pickup machine to feed the windrow into the pavers hopper ensure that it is capable of picking up the entire windrow down to the underlying materials .
num rollers provide rollers in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
ensure that the number weight and types of rollers are sufficient to obtain the required compaction while the mixture is in a workable condition .
use a pneumatic roller that weighs at least num ton for the breakdown roller .
equip rollers with pads and water systems that prevent the recycled mixture from sticking to the roller wheels .
num brooms maintain a working rotary power broom on site capable of removing aggregate that dislodges from the recycled surface .
num option b cold mill with hma or wma inlay provide and use equipment in accordance with section num hotmix asphalt qla nonqla section num warm mix asphalt qla nonqla section num tack coat and section num cold milling .
num construction requirements before beginning the prepaving conference submit a paving schedule to the project manager for pavement surface restoration operations option a or option b .
begin paving operations only after the project manager has given written approval .
monitor and record plan depths throughout the pavement surface restoration operations and at intervals directed by the project manager .
the department will not pay for any depth in excess of the contract specified depth .
num option a insitu cold recycling of existing surfacing ensure that option a work has a minimum depth of four num inches and the specified width or as directed by the project manager .
begin placing the hma or wma overlay of the insitu cold recycled layer within one num week of completing the insitu cold recycled layer .
remove deleterious materials within the width of the pavement to be recycled before beginning recycling operations or other relevant work .
dispose of the debris as directed by the project manager .
control water to the pulverized material to facilitate uniform mixing with the emulsified binder agent .
the contractor may add water before or with the emulsified binder agent .
provide a means to accurately meter and register the rate of flow of water into the pulverized material .
if the typical section to be recycled is on a super elevated or sloped section begin the initial pass of the milling equipment at the lowest portion of the section and proceed in succession towards the higher side of the slope .
remove fillets of fine pulverized material that form adjacent to a vertical face before spreading the recycled mix .
the contractor shall not remove fillets adjacent to existing pavement if the contractor is to remove the fillets by overlapping during subsequent milling operation .
if segregation occurs either in the windrow or behind the paver the project manager may require the contractor to make changes to the equipment or operations .
if a section of recycled pavement contains a paving fabric as identified in the plans waste oversized material as directed by the project manager .
this may require changes in equipment and procedures to obtain an acceptable end product .
make these changes at no additional cost to the department .
section num pavement surface restoration page num when a section of recycled pavement contains a paving fabric not identified in the plans or if the vertical location of the fabric varies by more than one num inch from that specified submit a written proposal to the project manager describing in detail the recommendations for addressing the fabric .
address the size of shredded fabric pieces the removal of oversize fabric pieces the removal of oversize rap and any anticipated changes to the emulsion addition rate .
proposals that incorporate a reduction of the existing pavement thickness or a decrease in the depth of cold recycling must include an analysis addressing the structural adequacy of the proposed new pavement section .
submit the proposal to the state materials bureau for their review .
do not begin the work until the project manager approves the proposal in writing .
spread the recycled asphalt base in one num continuous pass without segregation in accordance with the typical section .
num surface tolerance ensure that the final surface of recycled asphalt base does not deviate more than num inch when measured with a ten num ft straightedge .
num temperature and weather limitations do not perform recycling operations in the following conditions num .
the average daily air temperature is below num f num .
the chill factor is below num f num .
the weather is foggy or rainy or num .
the weather conditions are such that proper mixing spreading and compaction requirements of the recycled material can not be accomplished .
num binder application apply the emulsified binder agent to the pulverized material at the target addition rate in accordance with section num option a mix design .
maintain an allowable tolerance of num from the target binder content .
num lime slurry addition add water to the quicklime and incorporate it uniformly into the pulverized surfacing material at a rate that will result in num hydrated lime by dry weight of pulverized surfacing material .
control the addition of lime slurry by continuously weighing the pulverized surfacing material .
num density and rolling requirements establish a rolling pattern to obtain a minimum of num of the maximum theoretical density of a laboratory briquette prepared in accordance with department molding and testing procedures .
the project manager may require a redemonstration of rolling capabilities for the following reasons num .
the project manager observes a change in the recycled materials num .
the contractor changes the rolling equipment or num .
the contractor does not obtain proper densities .
perform initial rolling with a pneumatic roller until the mixture has no visible displacement .
perform the final rolling to eliminate pneumatic tire marks and achieve density with steel wheel rollers either in static or vibratory mode .
perform rolling in accordance with section num placement operations .
suspend rolling operations that result in cracking movement or other types of pavement damage and correct the problem .
the project manager will make suspension and resumption of rolling operations decisions .
section num pavement surface restoration page num num finishing operations do not permit vehicles on the completed recycled asphalt base for at least two num hours after the recycled material is spread and compacted .
allow traffic on the recycled material when approved by the project manager .
allow the recycled material to cure so that the free moisture in the recycled material reduces to a maximum of one percent num above the inherent moisture content of the existing pavement by the total weight of the mix .
determine the inherent moisture content of the existing pavement from samples taken at a maximum of nummile intervals or as approved by the project manager .
the state will determine the free moisture content of the recycled pavement from samples taken from the same areas and same intervals sampled for the inherent moisture content .
take the samples and determine the free moisture immediately before sealing or overlaying operations .
if the free moisture content of the recycled material is one percent num or less above the inherent moisture of the material seal the surface with emulsion at an approximate rate of num gal per square yard to num gal per square yard in order to control surface raveling .
repair unacceptable recycled material as directed by the project manager before placing a subsequent surfacing course .
ensure that the surface of the recycled pavement is safe for traffic .
remove loose aggregate that develops on the surface of the recycled pavement with a powerbroom .
num option b cold mill with hma or wma inlay ensure that option b work has a minimum depth of three num inches unless otherwise specified in the plans and a width as specified in the plans or as directed by the project manager .
if required mill the pavement surface to the grades depths and widths specified in the plans .
remove dirt and other objectionable material from the surface of the pavement with blades brooms or other methods approved by the project manager in accordance with section num hotmix asphalt superpave qla nonqla section num tack coat and section num cold milling .
num contractor quality control num contractor quality control for materials place new hma materials in accordance with section num contractor quality control or wma in accordance with section num contractor quality controlexcept take random test samples from the hma windrow before the material goes through the paver .
num contractor quality control for compaction see section num contractor quality control for compaction .
num project verification testing place new hma material in accordance with section num independent assurance testing or wma material in accordance with section num independent assurance testing .
num department quality assurance num department quality assurance for hmawma new hma materials shall meet the requirements of section num acceptance and new wma materials shall meet the requirements of section num acceptance with the exception that the department will base acceptance on random test samples taken from the hma or wma before the material goes through the paver .
num department quality assurance testing for hma or wma compaction section num pavement surface restoration page num meet the requirements of section num acceptance or section num acceptance as appropriate .
the project manager will grant an exception to the mean density requirement of at least num of the theoretical maximum density if the contractor can demonstrate that a minimum of num can not be reasonably obtained because of the conditions of the existing pavement structure or subgrade materials .
if the project manager grants this exemption construct a roadway test strip and develop a hma or wma compaction process to get the highest possible density based on an approved rollers density gain per pass in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
the project manager will approve the process except for the roadway test strip before paving operations begin .
in no case shall the percentage of theoretical maximum density exceed num nor fall more than three num percentage points lower than the target density .
if a lot does not meet either of these density requirements the project manager will do the following num .
accept and pay for the lot of hma material at num of the bid item unit price or num .
reject the inplace material and require the contractor to remove and replace .
if the project manager determines that the mean measured densities are consistently higher but not to exceed num or lower than the current lots target density the project manager may establish a new acceptance lot on the project .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment all process control and quality control testing required shall be incidental to pavement surface restoration .
pay item pay unit pavement surface restoration square yard num option a insitu cold recycling of existing surfacing if the actual quantity of polymerized highfloat emulsion varies outside the range of one percent num to two percent num the department will pay for or credit the actual amount of variation at the invoice cost for emulsion per ton .
section num minor paving page num section num minor paving num description this work consists of constructing one num or more courses of hma or wma pavement on a prepared base in accordance with the plans or as directed by the project manager .
all projects with less than num tons of hma or wma shall be paid as minor paving .
projects with less than num tons may be designated as minor paving in the plans .
examples of minor paving locations may include the following num .
bridge approaches num .
intersection improvements num .
auxiliary lanes and num .
turnouts .
num materials use hma or wma of the type and gradation shown in the contract for minor paving .
hma and wma are a mixture of asphalt binder aggregate blending sand mineral filler hydrated lime or anhydrite based material wma additive or process as appropriate .
use materials for minor paving in accordance with section num materials or num materials .
num construction requirements perform minor paving in accordance with section num construction requirements general section num mix temperature requirements section num addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material section num equipment and section num placement operations or in accordance with the appropriate num sections .
no referee testing will be required for minor paving .
referee testing may be used if both parties agree in writing prior to commencing placement operations for minor paving .
num sampling and testing num contractor quality control provide the materials equipment and personnel necessary for quality control .
submit a proposed quality control plan in accordance with section num hot mix asphalt superpave .
provide the department with quality control test results quality control charts and other documentation of the quality control efforts .
submit changes to the approved quality control plan to the project manager before performing work affected by the change .
failure to submit a quality control plan or failure to follow the approved quality control plan constitutes grounds for suspending the operations .
num department quality assurance num acceptance the department will accept the constructed product based on inspection and on laboratory testing for conformance with the contract .
the department will test samples of hma taken from the roadway before compaction and on cut pavement samples cores .
the department will accept the constructed product based on the following criteria num .
air voids as determined from laboratorycompacted specimens in accordance with aashto t num and aashto t num num .
asphalt content as determined by the tank strap method num .
final thickness of the compacted material as measured from cores in accordance with astm d num section num minor paving page num num .
density of the compacted roadbed as determined in accordance with aashto t num standard method of test for inplace density and moisture content of soilaggregate by nuclear methods shallow depth .
contractor shall provide cores from three num locations designated by the project manager for correlation with the nuclear densometer .
department representatives certified in the relevant test procedures by the state materials bureau through ttcp will perform acceptance testing in accordance with aashto or department methods using the test methods and modifications in the current ttcp manual .
num acceptance lots and pay factor determination the department will accept density based on the average of all density tests per project taken at a minimum of ten num density tests per num tons and will accept air voids and asphalt content based on a minimum of three num tests per num tons .
the department will determine pay factors in accordance with table num price adjustments for density table num price adjustments for air voids table num price adjustments for asphalt content and table num price adjustment for thickness .
the department will obtain the tvs for asphalt content and air voids from the approved jmf and will determine payment for each acceptance lot by multiplying the bid item unit price by the average of the pay factors per lot and multiplying the result by the total lot area .
table num price adjustments for density percent density pay factor num reject num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject table num price adjustment for air voids percent deviation from tv pay factor num num num num num num num num num reject table num price adjustment for asphalt content percent deviation from tv pay factor num num num num num num reject section num minor paving page num table num price adjustment for thickness deficiency from plan minimum thickness pay factor none plan minimum or thicker num num inch num num inchnum inch num num inchnum inch num num inchone num inch num one num inch corrective action remove and replace rejected material identified in table num price adjustment for density table num price adjustment for air voids and table num price adjustments for asphalt content .
instead of removing and replacing rejected material the project manager may allow the material to remain in place at num of the bid item unit price if in the best interest of the department .
take corrective action if specified in table num price adjustment for thickness .
corrective action includes removal and replacement of the unacceptable material overlay of the unacceptable material or other corrective actions approved by the project manager .
thin or feathered edge surface patching is not acceptable .
overlay lift thicknesses must meet the requirement of table num hma lift thickness .
table num hma lift thickness hma type lift thickness inches minimum maximum spiii num num spiv num num num independent assurance testing the department will perform independent assurance sampling and testing in accordance with section num acceptance sampling and testing .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will adjust payment for minor pavement in accordance with section num acceptance lots and pay factor determination .
pay item pay unit minor pavement square yard section num miscellaneous paving page num section num miscellaneous paving num description this work consists of constructing one num or more courses of asphalt paving on a prepared surface .
examples of miscellaneous paving include ditch paving median paving slope paving guardrail pads bicyclepedestrian paths and trails asphalt curbs or as designated in the plans .
num materials the asphalt paving consists of coarse and fine aggregates asphalt binder mineral filler and hydrated lime or anhydrate based material .
num aggregate use aggregate that meets the requirements in table num aggregate gradation requirements .
table num aggregate gradation requirements sieve size passing num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num coarse aggregate shall have an ai of num or less in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
the combined aggregate shall have a minimum sand equivalent of num .
num asphalt material use the type and grade of asphalt material specified in the contract .
if no grade is specified use any performancegraded asphalt binder in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
use asphalt mixture with sufficient asphalt binder to produce a design air voids of four percent num or less except for ditch paving which shall have a design air voids of three percent num or less .
use the superpave gyratory compactor at n design of num gyrations to determine the percentage .
use asphalt material content that meets requirements for workability and desired surface texture .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap the contractor may use rap miscellaneous paving in any amount up to num of the total weight of the mix providing the other provisions of this specification are met .
num job mix formula submit a jmf proposal to the project manager for approval at least num days before paving .
the jmf shall include the following num .
stockpile combination percentages and resulting gradation num .
source grade and percentage of asphalt binder and num .
any other information that will assist the project manager in evaluating the appropriateness of the mix design .
do not begin miscellaneous paving until the project manager has approved the jmf .
section num miscellaneous paving page num the contractor may substitute any approved mix design that complies with the requirements of section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla or section num warmmix asphalt qla nonqla instead of the requirements of this section .
submit proposed changes to the approved jmf to the project manager for approval before placement .
num construction requirements num mixing plants prepare hma for miscellaneous paving in an asphalt plant of typical configuration and in good repair .
the contractor may use drum or batch mixing plants in accordance with section num equipment .
no referee testing will be required for miscellaneous paving .
referee testing may be used if both parties agree in writing prior to commencing placement operations for miscellaneous paving .
num haul equipment use haul equipment in accordance with section num haul equipment .
num placement operations unless otherwise specified in the contract prepare the surface by compacting the top six num inches of soil to num of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d tttcp modified .
place asphalt mixtures in accordance with the plans or as directed by the project manager .
the surface of the placed mix shall be smooth and uniform in texture .
compact with a mechanical roller of suitable type and size to obtain the density and surface texture specified in the plans .
crossroll ditch paving with a pneumatic roller or by other approved means to produce a corrugated texture .
roll and consolidate median and slope paving and guardrail pads to a uniform texture .
num temperature and weather limitations perform miscellaneous paving in accordance with section num temperature and weather limitations .
num acceptance correct or remove material that the project manager determines is improperly coated or segregated or that otherwise fails to meet the requirements of this specification .
the department will base acceptance of miscellaneous paving on visual examination verification of line and grade and by density testing if required .
the department will require density testing on guardrail pads and bicyclepedestrian paths and trails .
evaluate density with nuclear methods and calibrate with the test area produced at the beginning of paving .
for the test area place the hma at the proper compaction temperature and thickness as shown on the plans .
run three num passes on the placed hot mixture with a smooth steelsurface roller that has a minimum weight of num lb per inch of drum width .
acceptance lots for density will be a maximum of num ydnum or per guardrail pad .
take three num nuclear density readings at random locations within the first test area and use the average of the three num tests or determination of the maximum density to be used for acceptance and pay factor .
the department will determine the pay factor for each lot in accordance with table num price adjustments for density section num miscellaneous paving page num table num price adjustments for density density percent of test area pay factor num num num num num num num num num reject remove and replace rejected material identified in table num price adjustment for density .
instead of removing and replacing rejected material the project manager may allow the material to remain in place at num of the bid item unit price if in the best interest of the department .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will adjust payment for miscellaneous paving in accordance with section num acceptance .
pay item pay unit miscellaneous paving square yard asphalt curb linear foot section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla and nonqla num description this work consists of constructing one num or more courses of hotmix asphalt hma on a prepared base .
num materials num general hma is a mixture of asphalt binder aggregate blending sand mineral filler and hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
unless otherwise prohibited in the contract the department will allow recycled asphalt pavement rap in hma mixtures as long as the resulting mixture conforms to all specification requirements .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions in accordance with the contract .
test materials in accordance with applicable aashto methods as modified by the department if applicable or other test procedures as directed by the department .
the state materials bureau will decide all questions pertaining to the interpretation of test procedures .
num aggregate ensure the aggregate gradation of the hma mixture meets the requirements of table num hma aggregate gradation control points .
the project manager may require at no additional cost to the department wet preparation per aashto t num method a if the project manager determines there are deleterious materials present in the aggregate stockpiles before aggregate gradation testing .
the contract will specify the type of hma the contractor is to use .
the department will allow the contractor to combine materials from two num or more sources to produce aggregate only when each individual aggregate source meets all applicable quality requirements .
num gradation and quality requirements table num hma aggregate gradation control points sieve size passing per hma type spii spiii spiv min max min max min max two num inch num num inch num one num inch num num num num inch num num num num num inch num num num num inch num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num aggregate quality for each material source ensure the hma coarse aggregate has an ai of num or less when calculated in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
regulate the crushing of aggregate stockpiles so that the minimum fractured faces content of the plus no .
num material complies with the requirements of table num fractured faces sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity and evaluation by nmdot section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num method ffnum fractured face determination for coarse aggregate .
ensure the plus num inch material contains no more than num flat elongated particles with a dimensional ratio of num or greater as determined by astm d num ttcp modified .
ensure the combined material excluding rap passing the no .
num sieve is nonplastic .
ensure that before the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material the minimum sand equivalent value and the minimum fine aggregate angularity value of the combined aggregate excluding rap complies with the requirements of table num fractured faces sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity .
determine the sand equivalent value in accordance with aashto t num alternate method no .
num and the fine aggregate angularity value in accordance with aashto t num method a .
num fractured faces the department will consider a face to be fractured when at least onehalf of the projected particle area exhibits a rough angular or broken texture with well defined edges .
table num minimum fractured faces sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity for virgin aggregates design traffic esals a x num num fractured faces b sand equivalent fine aggregate angularity num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num aesals are based on a numyear design life for all scenarios .
bunder fractured faces num num denotes that num of the coarse aggregate has at least num fractured face and num has at least two num fractured faces .
ensure rap provided from sources outside the project has at least num fractured faces one num fractured face however sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity do not apply .
num production when producing aggregates for hma remove natural fines by screening and stockpiling separately .
use a no .
num screen minimum or a larger screen if needed to properly control the crushing and screening operation .
crush the aggregate retained on the scalping screen and separate the crushed material into at least two num stockpiles of fine and coarse aggregates .
regulate crushing operations to produce material within the specified gradation band .
num stockpiling the following requirements apply to stockpiles num .
place stockpiles upon prepared sites num .
make stockpiles neat and regular to prevent segregation num .
provide enough storage space for each size of aggregate num .
separate the aggregate stockpiles far enough apart to prevent mixing or with walls or partitions num .
prevent contamination store stockpiles away from vehicular and equipment traffic num .
keep the storage yard neat and orderly and keep the stockpiles accessible for sampling and num .
keep the aggregate sizes separated until delivered to the cold feed system that feeds the drier .
num combining section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num when combining crushed materials from different stockpiles including rap if in the mixture ensure the product is in accordance with the mix design gradation requirements .
use controlled feeders from each stockpile to combine crushed material .
num asphalt binder the contract will specify the type and grade of asphalt binder .
provide asphalt binders in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
do not change the asphalt source after approval of the mix design without written approval of the state materials bureau .
num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material provide hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
num blending sand blending sand consists of the following num .
natural fines from the scalping process num .
concrete sand num .
sandy material or num .
a combination of these graded to the mix design requirements .
determine the need for and percentage a maximum of num of blending sand using mix design tests on samples taken from stockpiles during crushing operations and submitted to an approved testing laboratory .
num mineral filler provide mineral filler in accordance with aashto m num and approved by the state materials bureau .
the department will not allow fly ash as mineral filler for hma .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor may use rap removed under the contract consisting of salvaged milled pulverized broken or crushed asphalt pavement .
the contractor may use rap produced from outside sources provided evidence of ownership is supplied and the following is met after the contractor obtains sufficient quantities of rap aggregate samples in accordance with aashto t num the department will accept rap for which each fraction of coarse aggregate has a percent wear of num or less at num revolutions when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
provide plus no .
num rap material with a minimum of num fractured faces content one num face .
the contractor may use a maximum of num rap by weight in the production of hma mixtures without changing the asphalt binder .
for quantities greater than num to num rap either lower the asphalt binders high and low temperature grades by one num grade e.g .
lower a pg num to a pg num or extract recover and combine the raps asphalt binder with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto m num appendix a ensuring the resultant binder meets the entire aashto m num required project pg asphalt binder properties indicated on the approved mix design .
for quantities greater than num to num rap extract recover and combine the raps asphalt binder with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto m num appendix a .
ensure the resultant binder meets the entire aashto m num required project pg asphalt binder properties indicated on the approved mix design .
the department will not allow the contractor to use more than num rap in the production of hma mixtures .
for projects of entirely new construction limit the rap to num in the top mat or extract recover and combine the raps asphalt binder with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto mnum appendix a .
ensure the resultant binder meets the entire aashto mnum required project pg asphalt binder properties indicated on the approved mix design .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num process rap so that num passes a numinch sieve .
for hma mixtures containing greater than num rap maintain adequate stockpile management i.e .
sufficient quantities and shaping of the stockpiles and fractionation divide the rap into a minimum of two num stockpiles so they are uniform throughout the stockpiles .
address in the quality control plan how rap will be controlled such as which screen will be used to split into two num stockpiles or by what method the rap will be controlled to keep the resultant mix within acceptable limits .
account for the weight of the binder in the rap when batching aggregates .
provide rap that is free of deleterious materials .
if the contractor decides to use rap in the production of hma mixtures the department will make no additional payment for the asphalt binder in the rap or asphalt binder due to asphalt binder grade adjustment .
as rap is produced and prepared for inclusion in the hma perform process control testing in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance table num minimum process control guidelines for aggregates and base course .
if problems with hma consistency or compliance with project specifications occur additional efforts taken to achieve acceptable levels of consistency and compliance with contract specifications at the contractors discretion at no additional cost to the department include but are not limited to reduce the top size of the rap from num to num fractionate the aggregates on a second screen such as the num or num screen so that the rap is maintained in three num stockpiles one being rap larger than num to num coarse rap and the third being fine rap ensure that the rap used in the hma mix design is representative of the rap available on the project cover the rap piles so that ambient moisture is not absorbed and process and maintain the stockpiles so that the rap material is equally and uniformly distributed throughout the entire stockpiles and is withdrawn such that uniform nonsegregated rap is delivered to the hoppers .
num mix design provide a mix design developed by a departmentapproved testing laboratory reviewed and signed by a professional engineer licensed by the new mexico board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors .
a list of approved private testing laboratories is available from the state materials bureau .
develop the mix design at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor may develop the mix design at any time prior to the project pre paving conference .
submit at least five num independent aggregate gradation test results from each stockpile to the project manager .
provide the department with a copy of the request to the testing laboratory to develop a mix design along with supporting documents in accordance with aashto r num to the project manager and the state asphalt engineer .
include the proposed aggregate combination and copies of all stockpile test results .
summarize the mix design results from the department approved testing laboratory in a format approved by the state materials bureau and submit them to the project manager and state asphalt engineer for review and concurrence by the state asphalt engineer .
include the results and design worksheets of testing calculations in accordance with aashto r num for the mix components as well as the mixture itself and in accordance with state materials bureau procedures .
department concurrence of a mix design will not relieve the contractor of full responsibility for producing an acceptable mixture .
the mix design may require adjustment in accordance with section num mix design adjustment .
create the jmf gradation in accordance with table num hma aggregate gradation control points .
the department will require at least one percent num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in all mix designs .
include the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in the gradation for developing the mix design .
the mix design shall establish a single percentage of the aggregate passing each sieve size and a single percentage of asphalt binder the contractor is to add to the aggregate .
develop the mix design using the section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num strategic highway research program shrp gyratory compactor in accordance with aashto r num .
aashto tp num may be used in lieu of aashto t numt num .
the mix design shall be in accordance with table num hma superpave design requirements for aggregates with less than three percent num absorption or table num hma superpave design requirements for aggregates with three percent num or greater absorption .
test the hma with at least one percent num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in accordance with aashto t num as modified below use six num inch by num inch specimens for all prisms compact all test specimens in accordance with aashto t num to an air content of seven percent num num on the aashto tnum section num scale of num with num exhibiting the most damage from moisture visually estimate the amount of damage caused by moisture on the interior surfaces of each broken prism .
use a minimum of one percent num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and ensure the design amount results in a tensile stress ratio of at least num and that no visual rating is greater than one num as determined by aashto tnum section num .
provide a mixture that meets all applicable criteria .
if tests indicate the need for additives or modifiers not specified in the contract or a change in source of binder to satisfy mix design requirements perform the required changes at no additional cost to the department .
table num hma superpave design requirements for aggregates with less than num absorption numyear design esals a n initial n design b n max percent voids in the mineral aggregate vma per nominal maximum aggregate size voids filled with asphalt vfa range c dust to binder ratio range one num inch spii num inch spiii num inch spiv num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num ain millions bdesign air void content of four percent num cfor one num inch nominal maximum size mixtures the specified lower limit of the vfa shall be num for the design traffic level num million esals .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num table num hma superpave design requirements for aggregates with num or greater absorption numyear design esals a n initial n design b n max percent voids in the mineral aggregate vma per nominal maximum aggregate size voids filled with asphalt vfa range c dust to binder ratio range onenum inch spii num inch spiii num inch spiv num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num ain millions bdesign air void content of num cfor one num inch nominal maximum size mixtures the specified lower limit of the vfa will be num for the design traffic level num million esals .
when department reviewed commercial mix designs are used on the project submit a copy of proposed commercial mix design to the state materials bureau with project information to verify the proposed commercial mix design is appropriate to use and meets all the requirements for the specific project .
.if the proposed commercial mix design meets all the requirements for the specific project the state materials bureau may reissue the proposed commercial mix design for that specific project .
the state materials bureau may allow the contractor to use a mix design for one num year from the date of review by the state materials bureau .
the contractor may use or resubmit the design before the expiration of the one num year time frame .
do not use a mix design beyond one num year after the state materials bureaus review date .
submit acceptable evidence to the state materials bureau verifying that the component materials have not changed .
submit a new mix design if changing the source of materials .
obtain concurrence from the state materials bureau before using the new materials .
num job mix formula the job mix formula jmf must be in accordance with all aggregate gradation requirements and result in a mix that meets all specified mix design requirements .
the department will refer to the result of the laboratory mix design developed in accordance with section num mix design as jmfnum .
prepare the aggregate gradation of the calibration samples for analysis per aashto t num .
individually calibrate each oven used to perform aashto t num in accordance with the state materials bureaus ignition oven calibration factors procedure including a set for the referee lab .
provide a minimum of five num sets of calibration samples .
do not combine the elements of the calibration samples prepared for the referee lab and provide them with the project number contractor and project manager clearly identified to the project manager who will forward them to the state asphalt engineer .
all quality control quality assurance and independent assurance ovens must be calibrated by this procedure prior to start of production of a jmf .
new calibration samples may be required for new jmfs as determined by the district lab supervisor or the state asphalt engineer .
the project section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num manager will suspend paving operations until calibration of the ovens has been completed .
no additional time or compensation will be granted for completion of this requirement .
num job mix formula adjustment the contractor may request a modification to the jmf based on field testing of material produced through the plant .
it is expected that minor adjustments will be necessary and the project manager with the concurrence of the departments district laboratory supervisor may approve a new jmf if the adjustment results in a new tv that is within the tolerance from the design tv .
example if design tv for no .
num sieve is num then a new tv may be approved in the field from num num .
test results and calculations that verify a proposed jmf adjustment complies with the specifications will be required prior to being reviewed by the project manager and concurred by the state materials bureau .
review and concurrence of a jmf adjustment can only be made after the quality control plan including checks on specific gravity has been submitted and concurred by the project manager and the district lab supervisor for use on the project confirmation by the project manager that the quality control plan is being followed concurrence of the proposed changes from project manager and district lab supervisor submittal by the testing laboratory responsible for the original mix design to the project manager with a copy to the state asphalt engineer .
if the jmf is adjusted after the shakedown period terminate the previous lot when the adjusted jmf has been reviewed and concurred with by the project manager assistant district engineer for construction and the state materials bureau .
terminated lot will be added to the previous lot for evaluation by qla .
begin a new lot for the qla with the adjusted jmf .
during the shakedown period make jmf adjustments in accordance with section num test strip and shakedown period .
num construction requirements num general provide sufficient storage space for each size of aggregate and rap .
keep the different sizes separate until delivery to the cold feed system feeding the drier .
while storing and moving the coarse and fine aggregate ensure that segregation degradation or combination of materials of different grades does not occur .
rescreen or waste segregated or degraded material .
provide separate storage and bin feeder for mineral filler if the contract requires mineral filler .
stockpile aggregates and rap that contain gravitational water and allow them to drain before mixing .
after introducing the required amounts of aggregate rap if used and asphalt binder into the mixer mix them until the aggregate particles are completely and uniformly coated with asphalt binder .
if the project manager determines that uncoated aggregate exists take corrective action .
ensure that the moisture content of the hma at discharge from the mixer does not exceed num .
num mix temperature requirements do not allow the temperature of the hma discharged from the mixer into the transport vehicle to be greater or less than the target mixing temperature specified in the mix design by more than ten percent num f not to exceed num f unless written concurrence by the oil supplier and design lab are provided to the project manager .
hma delivered to the project with mix temperatures outside the acceptable range shall at the sole discretion of the project manager be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
num addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num add the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material to the aggregate in an enclosed pug mill immediately after leaving the cold feed and just before introduction into the drier drum or aggregate drier .
minimize the loss of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material while adding to the aggregate .
use an enclosed conveyor belt to prevent blowing or loss of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material if necessary .
during production if necessary to counteract loss increase the percentage of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
equip the out feed of the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material silo with a vane feeder and install a flow sensor on the discharge from the vane feeder .
ensure that the sensor activates audible and visual signals at the control panel upon interruption of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material flow .
equip the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material silo with an approved means of metering the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material to the mix at typical discharge rates with an accuracy of num by weight .
approved means of metering hydrated lime or anhydrite based material include load cell weighing devices placed beneath each leg of the silo or a weigh belt feeder between the silo discharge and the pug mill .
obtain project managers approval for other means of metering the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material before use .
do not use external strain gauges affixed to the legs of the silo .
if the contractor uses load cell weighing devices for hydrated lime or anhydrite based material metering use a foundation system to support the silo in accordance with the silo manufacturers recommendations .
control the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material content such that at a minimum the amount added is equal to the target value on the job mix formula .
when mixing the aggregate and hydrated lime or anhydrite based material maintain the moisture content of the combined aggregate at the recommended saturated surface dry moisture content plus an additional num num by weight .
the project manager may increase the moisture content of the coarse and fine aggregates to properly coat the aggregates with hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and to eliminate dust pollution .
provide a method to measure the amount of moisture added to the hydrated lime or anhydrite based materialaggregate mix .
on a daily basis record the average amount of added moisture to verify specification compliance .
supply the recorded moisture information to the project manager upon request .
num equipment num mixing plants num plant scales ensure that the scales are accurate to num of the maximum allowable load in accordance with the federal motor carrier safety administration fmcsa publication .
a licensed scale serviceman must certify the scales .
submit a copy of the certification to the project manager .
num equipment for preparation of asphalt materials provide storage tanks for asphalt binder capable of heating and holding the asphalt at the required temperatures and measuring the temperature of the asphalt in the tank .
use approved heating methods that do not allow flames in contact with the tank .
design the circulating system for the asphalt binder to ensure proper and continuous circulation during the operating period .
allow measuring and sampling of asphalt binder from the delivery truck upon arrival .
num feeder for drier equip the plant with an accurate feeding mechanism to deliver the aggregate into the drier and maintain uniform production and temperature .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num num drier equip the plant with a system to continuously agitate the aggregate during the heating and drying process .
use a drier that can dry and heat the aggregate and prevent fuel oil or carbon from coating the aggregate .
take corrective action if the aggregate becomes coated with burner fuel .
num bins equip the plant with storage bins large enough to supply the mixer when it is operating at full capacity .
arrange the bins to ensure separate and adequate storage of the appropriate fractions of the mineral aggregates .
when necessary use separating boards .
provide separate dry storage for hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
ensure that the gates on the bins do not leak .
equip the bins with warning devices that notify the control panel when the bins are low .
num asphalt binder control unit equip the plant with the following num .
a scale or meter to obtain the proper amount of asphalt binder in the mix within the allowable tolerances and num .
a meter for checking the quantity or rate of flow of asphalt binder put in the mixer .
num thermometers equip the asphalt feed line near the charging valve at the mixer unit with an approved recording thermometer with a range of from num f to num f. equip the discharge chute of the drier with an approved recording thermometer to automatically register the temperature of the heated aggregates or mix as necessary .
provide the project manager with a record of discharge temperatures at the end of each weeks production and when requested by the project manager during the course of production .
num truck scales weigh the hma on approved scales provided by the contractor or public scales in accordance with section num measurement of quantity .
num requirements for batching plants num weigh box or hopper provide a batching plant that can accurately weigh aggregate in a weigh box or hopper suspended on scales .
use a weigh box or hopper that can hold a full batch .
ensure that the gate of the weigh box or hopper does not allow material to leak into the mixer while being weighed .
test the scales in accordance with section num measurement of quantity .
num mixer provide a batch mixer with a capacity of at least num lb capable of producing a uniform mixture within specified tolerances .
num control of mixing time equip the mixer with an accurate timing device that signals the end of the mixing time .
num drum mix plants equip the drum mix plant with the following auxiliary equipment and capabilities num .
separate cold feed controls for each material .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num num .
an automatic interlocking device for cold feed asphalt and additive .
num .
a means for determining moisture content of aggregate so the dry weight of cold feed can be determined for proper setting of asphalt and additive flow .
determine the moisture content of the aggregate at least twice daily and adjust the moisture correction equipment accordingly .
num .
a means for sampling individual cold feeds and provisions for sequential sampling of aggregate rap asphalt binder and additives while under full production .
num .
measure the temperature of the mix at the discharge and the automatic burner controls .
num .
a surge storage system having a minimum capacity of num ton designed and equipped to prevent segregation .
equip the surge storage system bins with mechanical or electrical devices that provide an audible or visual warning when the bins are less than num full .
num .
equip the bin containing fine aggregate and filler if required with a device that prevents material hangup during plant operation .
num .
a minimum of one num cold feed bin for each aggregate fraction in the mix .
num .
equip the cold feed with mechanical or electrical devices that indicate when the bins are empty or when the cold feed belt is not carrying the proper amount of material .
the device shall automatically lock the cold feed belt and provide an audible or visual warning .
num .
a separate cold feed for rap material .
introduce rap so that it does not come into direct contact with the burner flame .
num .
equip the feeding mechanism with an individual belt feeder with a variable speed feeder drive controlled by electronically operated actuators .
couple the asphalt feed control with the totalaggregateweight measurement device to automatically vary the asphalt feed rate to maintain the required proportion .
num haul equipment haul asphalt mixtures with trucks that have tight clean smooth metal beds and a thin coat a minimal amount of a departmentapproved release agent to prevent the mixture from adhering to the bed .
do not use release agents derived from petroleum derivatives including but not limited to diesel fuel that contaminate or alter the characteristics of the mix .
be prepared to cover and insulate hauling beds .
equip each truck with a waterproof and windproof cover of suitable material and sufficient size to protect the mix from the weather .
securely fasten covers when necessary to maintain temperature .
ensure that covers do not allow water to enter the bed paver or mix material transfer device during mix unlading .
use insulated truck beds when necessary to maintain temperature .
num pavers use selfcontained selfpropelled pavers with activated screeds or strikeoff assemblies heated if necessary and capable of spreading and finishing courses of hma in accordance with the plans .
num compaction equipment provide a sufficient number weight and type of rollers to obtain the required compaction and specified pavement density while the hma is in a workable condition .
all rollers must be capable of reversing direction without shoving or tearing the mixture .
num placement operations for cold milled surfaces prepare the surface in accordance with section num cold milling .
clean the existing surfaces and apply a tack coat in accordance with section num tack coat .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num when placing hma on base course proof roll the base course with a num ton roller or other approved equipment and correct any soft areas as directed by the project manager .
correct deficient areas at the contractors expense .
place the hma on the approved surface then spread and strike off to the specified grade and elevation .
spread and compact the hma in layers in accordance with the plans .
for new construction and reconstruction prepare the subgrade or base course as follows num .
clean of loose or deleterious materials num .
free of frozen material num .
meet the moisture and density requirements and num .
place prime coat as required in the plans unless otherwise approved by the project manager in accordance with section num prime coat .
unless otherwise specified in the plans for construction on nmdot projects using state approved hma designs utilizing greater than num rap the use of a materials transfer vehicle is required .
materials transfer vehicle mtv use a mtv with storage and remixing capabilities on all mainline construction when placing hma state approved designs .
the mtv will independently remix and deliver mixture from the hauling equipment to the paving equipment .
furnish an mtv with the following capabilities num .
an unloading system to receive mixtures from the hauling equipment .
num .
a minimum storage capacity of num tons with a remixing system in the mtv storage bin .
num .
a discharge conveyor to deliver the mixture to the paver hopper .
num .
the mtv system can not exceed maximum legal loading on structures .
pickup machines hopper inserts and material transfer devices are not considered mtvs .
in the event the mtv malfunctions during paving operations the contractor can finish the day without the mtv .
do not resume further mainline mix placement until the mtv is operational .
consistently overloading the hma mix into the paving machine is not acceptable .
coordinate the speed of the paving machine with the production of the plant and keep enough haul equipment available to achieve continuous operation .
use the control system on the paving machine to control the grade and the transverse slope by either of the following methods num .
one end directly and the other indirectly through controlling the transverse slope or num .
each end independently including screed attachments .
suspend operations if the control system does not achieve the typical section in accordance with the plans .
place spread and finish the courses of hma according to the following num .
without segregation or tearing num .
true to the line grade and crown in accordance with the plans and num .
with selfpropelled pavers except as otherwise directed .
on areas where irregularities or unavoidable obstacles make the use of mechanical spreading and finishing equipment impracticable dump spread and level the hma by other methods to achieve the required compacted thickness .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num num weather limitations do not place hma on wet or frozen surfaces or if weather conditions prevent proper handling finishing and compacting .
place hma when the chill factor is at least num f and rising .
if the air temperature is num f or warmer do not consider the chill factor .
num compaction compact the hma thoroughly and uniformly immediately after placement .
operate rollers at speeds slow enough to minimize displacement of the hma including the lines and grades of the asphalt edges .
remove marks from pneumatic rollers and immediately correct any displacement .
the department will not allow the use of equipment that crushes the aggregate excessively .
prevent the hma from sticking to the roller wheels by keeping the wheels moistened with water water mixed with very small quantities of detergent or other approved material .
do not use diesel fuel or other petroleum diluents .
at locations inaccessible to the rollers compact the hma with hot hand tampers smoothing irons or mechanical tampers .
the contractor may use a trench roller or cleated compression strips under the roller to transmit compression to depressed areas .
remove areas that become loose broken mixed with dirt segregated or defective replace with fresh hma and compact to match the surrounding area at no additional cost to the department .
immediately correct areas that have excessive or deficient asphalt binder .
num not used num joints place the hma as continuously as possible .
do not pass rollers over the unprotected end of a freshly laid mixture .
when placing opengraded friction course over hma stagger longitudinal joints at least six num inches relative to the longitudinal joints of the underlying course .
unless otherwise specified taper transverse and longitudinal joints as follows num .
at least a three num ft taper for transverse joints with a taper slope no steeper than num .
num .
at least a one num ft taper or a notched taper for longitudinal joints with a taper slope no steeper than num or a notched taper with a one num inch vertical edge at the top of the taper connected to a slope no steeper than num .
num .
cut and square off transverse tapers before commencing new work .
num .
clean and tack coat longitudinal joints from previous operations .
num .
avoid placing longitudinal joints in the wheel paths unless approved by the project manager .
completely bond joints .
smooth the surface of each course at the joints .
the department will not allow deviations greater than num inch when tested with a ten num ft straightedge in any direction .
when paving under traffic schedule the daily surfacing operations so that tapered longitudinal joints are not exposed for longer than seven num days .
num surface tolerances smooth the surface of each completed course and prevent deviations larger than num inch using a ten num ft straightedge in any direction .
immediately correct deviations exceeding this tolerance .
provide a final hma surfacing course that conforms to section num pavement smoothness measurement .
num plan surfacing depths section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num provide pavement at the depth specified in the contract .
monitor depths by calculating continuous production yields using the formula found in the mtnum as maintained by the state construction bureau .
calculate the required yield and the corresponding yields for num inch increase upper limit and decrease lower limit .
the project manager may adjust the required yield to fit field conditions .
if adjusted the new target yield will be communicated to the contractor in writing .
control production to keep yield within the upper and lower limits .
correct deficiencies at no cost to the state .
correct deficient depths during placement .
address plan surfacing depths in the quality control plan .
num test strip shakedown period construct a maximum num ton test strip for each hma mix design with a minimum of three num contractor and three num agency samples to evaluate the jmf process control and placement operations .
construct test strip on shoulder low volume segments of the pavement or area approved by the project manager .
correct and modify noncomplying placement operations and produce necessary process control adjustments .
develop a revised jmf if necessary based on the results of the test strip .
production and placement operations prior to approval of the revised jmf and placement operations are at the contractors risk .
for purposes of payment the test strip will be evaluated in conformance with section num minor paving .
if accepted the test strip will have a pay factor of num .
if rejected said material shall be handled in accordance with section num adherence to specifications and rejection of nonspecification material .
remove unaccepted test strip material placed within the roadway prism at no cost to the department .
if the contractor disagrees with removing and replacing unacceptable material placed in test strips outside the roadway prism the assistant district engineer for construction based on engineering judgment will decide if the material can remain in place with a maximum pay factor of num or shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
if the test strip is rejected construct a subsequent test strip .
do not proceed to full production until an accepted test strip is produced .
after the test strip is placed continue to evaluate the mix properties and the jmf during the placement of the first two num sublots in the first lot .
changes may be made to either the jmf or the mix proportions andor properties with the concurrence of the assistant district engineer for construction .
for changes made prior to the completion of the first two num sublots the adjustments will be applied to the entire lot for purposes of payment .
the project manager may waive test strip requirements for the project if requested by the contractor based on prior experience with the jmf .
for qla projects the shakedown period is defined as the first two num sublots produced in the first lot .
for nonqla projects the shakedown period is defined as the test strip .
as the test strip is placed evaluate the mix properties and the jmf .
changes may be made to either the jmf or the mix proportions andor properties with the concurrence of the project manager state materials bureau and the assistant district engineer for construction .
num sampling and testing sample and test the aggregate production and hma mixture in accordance with section num quality control quality assurance qcqa and the departments minimum testing requirements .
department personnel may test locations other than the random locations generated for statistical analysis .
these tests will not be used for pay factor determination but may be used to determine acceptance or rejection of localized material .
num contractor quality control administer a quality control plan referred to hereafter as the plan to provide a product in accordance with the contract .
ensure the plan conforms to section num contractor quality control .
submit the plan a minimum of two num weeks prior to commencement of crushing operations and at a minimum comply with contractor quality control plan guidelines .
no hma operations are allowed until the plan has been approved by the project section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num manager and the district lab supervisor .
address changes in the job mix formula in conformance with section num job mix formula adjustments .
the plan shall do the following num .
address elements that affect the quality of the asphalt concrete including but not limited to the following num .
mix design num .
sampling and testing num .
aggregate production num .
gradation num .
minus num wash num .
plasticity index num .
sand equivalent num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
flat and elongated particles count and num .
fractured face count .
num .
rap if used num .
quality of components num .
stockpile management num .
proportioning num .
gradation num .
minus num wash num .
plasticity index num .
sand equivalent num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
flat and elongated particles count and num .
fractured face count .
num .
mixing including addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material andor asphalt additive if required num .
transporting num .
placing and finishing num .
joints num .
compaction num .
smoothness num .
plan surfacing depths num .
shakedown period num .
corrective action processes and num .
proposed lot size and sublot size in accordance with section num qla .
for the properties listed in num above specifically address the requirements of table num in the plan .
define planned corrective action if the requirements are not met .
num and num are for informational purposes during aggregate production .
num through num if three num consecutive tests fail address what will change in production .
failure to adjust will result in ceasing operations until a corrective action plan is approved by the project manager .
for the properties listed in num above specifically address the requirements of table num in the plan .
define planned corrective action if the requirements are not met .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num num and num are to be evaluated against the job mix formula .
for properties listed in num through num if any three num consecutive tests fail the contractor is to cease operations until a corrective plan is approved by the project manager and implemented .
for properties listed in num through num any test failing by more than num percentage points or if three num consecutive tests fail by an average of num to num percentage points cease operations until a corrective plan is approved by the project manager and implemented .
num .
employ sampling and testing personnel who are either under the direct supervision of a ttcp certified technician or who are themselves currently certified to perform the required quality control testing .
provide the project manager with a listing of all testing personnel that summarizes their ttcp certifications or if they are not ttcp certified to perform a particular test which ttcp certified technician is supervising their testing .
keep the project manager notified by providing an updated listing of any changes .
provide testing equipment that meets all applicable astm and aashto requirements to accomplish required sampling and testing .
establish a laboratory for the project separate and distinct from the departments laboratory and quality assurance facilities .
submit verification that all quality control and assurance testing equipment meets the applicable standards and has been calibrated per the requirements of aashto rnum .
remove any equipment that does not meet the applicable standards or calibration requirements .
on projects designated as qla projects sample and test hma in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
num .
the contractor is responsible for inspection performed at the crushing operations hot mix plant and at the contractors field laboratory using the laboratory test results and other quality control practices to ensure the quality of aggregate sources and other mix components .
adjust and control mix proportioning to meet the mix design .
be responsible for periodically inspecting all equipment used in proportioning and mixing to ensure its proper operating condition and to ensure that proportioning and mixing is in conformance with the mix design and other requirements .
num .
be responsible for inspection sampling and testing performed at the paving site ensuring that the delivered materials meet contract requirements and for periodically inspecting all equipment used in transporting placing finishing and compacting to ensure its proper operating condition .
ensure that placing finishing joint construction compaction and thickness when required are as specified .
num .
define and document the coordination of activities between the contractors management and all contractor testing personnel including the frequency of each type of test the criteria used by the contractors management and technicians to recognize deficiencies and reject or correct unacceptable materials and a description of proposed corrective actions .
num .
in the plan describe in detail the proposed process control sampling and testing programs .
include the method by which random sampling locations are to be determined .
develop sample locations for process control tests so that the center of the sample is at least num inches from a joint or edge of the pavement layer .
num contractor quality control of aggregate obtain samples in accordance with section num sampling .
take representative samples as required either at the stockpile or after the aggregate material is combined but before the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num mixing with asphalt binder .
test these samples for conformance with the approved job mix formula and excluding rap num .
gradation num .
minus num wash num .
plasticity index num .
sand equivalent num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
flat and elongated particles count and num .
fractured face count .
the project manager may sample and test the aggregate at any time during production or stockpiling or may request to split samples with the contractor .
if testing indicates corrections are necessary make corrections in conformance with the plan .
the department will base evaluation of rap aggregate in accordance with section num reclaimed asphalt pavement .
num contractor quality control for compaction monitor the compaction process by determining the density of the hma with a portable densometer in accordance with the plan .
establish calibration of the portable densometer from cut pavement samples .
determine the density readings of the cut pavement samples in accordance with aashto t num weight volume method and determine the density readings of the pavement with the portable densometer .
correlate these test results .
conduct quality control testing in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa and provide test results to the project manager .
perform quality control density testing while the asphalt mixture is hot enough to permit further compaction .
do not roll for compaction when it becomes ineffective or damages the hma .
do not use vibratory mode when the temperature of the mix is below num f. num adherence to specifications and rejection of nonspecification material produce material in compliance with all specification requirements .
evaluate test results for specification compliance and treatment of material that does not meet specifications in accordance with section num in its entirety .
all material that is rejected shall at the sole discretion of the department be removed and replaced with specification material at the contractors expense .
num department quality assurance num acceptance the department will evaluate materials for acceptance in accordance with this section .
sample and test the mixture and pavement on a statistically random basis in accordance with table num minimum acceptance guidelines .
the project manager may reject material that appears to be defective based on visual inspection .
table num acceptance testing tolerancesa characteristic specification limit percentage points from tv air voids num pavement density c num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material e minimum of jmf target value voids in the mineral aggregate vma ad num asphalt content ab num section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num table num acceptance testing tolerances a a all gradation asphalt content vma and vfa values shall be determined using the aashto t num testing results .
b hma will not be rejected based on asphalt content determined by aashto t num c density payment will be adjusted in accordance with section num d if gmm fluctuates more than num on a consistent basis it is recommended that the specific gravity of the aggregates be checked in order to verify vma .
e if hydrated lime or anhydrite based material is below design tv cease hot mix production investigate and correct .
num nonqla the department will evaluate qa test results from projects with bid quantities less than num tons for specification compliance in accordance with the following procedures if the mean of the test results for each property is within the acceptance tolerances as listed in table num acceptance testing tolerances the material will be accepted at full contract price except that roadway density will be adjusted in price in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
if the mean of the test results for any of the listed properties is outside of the tolerances as listed in table num acceptance testing tolerances then the department will determine acceptance of the material in accordance with num acceptance sampling and testing and section num quality level analysis .
a composite pay factor of more than num is not allowed for projects with bid quantities less than num tons .
remove and replace rejected material with specification material at no additional cost to the department .
num acceptance of pavement density the target density for acceptance of hma will be num of the theoretical maximum density as determined from aashto t num .
for determination of maximum specific gravity obtain and test a minimum of two num samples and ensure the department obtains and tests a minimum of one num sample for each day that the hma is placed .
each individual density test value obtained must be from num to num of the theoretical maximum density .
to be prepared for dispute resolution the contractor is to provide one num additional core for each core tested by the department for acceptance of density .
the additional core is to be from the same lot as the initial core and shall be generated from the random sample plan .
if the contractor believes the departments cut pavement samples have been damaged they may invoke section num dispute resolution .
the referee lab results will replace the initial core in determining pay factor .
the assistant district engineer for construction will make the final decision on accepting or rejecting material based on the referee laboratorys results by num .
accepting the section or sublot if the density falls between num num num .
determining that a portion based on visual determination or all of the material in that section or sublot shall be removed or replaced at no additional cost to the department num .
determining that a portion based on visual determination of the material in that section or sublot will be paid for at a num pay factor .
for purposes of acceptance and pay factor determination determine the density from cut pavement sections cores with numinch diameters extending through the full thickness of the hma .
determine the pay factor in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
use a minimum of ten num cores to determine the pay factor unless otherwise directed by the assistant district engineer for construction .
determine the theoretical maximum density using an average of the maximum specific gravity values obtained by the department and the contractor the day the cores material was placed .
if a composite pay factor of more than num is calculated the composite pay factor will be a num for the purposes of payment .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num for projects consisting of single lift overlays or mill and inlay with a single lift of two and a half inches or less the project manager may grant an exception to the mean density target requirement of at least num of the theoretical maximum density if the contractor can demonstrate that a minimum of num can not be reasonably obtained because of the existing conditions of the pavement structure or subgrade materials .
the contractor demonstrates this by providing density results obtained during paving operations witnessed by a state inspector at the location in question .
if the project manager grants this exemption construct a roadway test strip and develop an hma compaction process to get the highest possible density based on an approved rollers density gain per pass in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
the project manager will approve the process establish a new target value for density and establish a new acceptance lot only for the portion of the project addressed herein except for the roadway test strip before paving begins or continues .
density shall not fall below num .
if a lot does not meet either of the revised density requirements the project manager will with the concurrence of the assistant district engineer for construction do the following num .
accept and pay for the lot of hma at num of the bid item unit price or num .
reject the inplace material and require the contractor to remove and replace .
num qla on projects with bid quantities of num tons or more the department will determine acceptance of the materials in accordance with section num quality level analysis using the acceptance limits in table num acceptance testing tolerances .
acceptance lots shall be between num tons and num tons as determined at the prepaving conference .
table num indicates properties that will be tracked for purposes of quality assurance .
for all qla projects if a composite pay factor of more than num is calculated the composite pay factor will be a num for the purposes of payment .
num acceptance of pavement density the target density for acceptance of hma will be num of the theoretical maximum density as determined from aashto t num .
for determination of maximum specific gravity obtain and test a minimum of two num samples and ensure the department obtains and tests a minimum of one num sample for each day that the hma is placed in accordance with the random sampling plan .
each individual density test value obtained must be from num to num of the theoretical maximum density .
for purposes of acceptance and pay factor determination determine the density from cut pavement sections cores with numinch diameters extending through the full thickness of the hma .
determine the pay factor in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
use a minimum of ten num cores to determine the pay factor unless otherwise directed by the assistant district engineer for construction .
to be prepared for dispute resolution the contractor is to provide one num additional core for each core tested by the department for acceptance of density .
the additional core is to be from the same lot as the initial core and shall be generated from the random sample plan .
if the contractor or department believes the departments cut pavement samples have been damaged they may invoke section num dispute resolution .
the referee lab results will replace the initial core in determining pay factor .
determine the theoretical maximum density using an average of the maximum specific gravity values obtained by the department and the contractor the day the cores material was placed .
if a composite pay factor of more than num is calculated the composite pay factor will be a num for the purposes of payment .
for projects consisting of single lift overlays or mill and inlay with a single lift of two and a half inches or less the project manager may grant an exception to the mean density target requirement of at least num of the theoretical maximum density if the contractor can demonstrate that a minimum of num can not be reasonably obtained because of the existing conditions of the pavement structure or subgrade materials .
the contractor demonstrates this by providing nondestructive density results obtained during paving operations witnessed by a state inspector at the location in question .
if the project manager grants this exemption construct a roadway test strip and develop an hma compaction process to get the highest section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num possible density based on an approved rollers density gain per pass in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
the project manager will approve the process establish a new target value for density and establish a new acceptance lot only for the portion of the project addressed herein except for the roadway test strip before paving begins or continues .
lot density shall not fall below num .
if a lot does not meet either of the revised density requirements the project manager will with the concurrence of the assistant district engineer for construction do the following num .
accept and pay for the lot of hma at num of the bid item unit price or num .
reject the inplace material and require the contractor to remove and replace at no cost to the department .
num independent assurance testing the department will perform independent assurance sampling and testing in accordance with section num independent assurance testing .
num dispute resolution for any test incorporated into the pay factor if a dispute exists the project manager and contractor will investigate to determine why and make corrections if possible .
if the discrepancy can not be resolved then either party may invoke a referee lab .
the state asphalt engineer will maintain a list of labs that are willing and capable of performing referee testing .
all referee labs shall be aashto materials reference laboratory amrl certified for the tests to be performed .
neither the departments project staff nor the contractor will know who is performing the referee testing .
the state asphalt engineer will select a laboratory without disclosing the name of the lab to department project personnel or contractor personnel from the following not in priority order num .
a district laboratory not from the district in which the project resides or num .
a private laboratory currently listed on the state materials bureaus list of approved private labs not involved in the subject project in any manner such as mix design submittal preliminary testing for design etc .
only laboratories that are in the routine business of providing testing and designs will be considered .
contractor owned laboratories will not be allowed .
when a referee lab is used the referee labs test results will be used in determining the pay factor .
the referee lab must be invoked in writing within ten num calendar days of receiving the test results from the other party .
if not invoked within ten num calendar days the test results are deemed accepted .
the results will be used to determine pay factors .
the departments prior test results or the contractors prior test results for the test in question will be discarded .
if the composite pay factor decreases from applying the referee labs results the contractor shall pay for the testing performed by the referee lab .
if the composite pay factor increases from applying the referee labs results the department will pay for the testing performed by the referee lab .
if the composite pay factor remains unchanged the cost shall be split with each party responsible for num of the total cost .
for all testing incorporated into the pay factor each party shall generate an additional sample from the departments acceptance samples and the contractors quality control samples used in pay factor analysis .
failure to provide the referee samples prior to testing the initial sample will result in the project manager suspending the project at no cost to the department .
additional time will not be added to the contract for project suspension caused by failure to comply with dispute resolution process .
work shall not resume until the contractor provides the delayed samples and satisfies the project manager in writing that future samples will be provided in compliance with this requirement .
the extra samples is are to be retained by the department .
the department will retain the samples at the project location inside a locked cargo container provided by the contractor at no cost to the state .
the state will provide the lock for the cargo container .
once the pay factor is determined dispose of the unused samples at no cost to the department .
in no case will the unused samples be disposed of prior to the ten num calendar day period in which the dispute resolution process may be invoked .
section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num for pavement density the contractor shall provide an additional core only for each core provided to the department for acceptance .
the additional core will be stored and retained in the provided container .
should the contractor invoke the dispute resolution process for density the second core will be provided to the referee lab .
the density pay factor for the material in question will be based solely on the referee lab result not including department or contractor results .
failure to comply with the requirements contained herein will result in the pay factor being calculated in accordance with the applicable sections of num superpave qla and non qla and num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
no test results will be replaced by referee results .
num method of measurement if the department measures hma by the square yard the department will use the average width of the hma in place and the length from station to station along the centerline of the roadway when calculating quantities .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit hma complete ton or square yard hma ton or square yard the department will pay for accepted quantities at the bid item unit price adjusted in accordance with section num price adjustments .
providing and transporting all cores samples and storage containers shall be incidental to the pay items above .
num price adjustments num projects with bid quantities of num tons or greater the department will pay for accepted quantities of hma or hma complete at the bid item unit price adjusted in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
the hma will be evaluated on a lotbylot basis at a price determined by multiplying the bid item unit price by the weighting factor .
the department will use table num weighting factors to calculate each lots composite pay factor .
the pay factor for the entire project will be calculated by applying weighted averages based on tonnage contained within each lot to each lots composite pay factor .
if the composite pay factor for a lot is greater than num the pay factor will be set at num .
table num weighting factors characteristic f factor mat density num air voids num voids in the mineral aggregate vma num asphalt content num if the individual pay factor for asphalt content is less than num it will be set at num for the purpose of calculating payment .
num projects with bid quantities less than num tons the department will pay for accepted quantities of hma or hma complete at the bid item unit price if the mean of the test results for each property is within the testing tolerances as listed in table num acceptance testing tolerances .
if the mean of the test results for any of the listed properties is outside of the testing tolerances as listed in section num hot mix asphalt superpave qla nonqla page num table num acceptance testing tolerances then the department will determine the price adjustment for the material in accordance with the departments price reduction procedures current at the time of the project letting .
in no case will the pay factor be greater than num .
num price adjustment for pavement density bid quantities less than num tons the department will also adjust the bid item unit price for the hma or hma complete pay item based on the roadway density in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa specifically section num quality level analysis steps one num through nine num .
if the density pay factor for a lot is greater than num the density pay factor will be set at num for purposes of payment .
the department will apply the price adjustments to the hma bid item unit price for each lot .
section num warm mix asphalt page num section num warm mix asphalt warm mix asphalt wma is a generic term used to describe the reduction in production paving and compaction temperatures achieved through the use of one num of the approved wma technologies .
some modification to wma plants may be necessary to accommodate the wma technologies as noted in section num construction requirements .
num description this work consists of constructing one num or more courses of warmmix asphalt wma pavement courses on a prepared base produced with a warmmix additive or technologies approved by the new mexico department of transportation and included the most current approved products list apl .
warmmix asphalt shall be produced in a mixing plant and stored hauled placed and compacted in accordance with the requirements of this section and as shown on the plans .
a technical representative of the warm mix additive supplier including contact information shall be designated in writing via the mix design submittal process .
the representative is expected to ensure that the warmmix additive is handled properly .
this representative does not have the authority to allow any deviation from the department specifications and project requirements .
num materials num general wma may be produced by one num or a combination of several technologies which may include wma plant foaming processes and equipment mineral additives or chemicals that allow the reduction of the production temperatures .
wma is a mixture of asphalt binder warm mix additive or technologies aggregate blending sand mineral filler and hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
unless otherwise prohibited in the contract the department will allow recycled asphalt pavement rap in wma mixes as long as the resulting mixture conforms to all specification requirements .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions in accordance with the contract .
test materials in accordance with applicable aashto methods as modified by the department if applicable or other test procedures as directed by the department .
the state materials bureau will decide all questions pertaining to the interpretation of test procedures .
num aggregate ensure the aggregate gradation of the wma mixture meets the requirements of table num wma aggregate gradation control points .
the project manager may require at no additional cost to the department wet preparation per aashto t num method a if the project manager determines there are deleterious materials present in the aggregate stockpiles before aggregate gradation testing .
the contract will specify the type of wma the contractor is to use .
the department will allow the contractor to combine materials from two num or more sources to produce aggregate only when each individual aggregate source meets all applicable quality requirements .
num gradation and quality requirements section num warm mix asphalt page num table num wma aggregate gradation control points sieve size passing per wma type spii spiii spiv min max min max min max two num inch num num inch num one num inch num num num ¾ inch num num num num ½ inch num num num num inch num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num aggregate quality for each material source ensure the wma coarse aggregate has an ai of num or less when calculated in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
regulate the crushing of aggregate stockpiles so that the minimum fractured faces content of the plus no .
num material complies with the requirements of table num fractured faces sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity and evaluation by nmdot method ffnum fractured face determination for coarse aggregate .
ensure the plus num inch material contains a maximum of num flat elongated particles with a dimensional ratio of num or greater as determined by astm d num ttcp modified .
ensure the combined material excluding rap passing the no .
num sieve is nonplastic .
ensure that before the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material the minimum sand equivalent value and the minimum fine aggregate angularity value of the combined aggregate excluding rap complies with the requirements of table num fractured faces sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity .
determine the sand equivalent value in accordance with aashto t num alternate method no .
num and the fine aggregate angularity value in accordance with aashto t num method a .
num fractured faces the department will consider a face to be fractured when at least onehalf of the projected particle area exhibits a rough angular or broken texture with well defined edges .
table num minimum fractured faces sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity for virgin aggregates design traffic esalsa x num num fractured faces b sand equivalent fine aggregate angularity num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num aesals are based on a numyear design life for all scenarios .
bunder fractured faces num num denotes that num of the coarse aggregate has at least num fractured face and num has at least two num fractured faces .
ensure rap provided from sources outside the project has at least num fractured faces one num fractured face however sand equivalent and fine aggregate angularity do not apply .
section num warm mix asphalt page num num production when producing aggregates for wma remove natural fines by screening and stockpiling separately .
use a no .
num screen minimum or a larger screen if needed to properly control the crushing and screening operation .
crush the aggregate retained on the scalping screen and separate the crushed material into at least two num stockpiles of fine and coarse aggregates .
regulate crushing operations to produce material within the specified gradation band .
num stockpiling the following requirements apply to stockpiles num .
place stockpiles upon prepared sites num .
make stockpiles neat and regular to prevent segregation num .
provide enough storage space for each size of aggregate num .
separate the aggregate stockpiles far enough apart to prevent mixing or with walls or partitions num .
prevent contamination store stockpiles away from vehicular and equipment traffic num .
keep the storage yard neat and orderly and keep the stockpiles accessible for sampling and num .
keep the aggregate sizes separated until delivered to the cold feed system that feeds the drier .
num combining when combining crushed materials from different stockpiles including rap if in the mixture ensure the product is in accordance with the mix design gradation requirements .
use controlled feeders from each stockpile to combine crushed material .
num asphalt binder the contract will specify the type and grade of asphalt binder .
provide asphalt binders in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
do not change the asphalt source after approval of the mix design without written approval of the state materials bureau .
num warm mix additive or technology only warm mix additives or technologies approved by the product evaluation program and currently listed on the approved products list can be used on department projects .
to be placed on the approved products list the wma additive supplier shall verify that the binder with the additive meets the pg grade of the specified binder .
the potential additive supplier shall demonstrate this to the department by evaluating the asphalt binder and wma additive for compliance with the rheological properties for low and high temperatures for the specified pg grade in accordance with aashto mnum table num and section num performance graded asphalt binder .
the type and dosage of warm mix additives shall comply with the requirements of the warm mix additive supplier .
the type andor dosage of the wma additives shall be provided to the project manager two num weeks prior to the commencement of paving operations .
warm mix additive dosage rates shall not deviate from those designated by the warm mix additive supplier .
if a terminal blend warm mix additive is used the dosage rate shall be shown on the materials certificate of compliance .
after the warm mix additive is introduced the pg grade of the binder shall comply with the pg grade as specified in the contract .
for foamed asphalt systems water used as directed by the foamed asphalt system manufacturer shall be considered to be the warm mix additive .
only foam systems on the departments approved product list shall be used .
section num warm mix asphalt page num num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material provide hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in accordance with section num asphalt materials hydrated lime and anhydrite based material .
num blending sand blending sand consists of the following num .
natural fines from the scalping process num .
concrete sand num .
sandy material or num .
a combination of these graded to the mix design requirements .
determine the need for and percentage a maximum of num of blending sand using mix design tests on samples taken from stockpiles during crushing operations and submitted to an approved testing laboratory .
num mineral filler provide mineral filler in accordance with aashto m num and approved by the state materials bureau .
the department will not allow fly ash as mineral filler for wma .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractor may use rap removed under the contract consisting of salvaged milled pulverized broken or crushed asphalt pavement .
the contractor may use rap produced from outside sources provided evidence of ownership is supplied and the following is met after the contractor obtains sufficient quantities of rap aggregate samples in accordance with aashto t num the department will accept rap for which each fraction of coarse aggregate has a percent wear of num or less at num revolutions when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
provide plus no .
num rap material with a minimum of num fractured faces content one num face .
the contractor may use a maximum of num rap by weight in the production of wma mixtures without changing the asphalt binder .
for quantities greater than num to num rap either lower the asphalt binders high and low temperature grades by one num grade e.g .
lower a pg num to a pg num or extract recover and combine the raps asphalt binder with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto m num appendix a ensuring the resultant binder meets the entire aashto m num required project pg asphalt binder properties indicated on the approved mix design .. for quantities greater than num to num rap extract recover and combine the raps asphalt binder with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto m num appendix a .
ensure the resultant binder meets the entire aashto m num required project pg asphalt binder properties indicated on the approved mix design .
the department will not allow the contractor to use more than num rap in the production of wma mixtures .
for projects of entirely new construction limit the rap to num in the top mat or extract recover and combine the raps asphalt binder with a virgin asphalt binder per aashto mnum appendix a .
ensure the resultant binder meets the entire aashto mnum required project pg asphalt binder properties indicated on the approved mix design .
process rap so that num passes a numinch sieve .
for wma mixtures containing greater than num rap maintain adequate stockpile management i.e .
sufficient quantities and shaping of the stockpiles and fractionation divide the rap into a minimum of two num stockpiles so they are uniform throughout the stockpiles .
address in the quality control plan how rap will be controlled such as which screen will be used to split into two num stockpiles or by what method the rap will be controlled to keep the resultant mix within acceptable limits .
account for the weight of the binder in the rap when batching aggregates .
provide rap that is free of deleterious materials .
if the contractor decides to use rap in the production of wma mixtures the department will make no additional payment for the asphalt binder in the rap or asphalt binder due to asphalt binder grade adjustment .
as rap is section num warm mix asphalt page num produced and prepared for inclusion in the wma perform process control testing in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance table num minimum process control guidelines for aggregates and base course .
if problems with wma consistency or compliance with project specifications occur additional efforts taken to achieve acceptable levels of consistency and compliance with contract specifications at the contractors discretion at no additional cost to the department include but are not limited to reduce the top size of the rap from num to num fractionate the aggregates on a second screen such as the num or num screen so that the rap is maintained in two num stockpiles one being coarse rap and the second being fine rap ensure that the rap used in the wma mix design is representative of the rap available on the project cover the rap piles so that ambient moisture is not absorbed and process and maintain the stockpiles so that the rap material is equally and uniformly distributed throughout the entire stockpiles and is withdrawn such that uniform nonsegregated rap is delivered to the hoppers .
num mix design provide a mix design developed by a departmentapproved testing laboratory reviewed and signed by a professional engineer licensed by the new mexico board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors .
a list of approved private testing laboratories is available from the state materials bureau .
develop the mix design at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor may develop the mix design at any time prior to the project pre paving conference .
submit at least five num independent aggregate gradation test results from each stockpile to the project manager .
provide the department with a copy of the request to the testing laboratory to develop a mix design along with supporting documents in accordance with aashto r num to the project manager and the state asphalt engineer .
include the proposed aggregate combination and copies of all stockpile test results .
summarize the mix design results from the department approved testing laboratory in a format approved by the state materials bureau and submit them to the project manager and state asphalt engineer for review and concurrence by the state asphalt engineer .
include the results and design worksheets of testing calculations in accordance with aashto r num for the mix components as well as the mixture itself and in accordance with state materials bureau procedures .
department concurrence of a mix design will not relieve the contractor of full responsibility for producing an acceptable mixture .
the mix design may require adjustment in accordance with section num mix design adjustment .
create the jmf gradation in accordance with table num wma aggregate gradation control points .
the department will require at least num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in all mix designs .
include the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in the gradation for developing the mix design .
the mix design shall establish a single percentage of the aggregate passing each sieve size and a single percentage of asphalt binder the contractor is to add to the aggregate .
develop the mix design using the strategic highway research program shrp gyratory compactor in accordance with aashto r num .
aashto tp num may be used in lieu of aashto t numt num .
the mix design shall be in accordance with table num wma superpave design requirements for aggregates with less than num absorption or table num wma superpave design requirements for aggregates with num or greater absorption .
test the wma with at least num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material in accordance with aashto t num as modified below use six num inch by num inch specimens for all prisms section num warm mix asphalt page num compact all test specimens in accordance with aashto t num to an air content of seven percent num num on the aashto tnum section num a scale of num with num exhibiting the most damage from moisture visually estimate the amount of damage caused by moisture on the interior surfaces of each broken prism use a minimum of one percent num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and ensure the design amount results in a tensile stress ratio of at least num and that no visual rating is greater than num as determined by aashto tnum section num .
provide a mixture that meets all applicable criteria .
if tests indicate the need for additives or modifiers not specified in the contract or a change in source of binder to satisfy mix design requirements perform the required changes at no additional cost to the department .
table num wma superpave design requirements for aggregates with less than num absorption numyear design esals a n initial n design b n max percent voids in the mineral aggregate vma per nominal maximum aggregate size voids filled with asphalt vfa range c dust to binder ratio range num inch spii num inch spiii num inch spiv num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num ain millions bdesign air void content of four percent num cfor one num inch nominal maximum size mixtures the specified lower limit of the vfa shall be num for the design traffic level num million esals .
section num warm mix asphalt page num table num wma superpave design requirements for aggregates with num or greater absorption numyear design esals a n initial n design b n max percent voids in the mineral aggregate vma per nominal maximum aggregate size voids filled with asphalt vfa range c dust to binder ratio range one num inch spii num inch spiii num inch spiv num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num ain millions bdesign air void content of num cfor one num inch nominal maximum size mixtures the specified lower limit of the vfa will be num for the design traffic level num million esals .
when department reviewed commercial mix designs are used on the project submit a copy of proposed commercial mix design to the state materials material bureau with project information to verify the proposed commercial mix design is appropriate to use and meets all the required specifications for the project .
if the proposed commercial mix design meets all the requirements for the specific project the state materials bureau may reissue the proposed commercial mix design for that specific project .
the state materials bureau may allow the contractor to use a mix design for one num year from the date of review by the state materials bureau .
the contractor may use or resubmit the design before the expiration of the one num year time frame .
do not use a mix design beyond one num year after the state materials bureaus review date .
submit acceptable evidence to the state materials bureau verifying that the component materials have not changed .
submit a new mix design if changing the source of materials .
obtain concurrence from the state materials bureau before using the new materials .
provide documentation confirming that the wma additive blended with the asphalt binder results in asphalt cement that meets the specified pg grade asphalt binder .
the wma additive supplier and the asphalt binder supplier will recommend mixing compaction and maximum allowable temperatures to be used for the development of the mix design .
the wma mix design signed and submitted by a department approved testing laboratory will be reviewed by the state asphalt engineer in accordance with department procedures and if found to comply with all requirements sent to the project manager for final acceptance for use by the department .
num job mix formula the job mix formula jmf must be in accordance with all aggregate gradation requirements and result in a mix that meets all specified mix design requirements .
the department will refer to the result of the laboratory mix design developed in accordance with section num mix design as jmfnum .
section num warm mix asphalt page num prepare the aggregate gradation of the calibration samples for analysis per aashto t num .
individually calibrate each oven used to perform aashto t num in accordance with the state materials bureaus ignition oven calibration factors procedure including a set for the referee lab .
provide a minimum of five num sets of calibration samples .
do not combine the elements of the calibration samples prepared for the referee lab and provide them with the project number contractor and project manager clearly identified to the project manager who will forward them to the state asphalt engineer .
all quality control quality assurance and independent assurance ovens must be calibrated by this procedure prior to start of production of a jmf .
new calibration samples may be required for new jmfs as determined by the district lab supervisor or the state asphalt engineer .
the project manager will suspend paving operations until calibration of the ovens has been completed .
no additional time or compensation will be granted for completion of this requirement .
num job mix formula adjustment the contractor may request a modification to the jmf based on field testing of material produced through the plant .
it is expected that minor adjustments will be necessary and the project manager with the concurrence of the departments district laboratory supervisor may approve a new jmf if the adjustment results in a new tv that is within the tolerance from the design tv .
example if design tv for no .
num sieve is num then a new tv may be approved in the field from num num .
test results and calculations that verify a proposed jmf adjustment complies with the specifications will be required prior to being reviewed by the project manager and concurred by the state materials bureau .
review and concurrence of a jmf adjustment can only be made after the quality control plan including checks on specific gravity has been submitted and concurred by the project manager and the district lab supervisor for use on the project confirmation by the project manager that the quality control plan is being followed concurrence of the proposed changes from project manager and district lab supervisor submittal by the testing laboratory responsible for the original mix design to the project manager with a copy to the state asphalt engineer .
if the jmf is adjusted after the shakedown period terminate the previous lot when the adjusted jmf has been reviewed and concurred with by the project manager and the state materials bureau .
terminated lot will be added to the previous lot for evaluation by qla .
begin a new lot for the qla with the adjusted jmf .
during the shakedown period make jmf adjustments in accordance with section num test strip and shakedown period .
num construction requirements num general provide sufficient storage space for each size of aggregate and rap .
keep the different sizes separate until delivery to the cold feed system feeding the drier .
while storing and moving the coarse and fine aggregate ensure that segregation degradation or combination of materials of different grades does not occur .
rescreen or waste segregated or degraded material .
provide separate storage and bin feeder for mineral filler if the contract requires mineral filler .
stockpile aggregates and rap that contain gravitational water and allow them to drain before mixing .
after introducing the required amounts of aggregate rap if used and asphalt binder into the mixer mix them until the aggregate particles are completely and uniformly coated with asphalt binder .
if the project manager determines that uncoated aggregate exists take corrective action .
ensure that the moisture content of the wma at discharge from the mixer does not exceed num .
num mix temperature requirements section num warm mix asphalt page num do not allow the temperature of the wma discharged from the mixer into the transport vehicle to be greater than num degrees f or less than num degrees f unless written recommendations by the asphalt cement supplier the warm mix additive supplier and the mix design laboratory are provided to the project manager .
wma delivered to the project with mix temperatures outside the acceptable range shall at the sole discretion of the project manager be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
num addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material add the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material to the aggregate in an enclosed pug mill immediately after leaving the cold feed and just before introduction into the drier drum or aggregate drier .
minimize the loss of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material while adding to the aggregate .
use an enclosed conveyor belt to prevent blowing or loss of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material if necessary .
during production if necessary to counteract loss increase the percentage of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
equip the out feed of the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material silo with a vane feeder and install a flow sensor on the discharge from the vane feeder .
ensure that the sensor activates audible and visual signals at the control panel upon interruption of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material flow .
equip the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material silo with an approved means of metering the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material to the mix at typical discharge rates with an accuracy of num by weight .
approved means of metering hydrated lime or anhydrite based material include load cell weighing devices placed beneath each leg of the silo or a weigh belt feeder between the silo discharge and the pug mill .
obtain project managers approval for other means of metering the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material before use .
do not use external strain gauges affixed to the legs of the silo .
if the contractor uses load cell weighing devices for hydrated lime or anhydrite based material metering use a foundation system to support the silo in accordance with the silo manufacturers recommendations .
control the hydrated lime or anhydrite based material content such that at a minimum the amount added is equal to the target value on the job mix formula .
when mixing the aggregate and hydrated lime or anhydrite based material maintain the moisture content of the combined aggregate at the recommended saturated surface dry moisture content plus an additional num num by weight .
the project manager may increase the moisture content of the coarse and fine aggregates to properly coat the aggregates with hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and to eliminate dust pollution .
provide a method to measure the amount of moisture added to the hydrated lime or anhydrite based materialaggregate mix .
on a daily basis record the average amount of added moisture to verify specification compliance .
supply the recorded moisture information to the project manager upon request .
num equipment use equipment and wma technologies capable of producing an asphalt mixture that meets specification requirements and is workable at the minimum placement and compaction temperatures desired regardless of storage or haul distance considerations .
num mixing plants modify the asphalt mixing plant as required by the manufacturer to introduce the wma technology .
num plant scales ensure that the scales are accurate to num of the maximum allowable load in accordance with the federal motor carrier safety administration fmcsa publication .
a section num warm mix asphalt page num licensed scale serviceman must certify the scales .
submit a copy of the certification to the project manager .
num equipment for preparation of asphalt materials provide storage tanks for asphalt binder capable of heating and holding the asphalt at the required temperatures and measuring the temperature of the asphalt in the tank .
use approved heating methods that do not allow flames in contact with the tank .
design the circulating system for the asphalt binder to ensure proper and continuous circulation during the operating period .
allow measuring and sampling of asphalt binder from the delivery truck upon arrival .
num feeder for drier equip the plant with an accurate feeding mechanism to deliver the aggregate into the drier and maintain uniform production and temperature .
num drier equip the plant with a system to continuously agitate the aggregate during the heating and drying process .
use a drier that can dry and heat the aggregate and prevent fuel oil or carbon from coating the aggregate .
take corrective action if the aggregate becomes coated with burner fuel .
num bins equip the plant with storage bins large enough to supply the mixer when it is operating at full capacity .
arrange the bins to ensure separate and adequate storage of the appropriate fractions of the mineral aggregates .
when necessary use separating boards .
provide separate dry storage for hydrated lime or anhydrite based material .
ensure that the gates on the bins do not leak .
equip the bins with warning devices that notify the control panel when the bins are low .
num asphalt binder control unit equip the plant with the following num .
a scale or meter to obtain the proper amount of asphalt binder in the mix within the allowable tolerances and num .
a meter for checking the quantity or rate of flow of asphalt binder put in the mixer .
num thermometers equip the asphalt feed line near the charging valve at the mixer unit with an approved recording thermometer with a range of from num f to num f. equip the discharge chute of the drier with an approved recording thermometer to automatically register the temperature of the heated aggregates or mix as necessary .
provide the project manager with a record of discharge temperatures at the end of each weeks production and when requested by the project manager during the course of production .
num truck scales weigh the wma on approved scales provided by the contractor or public scales in accordance with section num measurement of quantity .
num requirements for batching plants num weigh box or hopper provide a batching plant that can accurately weigh aggregate in a weigh box or hopper suspended on scales .
use a weigh box or hopper that can hold a full batch .
ensure that the section num warm mix asphalt page num gate of the weigh box or hopper does not allow material to leak into the mixer while being weighed .
test the scales in accordance with section num measurement of quantity .
num mixer provide a batch mixer with a capacity of at least num lb capable of producing a uniform mixture within specified tolerances .
num control of mixing time equip the mixer with an accurate timing device that signals the end of the mixing time .
num drum mix plants equip the drum mix plant with the following auxiliary equipment and capabilities num .
separate cold feed controls for each material .
num .
an automatic interlocking device for cold feed asphalt and additive .
num .
a means for determining moisture content of aggregate so the dry weight of cold feed can be determined for proper setting of asphalt and additive flow .
determine the moisture content of the aggregate at least twice daily and adjust the moisture correction equipment accordingly .
num .
a means for sampling individual cold feeds and provisions for sequential sampling of aggregate rap asphalt binder and additives while under full production .
num .
measure the temperature of the mix at the discharge and the automatic burner controls .
num .
a surge storage system having a minimum capacity of num ton designed and equipped to prevent segregation .
equip the surge storage system bins with mechanical or electrical devices that provide an audible or visual warning when the bins are less than num full .
num .
equip the bin containing fine aggregate and filler if required with a device that prevents material hangup during plant operation .
num .
a minimum of one num cold feed bin for each aggregate fraction in the mix .
num .
equip the cold feed with mechanical or electrical devices that indicate when the bins are empty or when the cold feed belt is not carrying the proper amount of material .
the device shall automatically lock the cold feed belt and provide an audible or visual warning .
num .
a separate cold feed for rap material .
introduce rap so that it does not come into direct contact with the burner flame .
num .
equip the feeding mechanism with an individual belt feeder with a variable speed feeder drive controlled by electronically operated actuators .
couple the asphalt feed control with the totalaggregateweight measurement device to automatically vary the asphalt feed rate to maintain the required proportion .
num haul equipment haul asphalt mixtures with trucks that have tight clean smooth metal beds and a thin coat a minimal amount of a departmentapproved release agent to prevent the mixture from adhering to the bed .
do not use release agents derived from petroleum derivatives including but not limited to diesel fuel that contaminate or alter the characteristics of the mix .
be prepared to cover and insulate hauling beds .
equip each truck with a waterproof and windproof cover of suitable material and sufficient size to protect the mix from the weather .
securely fasten covers when necessary to maintain temperature .
ensure that covers do not allow water to enter the bed paver or mix material transfer device during mix unlading .
use insulated truck beds when necessary to maintain temperature .
num pavers section num warm mix asphalt page num use selfcontained selfpropelled pavers with activated screeds or strikeoff assemblies heated if necessary and capable of spreading and finishing courses of wma in accordance with the plans .
num compaction equipment provide a sufficient number weight and type of rollers to obtain the required compaction and specified pavement density while the wma is in a workable condition .
all rollers must be capable of reversing direction without shoving or tearing the mixture .
num placement operations for cold milled surfaces prepare the surface in accordance with section num cold milling .
clean the existing surfaces and apply a tack coat in accordance with section num tack coat .
when placing wma on base course proof roll the base course with a num ton roller or other approved equipment and correct any soft areas as directed by the project manager .
correct deficient areas at the contractors expense .
place the wma on the approved surface then spread and strike off to the specified grade and elevation .
spread and compact the wma in layers in accordance with the plans .
for new construction and reconstruction prepare the subgrade or base course as follows num clean of loose or deleterious materials num free of frozen material and num meet the moisture and density requirements .
num place prime coat as required in the plans unless otherwise approved by the project manager in accordance with section num prime coat .
unless otherwise specified in the plans for construction on nmdot projects using state approved wma designs utilizing greater than num rap the use of a materials transfer vehicle is required .
materials transfer vehicle mtv use a mtv with storage and remixing capabilities on all mainline construction when placing wma state approved designs .
the mtv will independently remix and deliver mixture from the hauling equipment to the paving equipment .
furnish an mtv with the following capabilities num .
an unloading system to receive mixtures from the hauling equipment .
num .
a minimum storage capacity of num tons with a remixing system in the mtv storage bin .
num .
a discharge conveyor to deliver the mixture to the paver hopper .
num .
the mtv system can not exceed maximum legal loading on structures .
pickup machines hopper inserts and material transfer devices are not considered mtvs .
in the event the mtv malfunctions during paving operations the contractor can finish the day without the mtv .
do not resume further mainline mix placement until the mtv is operational .
consistently overloading the wma mix into the paving machine is not acceptable .
coordinate the speed of the paving machine with the production of the plant and keep enough haul equipment available to achieve continuous operation .
use the control system on the paving machine to control the grade and the transverse slope by either of the following methods section num warm mix asphalt page num num .
one end directly and the other indirectly through controlling the transverse slope or num .
each end independently including screed attachments .
suspend operations if the control system does not achieve the typical section in accordance with the plans .
place spread and finish the courses of wma according to the following num .
without segregation or tearing num .
true to the line grade and crown in accordance with the plans and num .
with selfpropelled pavers except as otherwise directed .
on areas where irregularities or unavoidable obstacles make the use of mechanical spreading and finishing equipment impracticable dump spread and level the wma by other methods to achieve the required compacted thickness .
num weather limitations do not place wma on wet or frozen surfaces or if weather conditions prevent proper handling finishing and compacting .
place wma when the chill factor is at least num f and rising .
if the air temperature is num f or warmer do not consider the chill factor .
num compaction compact the wma thoroughly and uniformly immediately after placement .
operate rollers at speeds slow enough to minimize displacement of the wma including the lines and grades of the asphalt edges .
remove marks from pneumatic rollers and immediately correct any displacement .
the department will not allow the use of equipment that crushes the aggregate excessively .
prevent the wma from sticking to the roller wheels by keeping the wheels moistened with water water mixed with very small quantities of detergent or other approved material .
do not use diesel fuel or other petroleum diluents .
at locations inaccessible to the rollers compact the wma with hot hand tampers smoothing irons or mechanical tampers .
the contractor may use a trench roller or cleated compression strips under the roller to transmit compression to depressed areas .
remove areas that become loose broken mixed with dirt segregated or defective replace with fresh wma and compact to match the surrounding area at no additional cost to the department .
immediately correct areas that have excessive or deficient asphalt binder .
num not used num joints place the wma as continuously as possible .
do not pass rollers over the unprotected end of a freshly laid mixture .
when placing opengraded friction course over wma stagger longitudinal joints at least six num inches relative to the longitudinal joints of the underlying course .
unless otherwise specified taper transverse and longitudinal joints as follows num .
at least a three num ft taper for transverse joints with a taper slope no steeper than num .
num .
at least a one num ft taper or a notched taper for longitudinal joints with a taper slope no steeper than num or a notched taper with a one num inch vertical edge at the top of the taper connected to a slope no steeper than num .
num .
cut and square off transverse tapers before commencing new work .
num .
clean and tack coat longitudinal joints from previous operations .
num .
avoid placing longitudinal joints in the wheel paths unless approved by the project manager .
section num warm mix asphalt page num completely bond joints .
smooth the surface of each course at the joints .
the department will not allow deviations greater than num inch when tested with a ten num ft straightedge in any direction .
when paving under traffic schedule the daily surfacing operations so that tapered longitudinal joints are not exposed for longer than seven num days .
num surface tolerances smooth the surface of each completed course and prevent deviations larger than num inch using a ten num ft straightedge in any direction .
immediately correct deviations exceeding this tolerance .
provide a final wma surfacing course that conforms to section num pavement smoothness measurement .
num plan surfacing depths provide pavement at the depth specified in the contract .
monitor depths by calculating continuous production yields using the formula found in the mtnum as maintained by the state construction bureau .
calculate the required yield and the corresponding yields for num inch increase upper limit and decrease lower limit .
the project manager may adjust the required yield to fit field conditions .
if adjusted the new target yield will be communicated to the contractor in writing .
control production to keep yield within the upper and lower limits .
correct deficiencies at no cost to the department .
correct deficient depths during placement .
address plan surfacing depths in the quality control plan .
num test strip shakedown period construct a maximum num ton test strip for each wma mix design with a minimum of three num contractor and three num agency samples to evaluate the jmf process control and placement operations .
construct test strip on shoulder low volume segments of the pavement or area approved by the project manager .
correct and modify noncomplying placement operations and produce necessary process control adjustments .
develop a revised jmf if necessary based on the results of the test strip .
production and placement operations prior to approval of the revised jmf and placement operations are at the contractors risk .
for purposes of payment the test strip will be evaluated in conformance with section num minor paving .
if accepted the test strip will have a pay factor of num .
if rejected said material shall be handled in accordance with section num adherence to specifications and rejection of nonspecification material .
remove unaccepted test strip material placed within the roadway prism at no cost to the department .
if the contractor disagrees with removing and replacing unacceptable material placed in test strips outside the roadway prism the assistant district engineer for construction based on engineering judgment will decide if the material can remain in place with a maximum pay factor of num or shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
if the test strip is rejected construct a subsequent test strip .
do not proceed to full production until an accepted test strip is produced .
after the test strip is placed continue to evaluate the mix properties and the jmf during the placement of the first two num sublots in the first lot .
changes may be made to either the jmf or the mix proportions andor properties with the concurrence of the assistant district engineer for construction .
for changes made prior to the completion of the first two num sublots the adjustments will be applied to the entire lot for purposes of payment .
the project manager may waive test strip requirements for the project if requested by the contractor based on prior experience with the jmf .
for qla projects the shakedown period is defined as the first two num sublots produced in the first lot .
for nonqla projects the shakedown period is defined as the test strip .
as the test strip is placed evaluate the mix properties and the jmf .
changes may be made to either the jmf or the mix proportions andor properties with the concurrence of the project manager assistant district engineer for construction and the state asphalt engineer .
num sampling and testing section num warm mix asphalt page num sample and test the aggregate production and wma mixture in accordance with section num quality control quality assurance qcqa and the departments minimum testing requirements .
department personnel may test locations other than the random locations generated for statistical analysis .
these tests will not be used for pay factor determination but may be used to determine acceptance or rejection of localized material .
num contractor quality control administer a quality control plan referred to hereafter as the plan to provide a product in accordance with the contract .
ensure the plan conforms to section num contractor quality control .
submit the plan a minimum of two num weeks prior to commencement of crushing operations and at a minimum comply with contractor quality control plan guidelines .
no wma operations are allowed until the quality control plan has been approved by the project manager and the district lab supervisor .
address changes in the job mix formula in conformance with section num job mix formula adjustments .
the plan shall do the following num .
address elements that affect the quality of the asphalt concrete including but not limited to the following num .
mix design num .
sampling and testing num .
aggregate production num .
gradation num .
minus num wash num .
plasticity index num .
sand equivalent num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
flat and elongated particles count and num .
fractured face count .
num .
rap if used num .
quality of components num .
stockpile management num .
proportioning num .
gradation num .
minus num wash num .
plasticity index num .
sand equivalent num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
flat and elongated particles count and num .
fractured face count .
num .
mixing including addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material andor asphalt additive if required num .
transporting num .
placing and finishing num .
joints num .
compaction num .
smoothness num .
plan surfacing depths num .
shakedown period section num warm mix asphalt page num num .
corrective action processes and num .
proposed lot size and sublot size in accordance with section num qla .
for the properties listed in num above specifically address the requirements of table num in the plan .
define planned corrective action if the requirements are not met .
num and num are for informational purposes during aggregate production .
num through num if three num consecutive tests fail address what will change in production .
failure to adjust will result in ceasing operations until a corrective action plan is approved by the project manager .
for the properties listed in num above specifically address the requirements of table num in the plan .
define planned corrective action if the requirements are not met .
num and num are to be evaluated against the job mix formula .
for properties listed in num throughnum if any three num consecutive tests fail the contractor is to cease operations until a corrective plan is approved by the project manager and implemented .
for properties listed in num through num any test failing by more than num percentage points or if three num consecutive tests fail by an average of num to num percentage points cease operations until a corrective plan is approved by the project manager and implemented .
num .
employ sampling and testing personnel who are either under the direct supervision of a ttcp certified technician or who are themselves currently certified to perform the required quality control testing .
provide the project manager with a listing of all testing personnel that summarizes their ttcp certifications or if they are not ttcp certified to perform a particular test which ttcp certified technician is supervising their testing .
keep the project manager notified by providing an updated listing of any changes .
provide testing equipment that meets all applicable astm and aashto requirements to accomplish required sampling and testing .
establish a laboratory for the project separate and distinct from the departments laboratory and quality assurance facilities .
submit verification that all quality control and assurance testing equipment meets the applicable standards and has been calibrated per the requirements of aashto rnum .
remove any equipment that does not meet the applicable standards or calibration requirements .
on projects designated as qla projects sample and test wma in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
num .
the contractor is responsible for inspection performed at the crushing operations hot mix plant and at the contractors field laboratory using the laboratory test results and other quality control practices to ensure the quality of aggregate sources and other mix components .
adjust and control mix proportioning to meet the mix design .
be responsible for periodically inspecting all equipment used in proportioning and mixing to ensure its proper operating condition and to ensure that proportioning and mixing is in conformance with the mix design and other requirements .
num .
be responsible for inspection sampling and testing performed at the paving site ensuring that the delivered materials meet contract requirements and for periodically inspecting all equipment used in transporting placing finishing and compacting to ensure its proper operating condition .
ensure that placing finishing joint construction compaction and thickness when required are as specified .
num .
define and document the coordination of activities between the contractors management and all contractor testing personnel including the frequency of each type of test the criteria used by the contractors management and technicians to section num warm mix asphalt page num recognize deficiencies and reject or correct unacceptable materials and a description of proposed corrective actions .
num .
in the plan describe in detail the proposed process control sampling and testing programs .
include the method by which random sampling locations are to be determined .
develop sample locations for process control tests so that the center of the sample is at least num inches from a joint or edge of the pavement layer .
if the wma additive supplier indicates that the additive makes mix properties time dependent the plan must include how all of the required testing will be completed in the designated time frame .
this plan will include how the contractor will comply with the required testing within the supplier specified time frames .
it will also include how the department will be supported if necessary to complete their tests within the time frame required if the testing can not be performed at established department facilities .
this plan must be reviewed and approved by the departments project manager and by the district laboratory supervisor prior to the placement of any wma on the project .
if the job mix formula changes it shall be addressed in conformance with section num job mix formula adjustments .
num contractor quality control of aggregate obtain samples in accordance with section num sampling .
take representative samples as required either at the stockpile or after the aggregate material is combined but before the addition of hydrated lime or anhydrite based material and mixing with asphalt binder .
test these samples for conformance with the approved job mix formula and excluding rap num .
gradation num .
minus num wash num .
plasticity index num .
sand equivalent num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
flat and elongated particles count and num .
fractured face count .
the project manager may sample and test the aggregate at any time during production or stockpiling or may request to split samples with the contractor .
if testing indicates corrections are necessary make corrections in conformance with the plan .
the department will base evaluation of rap aggregate in accordance with section num reclaimed asphalt pavement .
num contractor quality control for compaction monitor the compaction process by determining the density of the wma with a portable densometer in accordance with the approved quality control plan .
establish calibration of the portable densometer from cut pavement samples .
determine the density readings of the cut pavement samples in accordance with aashto t num weight volume method and determine the density readings of the pavement with the portable densometer .
correlate these test results .
conduct quality control testing in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa and provide test results to the project manager .
perform quality control density testing while the asphalt mixture is hot enough to permit further compaction .
do not roll for compaction when it becomes ineffective or damages the wma .
num adherence to specifications and rejection of nonspecification material produce material in compliance with all specification requirements .
evaluate test results for specification compliance and treatment of material that does not meet specifications in accordance with section num in its entirety .
all material that is rejected shall at the sole discretion of the department be removed and replaced with specification material at the contractors expense .
section num warm mix asphalt page num num department quality assurance num acceptance the department will evaluate materials for acceptance in accordance with this section .
sample and test the mixture and pavement on a statistically random basis in accordance with table num minimum acceptance guidelines .
the project manager may reject material that appears to be defective based on visual inspection .
table num acceptance testing tolerances a characteristic specification limit percentage points from tv air voids num pavement density c num hydrated lime or anhydrite based material f minimum of jmf target value voids in the mineral aggregate vma ad num asphalt content ab num a all gradation asphalt content vma and vfa values shall be determined using the aashto t num testing results .
b wma will not be rejected based on asphalt content determined by aashto t num c density payment will be adjusted in accordance with section num d if gmm fluctuates more than num on a consistent basis it is recommended that the specific gravity of the aggregates be checked in order to verify vma .
e if hydrated lime or anhydrite based material is below design tv cease hot mix production investigate and correct .
num nonqla the department will evaluate qa test results from projects with bid quantities less than num tons for specification compliance in accordance with the following procedures if the mean of the test results for each property is within the acceptance tolerances as listed in table num acceptance testing tolerances the material will be accepted at full contract price except that roadway density will be adjusted in price in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
if the mean of the test results for any of the listed properties is outside of the tolerances as listed in table num acceptance testing tolerances then the department will determine acceptance of the material in accordance with num acceptance sampling and testing and section num quality level analysis .
a composite pay factor of more than num is not allowed for projects with bid quantities less than num tons .
remove and replace rejected material with specification material at no additional cost to the department .
num acceptance of pavement density the target density for acceptance of wma will be num of the theoretical maximum density as determined from aashto t num .
for determination of maximum specific gravity obtain and test a minimum of two num samples and ensure the department obtains and tests a minimum of one num sample for each day that the wma is placed .
each individual density test value obtained must be from num to num of the theoretical maximum density .
to be prepared for dispute resolution the contractor is to provide one num additional core for each core tested by the department for acceptance of density .
the additional core is to be from the same lot as the initial core and shall be generated from the random sample plan .
if the contractor believes the departments cut pavement samples have been damaged they section num warm mix asphalt page num may invoke section num dispute resolution .
the referee lab results will replace the initial core in determining pay factor .
the assistant district engineer for construction will make the final decision on accepting or rejecting material based on the referee laboratorys results by num .
accepting the section or sublot if the density test falls between num num num .
determining that a portion based on visual determination or all of the material in that section or sublot shall be removed or replaced at no additional cost to the department num .
determining that a portion based on visual determination of the material in that section or sublot will be paid for at a num pay factor .
for purposes of acceptance and pay factor determination determine the density from cut pavement sections cores with numinch diameters extending through the full thickness of the wma .
determine the pay factor in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
use a minimum of ten num cores to determine the pay factor unless otherwise directed by the assistant district engineer for construction .
determine the theoretical maximum density using an average of the maximum specific gravity values obtained by the department and the contractor the day the cores material was placed .
if a composite pay factor of more than num is calculated the composite pay factor will be a num for the purposes of payment .
for projects consisting of single lift overlays or mill and inlay with a single lift of two and a half inches or less the project manager may grant an exception to the mean density target requirement of at least num of the theoretical maximum density if the contractor can demonstrate that a minimum of num can not be reasonably obtained because of the existing conditions of the pavement structure or subgrade materials .
the contractor demonstrates this by providing density results obtained during paving operations witnessed by a state inspector at the location in question .
if the project manager grants this exemption construct a roadway test strip and develop a wma compaction process to get the highest possible density based on an approved rollers density gain per pass in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
the project manager will approve the process establish a new target value for density and establish a new acceptance lot only for the portion of the project addressed herein except for the roadway test strip before paving begins or continues .
density shall not fall below num .
if a lot does not meet either of the revised density requirements the project manager will with the concurrence of the assistant district engineer for construction do the following num .
accept and pay for the lot of wma at num of the bid item unit price or num .
reject the inplace material and require the contractor to remove and replace .
num qla on projects with bid quantities of num tons or more the department will determine acceptance of the materials in accordance with section num quality level analysis using the acceptance limits in table num acceptance testing tolerances .
acceptance lots shall be between num tons and num tons as determined at the prepaving conference .
table num indicates properties that will be tracked for purposes of quality assurance .
for all qla projects if a composite pay factor of more than num is calculated the composite pay factor will be a num for the purposes of payment .
num acceptance of pavement density the target density for acceptance of wma will be num of the theoretical maximum density as determined from aashto t num .
for determination of maximum specific gravity obtain and test a minimum of two num samples and ensure the department obtains and tests a minimum of one num sample for each day that the wma is placed in accordance with the random sampling plan .
each individual density test value obtained must be from num to num of the theoretical maximum density .
for purposes of acceptance and pay factor determination determine the density from cut pavement sections cores with numinch diameters extending through the full thickness of the section num warm mix asphalt page num wma .
determine the pay factor in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
use a minimum of ten num cores to determine the pay factor unless otherwise directed by the assistant district engineer for construction .
to be prepared for dispute resolution the contractor is to provide one num additional core for each core tested by the department for acceptance of density .
the additional core is to be from the same lot as the initial core and shall be generated from the random sample plan .
if the contractor or department believes the departments cut pavement samples have been damaged they may invoke section num dispute resolution .
the referee lab results will replace the initial core in determining pay factor .
determine the theoretical maximum density using an average of the maximum specific gravity values obtained by the department and the contractor the day the cores material was placed .
if a composite pay factor of more than num is calculated the composite pay factor will be a num for the purposes of payment .
for projects consisting of single lift overlays or mill and inlay with a single lift of two and a half inches or less the project manager may grant an exception to the mean density target requirement of at least num of the theoretical maximum density if the contractor can demonstrate that a minimum of num can not be reasonably obtained because of the existing conditions of the pavement structure or subgrade materials .
the contractor demonstrates this by providing nondestructive density results obtained during paving operations witnessed by a state inspector at the location in question .
if the project manager grants this exemption construct a roadway test strip and develop a wma compaction process to get the highest possible density based on an approved rollers density gain per pass in accordance with section num compaction equipment .
the project manager will approve the process establish a new target value for density and establish a new acceptance lot only for the portion of the project addressed herein except for the roadway test strip before paving begins or continues .
density shall not fall below num .
if a lot does not meet either of the revised density requirements the project manager will with the concurrence of the assistant district engineer for construction do the following num .
accept and pay for the lot of wma at num of the bid item unit price or num .
reject the inplace material and require the contractor to remove and replace at no cost to the department .
num independent assurance testing the department will perform independent assurance sampling and testing in accordance with section num independent assurance testing .
num dispute resolution for any test incorporated into the pay factor if a dispute exists between the department and the contractor about the validity of the test result either party may invoke a referee lab .
the state asphalt engineer will maintain a list of labs that are willing and capable of performing referee testing .
all referee labs shall be aashto materials reference laboratory amrl certified for the tests to be performed .
neither the departments project staff nor the contractor will know who is performing the referee testing .
the state asphalt engineer will select a laboratory without disclosing the name of the lab to department project personnel or contractor personnel from the following not in priority order num .
a district laboratory not from the district in which the project resides or num .
a private laboratory currently listed on the state materials bureaus list of approved private labs not involved in the subject project in any manner such as mix design submittal preliminary testing for design etc .
only laboratories that are in the routine business of providing testing and designs will be considered .
contractor owned laboratories will not be allowed .
when a referee lab is used the referee labs test results will be used in determining the pay factor .
the referee lab must be invoked in writing within ten num calendar days of receiving the test results from the other party .
if not invoked within ten num calendar days the test results are deemed accepted .
the results will be used to determine pay factors .
the departments prior test results or the contractors prior test results for the test in question will section num warm mix asphalt page num be discarded .
if the composite pay factor decreases from applying the referee labs results the contractor shall pay for the testing performed by the referee lab .
if the composite pay factor increases from applying the referee labs results the department will pay for the testing performed by the referee lab .
if the composite pay factor remains unchanged the cost shall be split with each party responsible for num of the total cost .
for all testing incorporated into the pay factor each party shall generate an additional sample from the departments acceptance samples and the contractors quality control samples used in pay factor analysis .
failure to provide the referee samples prior to testing the initial sample will result in the project manager suspending the project at no cost to the department .
additional time will not be added to the contract for project suspension caused by failure to comply with dispute resolution process .
work shall not resume until the contractor provides the delayed samples and satisfies the project manager in writing that future samples will be provided in compliance with this requirement .
the extra samples is are to be retained by the department .
the department will retain the samples at the project location inside a locked cargo container provided by the contractor at no cost to the state .
the state will provide the lock for the cargo container .
once the pay factor is determined dispose of the unused samples at no cost to the department .
in no case will the unused samples be disposed of prior to the ten num calendar day period in which the dispute resolution process may be invoked .
.for pavement density the contractor shall provide an additional core only for each core provided to the department for acceptance .
the additional core will be stored and retained in the provided container .
should the contractor invoke the dispute resolution process for density the second core will be provided to the referee lab .
the density pay factor for the material in question will be based solely on the referee lab result not including department or contractor results .
failure to comply with the requirements contained herein will result in the pay factor being calculated in accordance with the applicable sections of num superpave qla and non qla and num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
no test results will be replaced by referee results .
num method of measurement if the department measures wma by the square yard the department will use the average width of the wma in place and the length from station to station along the centerline of the roadway when calculating quantities .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit wma complete ton or square yard wma ton or square yard the department will pay for accepted quantities at the bid item unit price adjusted in accordance with section num price adjustments .
providing and transporting all cores samples and storage containers shall be incidental to the pay items above .
num price adjustments num projects with bid quantities of num tons or greater the department will pay for accepted quantities of wma or wma complete at the bid item unit price adjusted in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
the wma will be evaluated on a lotbylot basis at a price determined by multiplying the bid item unit price by the weighting factor .
the department will use table num weighting factors to calculate each lots composite pay factor .
the pay factor for the entire project will be calculated by applying weighted averages based on tonnage contained within each lot to each lots composite pay factor .
if the composite pay factor for a lot is greater than num the pay factor will be set at num .
section num warm mix asphalt page num table num weighting factors characteristic f factor mat density num air voids num voids in the mineral aggregate vma num asphalt content num if the individual pay factor for asphalt content is less than num it will be set at num for the purpose of calculating payment .
num projects with bid quantities less than num tons the department will pay for accepted quantities of wma or wma complete at the bid item unit price if the mean of the test results for each property is within the testing tolerances as listed in table num acceptance testing tolerances .
if the mean of the test results for any of the listed properties is outside of the testing tolerances as listed in table num acceptance testing tolerances then the department will determine the price adjustment for the material in accordance with the departments price reduction procedures current at the time of the project letting .
in no case will the pay factor be greater thannum .
num price adjustment for pavement density bid quantities less than num tons the department will also adjust the bid item unit price for the wma or wma complete pay item based on the roadway density in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa specifically section num quality level analysis steps one num through nine num .
if the density pay factor for a lot is greater than num the composite pay factor will be set at num for purposes of payment .
the department will apply the price adjustments to the wma bid item unit prices for each lot .
section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num section num portland cement concrete pavement pccp qla num description this work consists of constructing portland cement concrete pavement pccp on a prepared subgrade base course or hmawma .
num materials portland cement airentraining admixtures chemical admixtures mineral pozzolans water and aggregate will meet the requirements of section num portland cement concrete .
num dowels and tie bars dowels and tie bars will meet the applicable requirements of section num steel reinforcement materials .
num joint sealing material joint sealing material will meet the requirements of section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints .
num curing compound use curing compound that complies with the requirements of aashto m num for class num type numd or type num pigmented curing compounds .
num sheet materials for curing and protecting concrete sheet materials for protecting concrete will meet the requirements of aashto m num .
the contractor shall only use the white reflective type .
num construction requirements num proportioning use a class fls concrete mix that has been reviewed and approved in accordance with section num by the state concrete engineer .
if the concrete is not slipformed an approved class aahpd concrete mix shall be used instead of class f. mix and place all concrete in accordance with section num construction requirements .
use a concrete mix that has been approved for use in the freezethaw zone as defined in section num freezethaw risk zones in which the project is located .
keep a copy of the approved mix design available on the jobsite when using the concrete mix .
num equipment num batching plant use batching plants and equipment that meet the requirements of section num batching plant .
num mixers use mixers that meet the requirements of section num mixing .
section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num num transporting use truck mixers truck agitators or nonagitating trucks that comply with section num transporting .
num slipform paver place the concrete with an approved slipform paver designed to spread consolidate screed float and finish the concrete in one num complete pass to create a dense and homogeneous pavement .
minimize the use of hand finishing .
the vibrators of the slipform paver must be located behind the auger .
do not use pavers with vibrators in front of the auger .
equip slipform pavers with internal vibrators that meet or exceed the following specifications at num cycles per minute cpm under noload conditions num .
amplitude peak to peak num inch and num .
centrifugal force num lb equip the slipform paver with an electronic monitoring device capable of the following num .
displaying the operating frequency of each internal vibrator num .
continuously recording at a minimum the following a .
time of day b .
station location c. paver track speed and d. operating frequency of each vibrator .
store all information captured by the electronic monitoring system throughout the project .
this information is to be used only for project information by the department and will be provided to the project manager at his request during the course of the project and at the completion of the project .
position the vibrators no further apart than the manufacturers recommendations for horizontal spacing of the vibrators but do not exceed num inches centertocenter .
ensure that the space from the outer edge of the pavement to the center of the outside vibrator does not exceed nine num inches or ½ the maximum recommended spacing whichever is less .
num concrete jointing equipment provide enough sawing equipment andor joint insertion equipment to complete the work within the allotted time .
the contractor may use a watercooled diamond edge saw blade an abrasive wheel an early entry dry cut type with a skid plate as defined by aci num or a control joint insertion system approved by the project manager and state materials bureau .
provide at least one num additional saw or insertion tool in good working order .
keep an ample supply of saw blades and skid plates if the early entry dry cut saws are used at the work site during sawing operations .
num curing compound application equipment apply curing compounds with equipment that uses a pressure tank or pump .
ensure that the equipment has a feed tank agitator that provides continuous agitation of the compound during spraying operations .
use a nozzle that contains enough air to thoroughly atomize the compound .
num operations for slipform paving construct the subgrade of sufficient width to accommodate the slip form equipment .
section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num provide enough lateral support to construct the section in accordance with the contract .
maintain the smoothness and compaction of the base course in the specified condition until the concrete placement is completed .
moisten untreated aggregate base layer if used before paving .
num handling measuring batching and mixing materials handle measure batch and mix the materials in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
the maximum mixing time for either truck mixers or nonagitating mixers is specified in section num mixing time .
num placing spreading and consolidating concrete place concrete with the specified thickness along the full width of the lane or area being paved .
prevent segregation and minimize redistribution .
place the concrete continuously between transverse joints without using intermediate bulkheads .
when using dowel baskets do not enddump the concrete directly onto the dowel baskets .
the contractor may use enddumps to transfer the concrete to the equipment designed to place it completely across the grade .
do not windrow the concrete .
when placing concrete adjacent to a newly constructed pccp lane do not operate equipment or traffic on the lane until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of at least num psi as determined by the maturity method as described in section num .
when working on existing pavement use equipment with protective pads on crawler tracks or rubbertire wheels .
set the crawler tracks or rubbertire wheels far enough from the pavement edge to prevent damage to the pavement .
num slipform paving use a slipform paver that complies with section num to distribute the concrete uniformly .
vibrate the full width and depth of the concrete to produce maximum consolidation without segregation .
ensure that the vibration produces uniform concrete that will stand normal to the surface with sharp welldefined edges .
coordinate concrete mixing delivering and spreading operations in order to provide uniform progress and to eliminate stopping and starting the paver .
if it is necessary to stop the paver also stop the vibratory and tamping elements immediately .
do not apply external tractive force to the machine the machine must be propelled only by its own mechanisms .
num other paving for paving operations that are not slip formed the contractor will place class aahpd concrete pavement between stationary side forms .
consolidate the concrete by internal vibration and finish it to the required surface smoothness using the handfloat method or other suitable means .
cure the concrete with approved methods .
leave wood or metal forms in place at least num hours after placing the concrete .
if necessary take additional efforts to prevent thermal cracking of the concrete .
clean and oil the forms each time they are used .
apply a curing compound to the concrete surfaces exposed by removal of the forms immediately after removing the forms .
check the forms alignment and grade elevations and make the necessary corrections before placing the concrete .
if a form is disturbed or if the base course under a form becomes unstable reset and recheck the form as directed by the project manager .
section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num num temperature and weather limitations temperature and weather limitations are defined in section num temperature and weather limitations .
keep the concrete temperature between num f to num f at the time of placement .
in addition for cold weather placement refer to section num cold weather concrete .
num rate of evaporation limitations the contractor shall continuously monitor the evaporation potential at a height not to exceed num feet above the surface of the concrete as determined from figure num surface evaporation from concrete at the actual placement location .
computerized equipment furnished by the contractor is set to automatically take the required readings shall be used for this purpose .
readings shall be taken at least once every num minutes beginning at least num minutes before the placement begins and continuing until the final application of the curing compound has been completed .
all readings shall be graphically plotted on a continuous time scale .
do not place or continue to place pccp if the average evaporation potential over any num minute period of time is greater than num lb per square foot per hour .
if the evaporation exceeds the num lb per square foot per hour one num or more of the following actions shall be implemented to reduce the rate of evaporation as approved by the project manager num .
use an evaporation retarder if used this can not be used as a finishing aide num .
erect windbreaks to reduce the wind velocity over the concrete surface .
num .
place concrete during nighttime or early morning hours .
num .
lower the fresh concrete temperature during hot weather .
this can be accomplished by using cool aggregate and chilled water by adding ice as part of the mixing water or by adding liquid nitrogen to the concrete mix after all mix ingredients have been placed into the ready mix truck .
num .
increase the relative humidity at the site with a fog spray maintained over the entire concrete surface until the final finish has been achieved and the curing system has been applied .
num change in atmospheric conditions during marginal weather placement of any pccp by the contractor is at his own risk .
repair or replace concrete that is determined to be damaged due to weather conditions by the assistant district engineer construction at no additional cost to the department .
num joints submit the proposed joint layout plan in .pdf format to the project manager state pavement engineer and the state materials bureau for review and approval at least four num weeks before starting concrete slab construction .
the proposed joint layout plan shall have the lane markings clearly depicted .
attempts shall be made in the submitted jointing plan for mainline paving not to place longitudinal joints in the wheel path .
after receiving the recommendations andor responses from the state pavement engineer and from the state materials bureau the project manager will either approve or reject the submittal within num working days from the date of submittal .
construct joints at the locations intervals and dimensions shown in the approved joint layout plan and seal them in accordance with section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints .
ensure no reentrant corners .
for typical slabs the longitudinal joint spacing shall not exceed num feet and the transverse joint spacing shall not exceed num feet .
the maximum slab lengthtowidth ratio shall not be greater than num for the primary traveled lanes and longitudinal joints shall be placed within the lane stripe or as approved by the project manager and nmdot pavement engineer .
avoid tapered joints if possible .
if a tapered joint is formed place a control joint at section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num num .
onehalf the distance between the end of the taper and the opposite end if the base leg is less than or equal to ten num ft and longer than five num ft or num .
third points along the base leg if the base leg is longer than ten num ft. num .
no slabs will have angles less than num degrees .
num .
joints shall be doglegged through curve radius points .
dog leg should be at least num inches in length to the radius point .
num .
construct joint faces perpendicular to the pccp surface .
install dowels at any joints added to control cracking in exactly the same way as the standard joints .
construct transverse and longitudinal contraction joints by inserting control joints while the concrete is still plastic or by sawing the freshly hardened concrete as soon as possible after placing it .
make the initial sawcut at least one third the pavement depth .
do not allow the saw to cut so deep that any reinforcement is damaged .
begin sawing of the joints as soon as possible after the concrete has hardened enough to permit a person to stand on the surface without leaving visible tracks or indentations .
all sawcutting must be completed no later than four num hours after the concrete has hardened enough that a person can stand on the surface without leaving visible tracks or indentations .
in all cases regardless of setting characteristics all sawcutting must be completed before the concrete is seven num hours old .
make transverse contraction and longitudinal joints in twophases .
make the initial saw cut or inserted joint wide enough and deep enough to ensure that a sufficiently weakened crosssection exists but not less than num the thickness of the concrete .
make the second sealant reservoirshaping saw cut in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
do not damage the steel reinforcement with any saw cut .
all pccp panels containing uncontrolled cracks shall be removed and replaced at no cost or additional time to the department .
the project shall not be granted final acceptance until all panels containing uncontrolled cracks have been removed and replaced .
change saw blades and the skid plates when using the early entry dry cut method as often as required to control and minimize spalling .
maintain a sufficient supply of replacement saw blades and skid plates at the project site to insure that the sawing operations will proceed without interruption until completed .
saw joints sequentially .
however the contractor may saw control transverse joints at intervals shown in the contract or at intervals that will most effectively minimize the possibility of uncontrolled cracking .
if necessary perform the sawing operations day and night regardless of weather conditions .
do not saw a joint if a crack occurs at or near the joint location before sawing .
immediately discontinue sawing of a joint when a crack develops ahead of the saw .
num longitudinal joints place tie bars perpendicular to the longitudinal joints using approved equipment or secure the joints with chairs or baskets .
do not place tie bars within num inches of transverse joints .
only paint or coat tie bars if it is necessary to repair the corrosionresistant coating .
the combined width of all concrete slabs tied together shall be not more than num feet .
should the tie bars be found to be closer than one num inch to the bottom of the sawed joint or closer than two num inches to the bottom of the slab or if the spacing between tie bars is found to be greater than num inches the contractor shall cease paving operations until it can be successfully demonstrated that the required tolerances will be met .
the control joint shall section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num then be made by sawing in hardened concrete in accordance with the plan details and with section num .
use a twopart threaded tie bar and splice coupler system or bend the tie bars unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
only bend tie bars made of grade num steel .
bend tie bars at right angles against the form of the first lane constructed and then straighten them into final position before placing the concrete of the adjacent lane .
if construction of pccp abuts existing pavement drill the holes at middepth of the thinner slab .
drill the face of the existing pccp to accept half of the tie bar length .
ensure that the drill holes are a diameter that provides a close fit for the tie bars to be epoxied into the drill holes .
construct joints with tie bars as shown on the plans .
num transverse joints construct transverse contraction joints with load transfer devices dowels .
hold dowels in position parallel to the surface and centerline of the slab with chairs or other approved supports as approved by the project manager .
submit shop drawings of the welded dowel assemblies to the project manager for approval by state pavement engineer .
do not place concrete until the department approves the welded dowel assemblies .
dowel bars shall be installed within the tolerances and of the size grade and spacing specified .
horizontal support wires or shipping braces shall be nondeformed bars or wires with a diameter less than or equal to num inches gauge num wire .
the number of horizontal support wires or shipping braces shall be limited to a maximum of five num per assembly .
the center of the dowel assembly or insertion location shall be marked on both sides of the pavement slab for reference in sawing the joint .
dowel bars shall be furnished in a rigid welded assembly or when the contractor demonstrates that the placement can be made within required tolerances placed by a dowel insertion machine .
assembly should be securely fastened to the basesubbase and constructed to firmly hold all the centerline of all dowel bars at tnum depth with a minimum of three num inches cover parallel to each other and to the pavement grade and alignment .
see detail indicated in the contract plans or standard plan serials for the applicable section .
dowel placement tolerances are horizontal translation two num inches horizontal skew num inch vertical translation num inch vertical skew num inch longitudinal side shifttranslation one num inch the contractor is responsible for ensuring that the dowels remain properly aligned and in the proper locations before and during the placing procedure .
do not cut the tie wires holding the baskets together before placing the concrete .
thoroughly and uniformly coat each dowel and each tie wire along its full length with an approved form release agent not more than twelve num hours before concrete placement .
do not use grease to lubricate the dowels .
if the concrete placement is postponed or delayed the dowels will be recoated .
num transverse construction joints make construction joints with approved corrosion resistant dowels .
use a dowel size and spacing that is adequate for the joint and is approved by the project manager .
if construction of pccp abuts existing pavement drill the holes at middepth of the thinner slab .
drill the face of the existing pccp to accept half of the dowel length .
do not construct a transverse construction joint within five num foot of a control joint or weakened plane .
if concrete placement stops the final slab must measure at least five section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num num foot .
if the final slab is less than five num foot remove the excess concrete to the preceding joint as directed by the project manager .
unanticipated construction joints need to be tied .
the contractor is responsible for preventing uncontrolled cracking andor loss of pavement durability by whatever means necessary including but not limited to placing construction joints andor contraction joints wherever necessary .
num final location of dowels and tie bars within num hours of concrete placement confirm that the final location of the transverse dowel bars and the longitudinal tie bars comply with the specified location and placement tolerances for every transverse joint and longitudinal joint in the first num linear feet of paving or as otherwise specified .
equipment used to determine the final location shall be a magnetic tomography i.e .
mit scan num or magnetic field detection i.e .
hilti ferroscan fs num or ground penetrating radar equipped with dual sidebyside antennas or approved equal approved by the project manager and state concrete engineer .
if all of the dowels and tie bars are properly located and aligned on the first num linear feet then the frequency used to confirm the final location of the dowels can be reduced to one num randomly selected longitudinal and transverse joint for within each num linear feet for the duration of the project andor as directed by the project manager .
paving can only proceed when all surveyed steel and dowels are confirmed by the project manager to be in proper location for each num foot increment .
num .
if the dowel bars or the tie bars do not comply with the project requirements then all placement of concrete must stop until the contractor can provide a corrective action plan to ensure the dowel bars and the tie bars are located in accordance with project requirements .
at the discretion of the assistant district engineer for construction either remove and replace the dowels andor tie bars that do not comply with this specification or allow the noncomplying bars to remain at a reduced price determined by the assistant district engineer .
do not resume placement of concrete operations until approved by the assistant district engineer construction in concurrence with the state pavement engineer and state concrete engineer .
when the placement operations are resumed the final location of the dowel bars and tie bars shall be confirmed in accordance with paragraph num above .
the contractor will be responsible for providing the appropriate equipment and qualified personnel to provide the specified test and report to the project manager .
this work will be incidental to concrete pavement .
num finishing after the concrete has been discharged from the truck no additional water will be added to the concrete .
provide a final surface finish that complies with the project requirements for mri measured in accordance with section num pavement smoothness measurement .
correct pavement edge slumping exclusive of specified edging in excess of ¼ inch before the concrete hardens .
if edge slump exceeds ¼ inch within num feet or less of hardened concrete replace the entire panel between the transverse and longitudinal joints .
before the concretes initial set work the edges and joints with the appropriate tools to produce a welldefined and continuous radius with a smooth and dense mortar finish that is not segregated nor prematurely sealed .
minimize disturbance of the slab surface during finishing operations .
it is the contractors responsibility not to overwork the surface of the fresh concrete .
any plastic shrinkage cracks that occur shall be repaired or replaced at the discretion of the project manager at no cost in time or money to the department .
section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num thoroughly clean the sawed area and after completion of the sawing process .
seal the joint immediately if required by the project manager .
give the pavement a final wearing surface by tining or grooving as required in section num texturing of pccp .
num texturing of pccp when tining use a mechanical device such as a wire broom or comb having a single row of tines num inch num inch width .
the depth of groove in the plastic concrete shall be num inch num inch .
tining will be longitudinal unless otherwise specified in the contract .
longitudinal tining the tines shall be uniformly spaced at ¾ inch intervals .
use equipment with horizontal and vertical controls to ensure straight uniform depth grooves .
a two num inch to three num inch wide strip of pavement surface shall be protected from longitudinal surface grooving for the length of and centered over the longitudinal joint .
transverse tining the tines shall be randomly spaced from num inch to num num inch with no more than num of the spacing exceeding one num inch .
leave a four num inch to six num inch wide untined strip of pavement surface centered over each transverse joint .
perform the tining operation at such time and manner that the desired surface texture will be achieved while minimizing displacement of the larger aggregate particles and before the surface permanently sets .
where abutting pavement is to be placed the texturing shall extend as close to the edge as possible without damaging the edge .
if abutting pavement is not to be placed the six num inch area nearest the edge or one num foot from the face of the curb shall not be textured .
all uniform width slabs of num feet or narrower and less than num feet in length as well as mainline and ramp pavement during equipment breakdowns may be textured by hand methods .
when diamond grooving is specified or allowed in the contract plans allow concrete to cure but no sooner than num hours groove the surface of the concrete in accordance with section num diamond grinding and grooving of portland concrete cement pavement .
unless otherwise approved by the project manager make grooves as required by the project specifications .
stamp the concrete surface near the right hand edge of the panel at the start and end of paving each day indicating the date month and year of placement .
stamp the concrete surface at numfoot intervals near the righthand edge of the pavement indicating the roadway station .
num protection of fresh concrete to protect the fresh concrete from unanticipated storm events keep enough waterproof sheeting at the placement location to cover the maximum anticipated amount of pavement that can be placed in a three numhour period .
reserve this sheeting exclusively to protect the pavement .
num surfacing smoothness requirements test the longitudinal smoothness of the pccp finished surface in each through traffic lane and passing lane with an approved profile in accordance with section num pavement smoothness measurement .
the department will exclude the following locations from the profiler measurement .
evaluate them using a straightedge in accordance with section num pavement smoothness measurement .
section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num num .
shoulders ramps tapers holding lanes turnouts medians concrete pavement slab removal and replacement projects intersections not paved integrally with the mainline and other nonmainline pavement .
num straightedge measurements measure the surface of pccp not subject to profiler measurements using an approved numfoot straightedge at both right angles and parallel to the centerline .
correct surface deviations greater than ¼ inch within ten num feet .
num curing begin application of the approved curing system as soon as possible after the concrete is placed .
do not wait until the bleed water has disappeared .
do not wait until all of the concrete has been placed if the curing system can be applied sooner .
no further finishing operations shall be performed after the curing system has been applied .
ensure that the entire surface of the newly placed concrete has been completely covered by applying the approved curing system at the earliest opportunity .
the use of an evaporation retarder is permitted .
the evaporation retarder must be used in strict accordance with the manufacturers directions .
once the evaporation retarder has been evenly applied to the concrete do not touch or finish any portion of the coated concrete until it is ready for the final surfacing treatment .
the evaporation retarder may not be used as a finishing aide or in any manner to facilitate finishing the surface of the concrete .
num application of curing compound before placing the curing compound in the spray tank thoroughly agitate it with compressed air or other approved means until the pigments in the original container are uniformly suspended .
do not dilute or alter the curing compound in any way .
place the curing compound directly into the spray tanks from the manufacturers original containers bearing the manufacturers name brand and lot number .
if because of cold temperature the curing compound becomes too viscous for proper stiffening or application or if portions of the curing compound have been precipitated from solution follow the manufacturers recommendations to restore proper fluidity and dispersion .
apply curing compound to the entire area of the exposed concrete surface with an approved mechanical spray machine .
protect the fog spray from the wind with an adequate shield and apply uniformly until it completely covers the entire surface without gaps or openings in the coverage at an application rate equal or greater than the minimum rate recommended by the manufacturer .
provide the actual rate of application to the project manager .
immediately reapply the curing compound over any control joints that were cut through previously applied coatings of curing compound .
if rain falls on freshly applied curing compound before it has dried enough to resist damage or if the surface is otherwise damaged apply an additional coat of curing compound .
protect the applied curing compound areas from automobile and pedestrian traffic for at least num calendar days or the concrete has achieved an inplace compressive strength of num psi as determined by the maturity method .
num use of sheeting materials section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num when chosen place sheeting materials over the pavement immediately after completing finishing operations .
place the sheeting so that individual sheets overlap at least num inches .
weigh down the overlapped areas with earth or boards to prevent movement by the wind .
extend the sheeting to completely cover the edges of the pavement and the surface of the subgrade to a distance of at least num inches beyond the edge of the pavement and secure them to the subgrade with a continuous bank of earth or surfacing material .
protect sheeting from damage and keep in place for at least num calendar days or until the compressive strength has reached num psi as determined by the maturity method .
immediately patch holes in the sheeting .
num protections from and opening to traffic protect new pavement against public traffic and operational and employee traffic .
provide personnel to direct traffic .
erect and maintain warning signs lights pavement bridges or crossovers in accordance with the contracts traffic control requirements .
do not open to traffic for a least seven num calendar days or until the concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi as determined by the maturity method in accordance with section num inplace concrete strength measurements unless the project manager directs otherwise .
clean the pavement of loose materials and debris before opening to traffic .
num sampling and testing sample and test the aggregate production and pcc mixture in accordance with section num quality control quality assurance qcqa and the departments minimum testing requirements for qla portland cement concrete pavement .
department personnel may test locations other than the random locations generated for statistical analysis .
these tests will not be used for pay factor determination but may be used to determine acceptance or rejection of localized material .
num contractor quality control administer a quality control plan referred to hereafter as the plan to provide a product in accordance with the contract .
ensure the plan conforms to section num contractor quality control .
submit the plan a minimum of two num weeks prior to pccp preplacement meeting and at a minimum comply with the contractor quality control plan guidelines .
the contractor quality control plan guidelines are available from the project manager or state construction bureau .
no pccp operations are allowed until the plan has been approved by the project manager and district lab supervisor .
ensure the plan addresses all elements that affect the quality of the portland cement concrete paving including but not limited to num .
mix designs num .
aggregate production num .
quality of components num .
stockpile management num. batching num .
mixing num .
transporting num .
placing num .
vibration and consolidation num .
finishing section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num num .
joints num .
smoothness num .
thickness num .
placement phasing num .
rumble strips if required and num .
non destructive testing methods including project calibration process .
make sure the plan identifies personnel responsible for sampling and testing of pccp and how to contact them at any time .
make sure that qualified sampling and testing personnel perform pccp sampling and testing in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
provide at least two num qualified technicians as follows num .
the process control technician pct is responsible for performing inspection sampling and testing at the concrete batching facility and at the contractors field laboratory .
the pct shall use laboratory test results and other quality control practices to assure the quality of aggregate sources and other mix components and adjust and control mix proportioning to meet the mix designs .
the pct shall periodically inspect equipment used in proportioning and mixing to assure its proper operating condition and to assure that the contractor performs proportioning and mixing in accordance with the mix design and other requirements .
num .
the quality control technician qct is responsible for inspection sampling and testing at the paving site .
the qct shall assure that the delivered materials comply with the requirements of the contract .
the qct shall periodically inspect equipment used to transport place and finish the concrete to assure its proper operating condition and to assure that the contractor provides a final constructed product in accordance with the contract .
the plan must coordinate and document the activities of the pct and qct .
this includes the frequencies for each test the criteria to reject or correct unsatisfactory materials and a description of what corrective actions can be taken and how and when the actions will be initiated .
the plan will detail the sampling and testing programs including methods to determine and apply random sampling locations .
perform sampling and testing in accordance with table num minimum process control guidelines aggregates and base courses and table num minimum process control guidelines portland cement concrete pavement .
num department quality assurance num acceptance sample and test the material on a statistically random basis in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
see table num minimum acceptance guidelines for acceptance guidelines .
the department will determine acceptance in accordance with section num quality level analysis using table num acceptance limits .
section num portland cement concrete pavement qla page num table num acceptance limits characteristic specification limits from tv entrained air from the appropriate freezethaw risk zone num target compressive strength from approved mix design num psi thickness from project specifications num inchnum inch unless otherwise provided in the contract target values for acceptance shall be as follows entrained air target air content for the freezethaw risk zone in which the project is located compressive strength target strength from mix design thickness nominal plan thickness num inchnum inch target compressive strength will be the average compressive strength of the first thirty num tests from the contractors qla testing program .
if the contractors data does not validate with the departments data the target compressive strength will be the average of the first ten num department tests .
num independent assurance testing the department will perform independent assurance sampling and testing in accordance with section num independent assurance testing .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will adjust the concrete pavement unit bid price in accordance with section num quality level analysis .
the department will pay for concrete pavement on a lotbylot basis at a price determined by multiplying the unit bid price by the composite pay factor .
the department will use table num composite pay factor to calculate the composite pay factor .
composite pay factors greater than num will be paid for as num .
table num composite pay factors measured characteristic factor f entrained air num compressive strength num thickness num pay item pay unit concrete pavement square yard section num portland cement concrete pavement page num section num portland cement concrete pavement pccp nonqla num description see section num description .
num materials see section num materials .
num construction requirements num proportioning see section num proportioning .
num equipment see section num equipment .
num operations see section num operations .
num joints see section num joints .
num finishing see section num finishing .
num curing see section num curing .
num grooving of pccp see section num texturing of pccp .
num protection from and opening to traffic see section num protection from and opening to traffic .
num sampling and testing num contractor quality controlreserved num department quality assurance num acceptance the department will accept the finished pavement with respect to strength in accordance with section num concrete sampling and testing .
the department will accept the finished pavement with respect to thickness based on test areas less than num ydnum in size randomly selected by the project manager .
the department will make thickness determinations either using cores located in a random pattern with at least two num cores in each test area or by drilling holes greater than ½ inch diameter completely through the pccp and determining the thickness from the drilled hole .
core holes shall be filled with selfleveling sealant material as specified in section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints including round closedcell bondbreaker as described in section num section num portland cement concrete pavement page num bondbreaker .
these repairs shall be considered incidental .
the contractor shall complete all corrective work in accordance with section num surfacing smoothness requirements before the department determines pavement thickness .
the department will accept test areas when an average of the measurements is not less than num inch from the required thickness and when any measurement is not less than num inch from the required thickness .
num independent assurance testing the department will perform independent assurance sampling and testing in accordance with section num independent assurance testing .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit concrete pavement __ inch square yard the department will only pay for the average thickness of pavement in accordance with the plans .
the department considers dowels tie bars joint materials and required coring including filling the core holes with concrete incidental to the work in accordance with section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints .
num price adjustments num thickness the department will apply price adjustment for concrete pavement with deficient thickness based on a structural engineering analysis conducted by the department that will determine the percent loss of traffic carrying ability based on the original design esal .
num strength see section num price adjustments .
num final adjustment in bid item unit price per lot when test results allow price adjustments the resultant adjustment will be cumulative .
section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints page num section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints num description this work consists of cleaning priming and sealing concrete pavement joints .
this work also consists of removing joint sealant sawing cleaning priming and resealing joints .
seal only joints between adjacent portland cement concrete surfaces .
seal joints between pccp and asphalt pavement in accordance with section num hotpoured crack sealant unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num materials num sealant joint sealant material will either be a type ns or sl single component silicone formulation meeting the requirements of astm d num or a single component low modulus polyurethane formulation meeting the requirements of astm c num and table num polyurethane sealant physical requirements .
provide a qualified manufacturers representative on the project for at least the first day of sealant application .
prepare and seal the joints in accordance with proper procedures approved by the manufacturers representative .
obtain the manufacturers written verification of primer backer and sealant compatibility .
num certification for each lot of sealant applied to concrete pavement joints the contractor shall provide certified test results in accordance with astm d num or astm c num and table num polyurethane sealant physical requirements except as otherwise provided in the contract .
provide sealant test results and verification that the product is currently within the manufacturers recommended shelf life to the project manager at least num days before sealant installation .
certification will show areas of primer use .
table num polyurethane sealant physical requirements property test method requirement tensile stress num elongation num day cure numof and num num r.h. psi astm d num die c num num tackfree time h maximum astm c num num num adhesion cohesion under cyclic movement astm c num pass artificial weathering astm c num pass weight mass loss maximum astm c num num ozone and u.v .
resistance astm c num note num movement capability and adhesion note num note num the sealant shall show no chalking cracking or bond loss after num hours .
note num the sealant shall show no adhesive or cohesive failure after num cycles of num of joint width with the rate of extension or compression being no greater than numin per hour .
num bondbreaker the bondbreaker is a round closed cell nonabsorbent material compatible with the sealant material that is at least num inch larger in diameter than the width of the joint being sealed .
if primer is required ensure that no adverse reaction occurs between the bondbreaker and sealant or primer .
section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints page num num construction requirements num general repair damage to the pavement surface at no additional cost to the department .
perform these repairs to the concrete surfaces before beginning sealing operations as directed by the project manager .
dispose of old sealant materials in accordance with section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to public .
num temperature and weather limitations perform joint sealing or resealing only under the following conditions num .
the air and pavement temperatures are num f or higher num .
the pavement temperature is above the dew point num .
the pavement and joint faces are dry and frost free and num .
weather conditions are dry .
num resealing operations saw the transverse and longitudinal joints to the specified width depth and configuration .
num joint preparation use a router to follow the path of random cracks and widen the top of the crack to the required section .
sandblast joints and clean with compressed air .
provide a one num inch wide border of clean dry newly exposed concrete before applying the bondbreaker and sealant at the joint and adjacent pavement .
use cleaning wands that provide compressed air with at least num psi of pressure at the outlet nozzle .
ensure that the compressed air is free of oil and moisture .
num sealant application apply the sealant according to the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified and approved by the project manager .
obtain project manager approval of the manufacturers sealant application instructions before beginning work .
place the bondbreaker to maintain the specified depth of the sealant material .
provide a finished joint seal surface that is concave and num inch num inch below the surface of the concrete pavement .
the project manager will cease operations if the contractor seals joints inconsistently .
correct inconsistencies in joint sealing operations and remove and replace nonconforming sealant at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit sealing concrete pavement joints linear foot section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints page num resealing concrete pavement joints linear foot section num cracking and sealing concrete pavement page num section num cracking and seating concrete pavement num description this work consists of cracking and seating existing portland cement concrete pavement .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num equipment use impact hammers capable of cracking the pavements full depth .
equip the breaker with a platetype shoe or use one designed to prevent penetration spalling and shattering of the existing surface use other equipment approved by the project manager .
do not use a headache drop ball or whip hammer .
if required provide a screen to protect vehicles in the adjacent lane from flying chips during the cracking process .
use pneumatic tire rollers that weigh a minimum of num ton .
num cracking operations before cracking the concrete remove existing asphalt patches .
before cracking the project manager will designate test sections .
crack the test sections using varying energy and striking patterns to establish an optimum pattern for cracking the pavement .
wet the pavement surface test section to determine the extent and pattern of cracking .
use the established pattern to crack the pavement on the remainder of the project provided the cracked pavement continues to meet the specified size requirements .
adjust the energy and striking pattern as directed by the project manager .
wet pavement surfaces at least once an hour to determine the extent and pattern of cracking .
crack the existing concrete pavement so that the dimensions of the majority of pieces of pavement are from num inches to num inches with a maximum dimension of num inches .
ensure that num of pavement pieces are smaller than num inch .
the project manager will determine the adequacy of pavement breakage .
perform cracking one num lane at a time with an impact hammer .
prevent damage to underground utilities drainage facilities bridge approach slabs and bridge decks .
repair damage at no additional cost to the department .
num seating operations after cracking the concrete pavement clean the surface of loose and spalled concrete and foreign material .
roll the cracked concrete with a pneumatic tire roller within num h before overlaying with hma until it is well seated and thoroughly and uniformly compacted .
crack slab sections that do not seat well under the roller into smaller sections and roll them again .
the project manager will determine when the pavement is properly cracked and seated .
the department will allow traffic on the cracked pavement before overlaying .
when routing traffic over the cracked pavement ensure the pavements condition is satisfactory to carry the traffic .
num method of measurementreserved section num cracking and sealing concrete pavement page num num basis of payment pay item pay unit cracking and seating concrete pavement square yard section num diamond grinding and diamond grooving of portland cement concrete pavement page num section num diamondgrinding and diamondgrooving of portland cement concrete pavement pccp num description this work consists of diamondgrinding andor diamondgrooving pccp and includes the removal of slurry and residue resulting from the work .
diamond grinding is a pavement preservation technique that corrects a variety of surface imperfections on both concrete and asphalt pavements .
the diamond blades used for grinding are composed of industrial diamonds and metallurgical powder .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num equipment use powerdriven selfpropelled machines equipped with diamond blades specifically designed to grind groove and texture pccp .
ensure the grinder has a depth control device to detect variations in the concrete surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the depth of the specified groove .
equip the diamond grinding machine with alignment control devices .
ensure the equipment grinds and grooves the pavement surface to the specified smoothness tolerances and textures without causing excessive raveling of the joints or cracking or fracturing of the aggregates .
num diamond grinding and grooving operations begin and end longitudinal diamond grinding and grooving at lines normal to the pavement centerline unless otherwise specified in the contract .
grind designated areas until the pavement surfaces on both sides of transverse joints and cracks are on the same plane .
ensure that diamond grinding produces a uniform finished surface eliminates joint or crack faults and provides positive lateral surface drainage by maintaining a constant crossslope within the diamond grinding limits of each lane .
grind auxiliary or ramp lane transitions from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and an acceptable riding surface .
make grooving patterns in accordance with section num grooving of hardened concrete unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num slurry removal continuously remove the slurry from the work .
do not allow the slurry to flow across lanes open to traffic or into gutters or other drainage facilities .
num final surface finish produce a pavement surface in accordance with section num surfacing smoothness requirements .
ensure the texture has parallel longitudinal corrugations that present a narrow ridge corduroytype appearance .
make the peaks and grooves approximately num inch apart in elevation .
make the grooves from num inch to num inch wide and the peaks from num inch to num inch wide .
determine the appropriate number of grooves per yard to produce the specified surface requirements .
section num diamond grinding and diamond grooving of portland cement concrete pavement page num num acceptance inspect transverse joints and random cracks to ensure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane .
regrind as directed by the project manager at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the department will measure the diamond grinding and diamond grooving of portland cement concrete pavement actually ground or grooved on the top width and length of the pavement if paid by the unit .
if no bid item exists for diamond grinding and diamond grooving of portland cement concrete pavement payment will be incidental to section num portland cement concrete pavement qla or section num portland cement concrete pavement as applicable .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit diamond grinding of pccp square yard diamond grooving of pccp square yard division num page num division num structures division contents num driven bearing piles num num drilled shafts num num load testing of bearing piles num num pile integrity testing num num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures num num portland cement concrete mix designs num num portland cement concrete num num concrete structures num num superstructure concrete num num concrete barrier railings for bridges num num reinforced concrete for minor structures num num flowable fill num num precast concrete structures num num prestressed concrete members num num shotcrete num num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members num num nonshrink mortar num num chemical adhesive anchors num num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors num num pier and abutment bearing modification num num bridge deck and pccp preparation for repair num num permanent antigraffiti protective coating num num penetrating water repellent treatment num num concrete structure repair num num epoxy injection num num crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers num num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay num num steel reinforcement num num steel structures num num highstrength bolts num num metal railing num num protective coating of new structural steel num num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel num num recoating structures num num safety and environmental requirements for painting operations num num treated timber num division num page num num elastomeric bearing pads num num elastomeric compression joint seals num num bridge joint strip seals num num polymer bridge joint seals num num preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals num num pipe culverts num num structural plate structures num num castinplace concrete pipe num section num driven bearing piles page num section num driven bearing piles num description the work consists of providing and driving bearing piles including splicing additional pile lengths and cutoffs .
num materials num standards provide materials in accordance with table num applicable pile standards .
table num applicable pile standards material description standard structural steel piles and columns hp astm a num grade num splice plates for structural steel piles aashto m num grade num castings for pile shoes astm a num steel pipe longitudinal or continuous spiral welded piles and columns astm a num gr .
num backing rings for steel pipe pile splices astm a num gr .
num end plate for closed end pipe piles aashto m num grade num portland cement concrete class g section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
precast prestressed concrete piles section num prestressed concrete members .
paint section num protective coating of new structural steel .
num piles num steel piles use no more than one num field splice to make steel piles that are from num ft to num ft long .
use no more than two num field splices to make steel piles longer than num ft .
the minimum acceptable splice length is five num ft. do not use more than two num splices per steel pile .
the department will not accept camber and sweep more than the mill tolerance .
num continuous spiral weld pipe piles provide longitudinal or spiral welded pipe on the departments approved products list with only complete full joint penetration welds conforming to the requirements of aws dnum structural welding code .
num precast prestressed concrete piles manufacture precast prestressed concrete piles in accordance with section num pre stressed concrete members .
num pile splices provide materials in accordance with table num applicable pile standards .
use prefabricated splices only when specified .
if the contract requires additional length due to inadequate bearing construct splices in accordance with section num splices .
perform field welding inspection in accordance with num field welding .
section num driven bearing piles page num num submittals submit the following to the project manager num .
three num certified copies of mtrs for the following num .
structural steel piles num .
pile columns num .
steel pipe piles and pipe pile columns num .
splice plates num .
backing rings num .
end plates num .
pile shoes indicate heat numbers on test reports and on each pile provided .
num .
welder certification in accordance with section num steel structures sufficient for welding field splices and end plates num .
class g concrete mix design approved by the state concrete engineer in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs num .
precast prestressed concrete piles certification and testing in accordance with section num prestressed concrete members and num .
paint certification in accordance with section num protective coating of new structural steel .
num pile driving equipment submittals submit pile driving equipment information to the project manager num days before beginning pile driving .
submit the information on the departments pile and driving equipment data form .
provide information required on the form including the following num .
pile hammer make model number and serial number num .
driving head assembly type model number and weight num .
hammer cushion material size and thickness and num .
pile cushion material size and thickness .
the department has num days to accept or reject the proposed pile driving equipment after the project manager receives the pile and driving equipment data form .
acceptance will be in accordance with section num approval of driving system .
if the department rejects the equipment modify or replace the pile driving equipment and revise and resubmit the form .
the department will have seven num days to accept or reject the revised pile and equipment data form .
submit the manufacturers chart showing stroke and blows per minute when proposing the use of openend singleacting diesel hammers .
submit a chart equating bounce chamber pressure and hose length to either equivalent energy or stroke when proposing use of closedend doubleacting diesel hammers .
specify hose lengths for closedend hammers .
calibrate the chart to atmospheric pressure based on the project site elevation to the nearest num ft elevation .
submit a chart equating the plant operating pressure to the equivalent delivered energy of the hammer including losses in the hose when proposing the use of double acting or differential acting airsteam hammers .
calibrate the chart to atmospheric pressure based on the project site elevation to the nearest num ft elevation .
submit a certificate of calibration to the project manager for the pressure gauge required for double acting hammers or for delivered energy for hydraulic hammers .
provide certificate of calibration from a national institute of standards and technology traceable laboratory section num driven bearing piles page num performed no more than six num months before use .
num construction requirements num equipment num pile hammers use steam air diesel or hydraulic hammers for driving piles .
only use gravity hammers where specified for use in dynamic testing of drilled shafts .
num steam and air hammers provide the plant and equipment with pressure gages that are easily accessible to the inspector .
use air and steam hammers with striking parts that weigh at least num the weight of drive head and pile or num lb whichever is more .
num diesel hammers use openend diesel hammers that allow the inspector to see the hammer stroke during pile driving operations unless accompanied by a saximeter stroke measurement device .
use closedend diesel hammers equipped with a bounce chamber pressure gauge mounted with a hose long enough for the inspector to read .
num hydraulic hammers use hydraulic hammers equipped with a digital display of delivered hammer energy for each stroke .
provide certification of hammer energy measurement readout to the project manager .
num driving apparatus num hammer cushion equip impact pile driving equipment except gravity and hydraulic hammers with hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the hammer or pile and to ensure uniform driving .
use hammer cushions made in accordance with the hammer manufacturers guidelines .
do not use wood wire rope or asbestos hammer cushions .
place a manufacturerrecommended striker plate on the hammer cushion to ensure uniform compression of the cushion material .
num drive head equip impact hammer driven piles with a steel drive head to distribute the hammer blow .
align the drive head axially with the hammer and the pile .
ensure that it is guided by leads and not freeswinging .
use a drive head that fits around the pile head to maintain the proper alignment of the hammer and pile and not transfer the torsional forces during driving .
cut pile heads squarely .
provide a drive head insert to fit the pile type and dimensions as recommended by the hammer manufacturer .
for precast concrete and prestressed concrete piles use a pile head that is perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile to prevent eccentric impacts .
num pile cushion before driving place a plywood pile cushion that is at least four num inches thick on the pile head .
greater thicknesses may be required if the wave equation analysis per section num wave equation analysis or dynamic testing per section num dynamic formula determines that the pile compressive or tensile stresses are unacceptable .
section num driven bearing piles page num num leads while being driven support piles in line and position with leads .
construct pile driver leads to allow the hammer free movement while maintaining alignment of the hammer and the pile to ensure concentric impacts .
do not extend the pile section being driven above the leads .
embed the leads in the ground or restrain by a rigid brace to maintain alignment .
ensure that the leads are long enough to make a follower unnecessary and design the leads to permit alignment of batter piles .
use fixed or swinging leads .
fit swinging leads with a pile gate at the bottom .
for batter piles use a horizontal brace between the crane and the leads .
num pile extensions do not use followers .
where required and approved by the foundation engineer use an extra length pile with splices if necessary and ensure that the leads are of adequate length so that followers will not be required .
after cutoff undamaged extra length pile may be re used as a production pile .
num templates use securely anchored heavy metal templates to maintain pile positions when driving a pile bent .
num preboring equipment use preboring equipment in accordance with section num preboring .
num inspection equipment provide and use equipment to illuminate the entire interior length of pipe piles after they are driven .
num minimum manufacturersrated hammer energy unless the contract specifies a minimum hammer energy use a manufacturerrated hammer at or above the appropriate minimum energy level corresponding to the required nominal pile capacity in accordance with table num required hammer energy .
section num driven bearing piles page num table num required hammer energy nominal pile capacity kips minimum manufacturers rated hammer energy ft lb num num num num num num num num num num num num wave equation analysis required num approval of driving system the foundation engineer will approve the driving system .
the driving system includes the hammer and driving apparatus proposed on the departments pile and driving equipment data form .
transporting the driving system to the project site before it is approved will be done at the contractors risk .
the driving system will be approved based on the following num .
the driving system meets the requirements of sections num pile hammers and num driving apparatus num .
the manufacturers rated hammer energy meets or exceeds the minimum hammer energy requirements established in section num minimum manufacturers rated hammer energy num .
the wave equation analysis indicates that the expected driving resistance required nominal capacity can be achieved at less than ten num blows per inch num .
the wave equation analysis indicates that the pile stresses will not exceed the allowable stresses at the expected driving resistance required ultimate capacity as indicated in table num wave equation analysis allowable driving stress num .
when dynamic tests are specified in accordance with section num load testing of bearing piles acceptance of the hammer system will be based on the measured energy transfer efficiency in accordance with section num variations of approved driving systems .
table num wave equation analysis allowable driving stress description maximum stressab steel piles compressive stress num of yield strength num fy concrete piles compressive stress num of the compressive strength c minus the effective prestress num fc effective prestress tensile stress numfc effective prestress aif the pile stresses determined by wave equation analysis exceed the allowable stresses the department may approve the hammer system if a heavier pile section approved by the foundation engineer is substituted .
if necessary provide heavier piles at no additional cost to the department .
bif the pile stresses determined by wave equation analysis exceed the allowable stresses the department may approve the hammer system if additional static or dynamic testing is performed and verifies that pile driving resistances will produce stresses in the pile within acceptable ranges .
perform additional testing at no additional cost to the department .
ccompressive strength at num days .
num driven pile capacity section num driven bearing piles page num the nominal pile capacity will generally be the required factored design resistance of the pile divided by the specified aashto lrfd resistance factor unless specified otherwise .
the specified aashto resistance factor depends on the specified pile testing and the specified method for monitoring the pile capacity .
determine resistance factors in accordance with table num lrfd resistance factors for driven piles unless otherwise specified .
table num lrfd resistance factors for driven piles capacity monitoring test method method lrfd resistance factor static load test wave equation analysis num dynamic load test wave equation analysis num none performed wave equation analysis num none performed dynamic formula num in some cases the required nominal pile capacity shown may be higher than the factored pile design resistance divided by the specified lrfd resistance factor .
in these cases the required nominal pile capacity includes resistance to be encountered penetrating unsuitable layers in addition to the required factored design resistance divided by the specified lrfd resistance factor .
num determination of pile capacity with impact hammer num wave equation analysis the foundation engineer will determine the nominal pile capacity based on a wave equation analysis .
drive piles to the required resistance based on the operating energy of the hammer .
the pile driving acceptance chart will indicate the resistance criteria .
obtain pile penetration by achieving the wave equation resistance criteria in accordance with section num minimum penetration elevation and section num estimated penetration elevation .
if the predicted pile penetration varies from the plan length by num or more the foundation engineer will perform a revised wave equation analysis in accordance with section num revised wave equation analysis .
num dynamic formula use the dynamic formula to determine nominal pile capacity only if specified or approved by the foundation engineer .
drive piles to the depth necessary to obtain the nominal pile capacity according to the following equation and in accordance with section num minimum penetration elevation rn numfelnnumn num where rn nominal bearing resistance kips f a constant that varies with hammer and pile type airsteam hammers all piles f num open ended diesel hammers with concrete f num open ended diesel hammers with steel piles f num closed ended diesel hammers f num e developed energy ftkips n average penetration resistance in blows per inch for the last four num inches of driving section num driven bearing piles page num num preparation for driving num abutment piles unless otherwise shown and before driving the abutment bearing piles place and compact the approach embankment material underneath and adjacent to the abutment to the required density .
after compaction ensure that the surface of the approach embankment is not lower than the elevation of the bottom of the abutment .
num preboring if specified prebore holes at pile locations to the depths and size in accordance with the plans .
if the contract does not specify prebored but the foundation engineer approves the use of prebored holes drill the holes to the depth established by the foundation engineer .
ensure that the depth permits the piles to be driven to the minimum penetration elevation and required bearing capacity without overstress or damage to the piles .
prebore holes in the presence of the inspector .
after placing pile fill voids remaining around the pile with sand or other approved material .
num application of prebored holes only use prebored holes as specified or when demonstrated to the satisfaction of the foundation engineer that a pile can not be driven to the minimum penetration elevation in accordance with section num minimum penetration elevation .
the department will determine the need for prebored pile holes based on the following driving resistances num .
steel piles when in ten num blows the set is less than num inch with the hammer delivering the minimum energy required num .
precast concrete piles when in ten num blows the set is less than one num inch with the hammer delivering the minimum energy as required in the contract num .
all piles if the resistance is sufficient to overstress the pile as indicated by the wave equation analysis field acceptance chart for the approved hammer system .
num diameter of prebored holes the foundation engineer will establish the diameter of prebored holes .
in general the diameter established will be as shown in table num diameter of prebored holes in soil or table num diameter of prebored holes in rock shale or conglomerate .
num obstructions if the contractor encounters subsurface obstructions the contractor may increase the borehole diameter to the smallest dimension adequate for pile installation .
penetrate obstructions in accordance with section num obstructions .
num rock sockets if the contract requires the contractor to drive a pile in a rock socket and the bore hole is larger than the diameter of the pile fill around that part of the pile in solid material with class g concrete .
place concrete in accordance with section num construction requirements .
fill the part of the pile above the rock socket with sand or other suitable material .
num temporary casing temporary casing may be required if the soil sloughs or caves into the hole or if a hole is required to be kept dry from groundwater such as socketed holes into shale .
increase the diameter of the drilled hole as necessary to place the temporary casing .
pull the casing after driving the pile and after the hole is backfilled with the appropriate material .
section num driven bearing piles page num table num diameter of prebored holes in soil pile type diameter cylindrical concrete piles two num inch smaller than the outside pile diameter square concrete piles minimum pile width hpiles two num inch smaller than the diagonal measurement of pile table num diameter of prebored holes in rock shale or conglomerate pile type diameter cylindrical concrete and pipe piles outside pile diameter square concrete piles and hpiles diagonal measurement of pile num pile and hammer cushion preparation before the drive head is attached make the pile heads plane and perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile .
protect precast concrete pile heads with a pile cushion in accordance with section num pile cushion .
provide a new pile cushion for each pre cast concrete pile .
replace the pile cushion if it is either compressed more than onehalf of the original thickness or begins to burn during driving .
inspect the hammer cushion with the inspector present when beginning pile driving at each structure or after each num h of pile driving whichever is less .
if the hammer cushion thickness is reduced by more than num of the original thickness replace the cushion before proceeding with driving .
num conditions to proceed the contractor shall not drive production piles until it meets the following conditions num .
the foundation engineer approves the driving system in accordance with section num approval of driving system num .
the inspector completes the pile driving field inspection form and the form is then approved by the project manager num .
all required load testing is complete as specified and in accordance with section num load testing of bearing piles num .
the pile driving acceptance chart is completed and stamped with new mexico p.e .
seal by the foundation engineer and approved by the state geotechnical engineer and submitted to the project manager num .
the hammer and leads are aligned with the pile plan in vertical or battered position and num .
the inspector is present before beginning operations .
num variations of approved driving systems only use the approved pile driving system .
submit a new pile and driving equipment data form to the project manager for variations to the approved driving system .
the project manager will notify the contractor of acceptance or rejection within num h of the receipt of the data form .
the time required for submission review and approval of a variation in the driving system will not constitute a basis for a contract time extension .
num variations due to dynamic testing the foundation engineer will reject the hammer if the hammer is unable to transfer sufficient energy to perform the dynamic testing in accordance with section num load testing section num driven bearing piles page num of bearing piles .
reasons for rejection include preignition from overheating or malfunctioning of the injection system and poor hammer or capblock maintenance .
after rejection repair or replace the hammer .
num revised wave equation analysis the department will perform a revised wave equation analysis to establish revised driving resistance criteria when the following conditions occur num .
variations in the driving system num .
preboring not originally specified in the contract is used to facilitate pile penetration or num .
the pile penetrations are considerably more or less than that estimated in the contract .
do not drive piles until the project manager receives the revised pile acceptance chart .
num pile driving operations approval of a pile hammer relative to allowable driving stresses will not relieve the contractor of responsibility for damaged piles for the following reasons num .
misalignment of the leads num .
failure of capblock or cushion material num .
failure of splices num .
malfunctioning of the pile hammer or num .
other improper construction methods .
if the foundation engineer determines that damage caused by one num of the above reasons impairs the pile strength or questions the measured resistance replace the piles at no additional cost to the department .
schedule pile driving to prevent vibrations and pressure from damaging piles or other in place concrete structural components that have reached their initial set but that do not have sufficient strength to resist damage .
replace the hammer cushion and pile cushion when necessary in accordance with section num pile and hammer cushion preparation to avoid excessive compression or damage .
num pile measurement and recording ensure that the first pile driven at each substructure element is accessible so the inspector can measure and mark the pile in numinch increments .
on the first pile driven the inspector will record blows per num inches of penetration until the pile tip is within five num ft of the specified penetration elevation or until the pile begins to set up whichever comes first .
then the inspector will measure and record the penetration in inches per ten num or num blows as directed by the foundation engineer until the contractor achieves the specified set .
num minimum penetration elevation if the contract specifies a minimum penetration elevation and the driven piles do not develop the required nominal bearing capacity at that elevation the contractor shall continue driving the piles until the required resistance is obtained .
if the piles develop a set determined in accordance with section num application of prebored holes before the pile tip reaches the minimum penetration elevation the contractor shall perform drilling to prevent damaging the pile while driving to the minimum penetration elevation .
num estimated penetration elevation section num driven bearing piles page num if the contract specifies an estimated penetration elevation drive the piles to the required nominal capacity .
if the piles attain the required resistance above the estimated penetration elevation terminate driving and the department will accept the piles at the shallower penetration .
num pile groups if driving multiple rows of piles for pile cap foundations drive the piles to the estimated or minimum penetration elevation before determining pile capacity for acceptance .
after driving the piles in the group to the required tip elevation restrike to determine the pile nominal capacity .
if the piles do not develop the required nominal bearing capacity at that elevation continue to drive until the required resistance is attained .
num splices ensure that steel pile splices are in accordance with section num steel structures .
make splices for closedend pipe piles watertight .
use the cement dowel method to make splices for precast concrete piles unless the foundation engineer approves an alternate splice detail .
select mechanical splices for concrete or steel piles from the departments approved products list .
num cutoff lengths cut off the tops of all permanent piles at the elevation shown or as directed .
remove the cut off lengths from the project .
num filling closedend pipe piles after driving closedend steelpipe piles inspect for water or other deleterious material inside the piles .
remove water and foreign substances from inside the piles .
after the project manager approves the piles fill them with class a any risk zone concrete with a num num inch to eight num inch slump .
provide a superplasticizer in accordance with num from the departments approved products list to achieve the slump .
place the concrete in accordance with section num concrete placement .
num filling openend pipe piles after driving openend steel pipe piles inspect for water inside the piles .
if water is present place pea gravel in the pile to an elevation of three num feet above the water level .
if the project manager approves the piles fill them with class a any risk zone concrete with a num ½ inch to six num inch slump .
provide a superplasticizer in accordance with num from the departments approved products list to achieve the slump .
place the concrete in at least the upper ten num ft of the piles in accordance with section num concrete placement .
num pile acceptance num pile load capacity and penetration drive piles to the required nominal capacity as determined by the specified capacity monitoring method in accordance with section num driven pile capacity .
if specified install piles to the penetration elevation in accordance with section num minimum penetration elevation .
num location and alignment tolerances do not pull laterally on piles to correct misalignment or splice a properly aligned section on a misaligned section to meet tolerances .
num trestle and abutment beam piling section num driven bearing piles page num drive trestle piling and abutment beam piling with a maximum variation of num inch per foot from the vertical or batter shown .
the pile variance will be no more than three num inches from the plan position at any point along its length .
num foundation piling drive foundation piling capped below grade with a maximum variation of num inch per foot from the vertical or batter shown with the tops of the piles at cut off elevation varying no more than three num inches from the plan position .
num edge distance do not place piles within nine num inches of an edge of a cap or beam .
increase the size of the cap or beam to meet this edge distance requirement at no additional cost to the department .
num pile orientation ensure that hpiles do not rotate more than num out of plan orientation of the strong axis and weak axis of the pile shown .
num pile tops cut off the tops of piles perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile or to a specified bevel and within the specified tolerance .
num damaged pile limitations the department will reject damaged piles based on the following criteria num .
piles that are broken cracked or split num .
precast concrete piles that show signs of crushing and spalling of the concrete splitting or visible cracks that affect the strength or service life of the pile num .
steel piles bent or deformed during installation and exceed mill tolerances for sweep and camber or num .
closedend pipe piles that show evidence of groundwater infiltration or breaks or deformation that would impair the strength of the completed piles .
num correcting rejected piles correct piles damaged during driving because of internal defects or improper driving with methods approved by the project manager at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractor exceeds the location or alignment tolerances and the foundation engineer determines that corrective measures are necessary the contractor shall design and construct corrective measures at no additional cost to the department .
the state geotechnical engineer will approve the design .
corrective methods may include the following num .
removing and replacing the pile with a new and when necessary longer pile num .
driving additional piles next to the defective piles or num .
extending the footing to properly embed the pile .
num method of measurement num pile extensions the project manager will include any approved extension lengths in the pile measurement .
section num driven bearing piles page num num driven piles the department will measure driven piles below the cutoff elevation to the nearest foot .
num pile cutoffs the department will calculate pile cutoffs to the nearest foot by subtracting the total lengths of the inplace piles after cutoff from the total plan lengths .
num prebored holes for bearing piles the department will only measure that portion of prebored holes for bearing piles below the plan grade elevation .
the department will not measure that portion of prebored holes drilled through soil or rock layers overburden that the contractor later excavates .
num pile splices the department will measure pile splices required for piles driven deeper than the estimated penetration elevation to achieve the required nominal capacity .
the department will only measure up to two num splices per pile in order to drive the piles beyond the specified penetration elevation to meet the required resistance .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit driven piles type foot prebored holes for bearing piles ___in diameter foot pile splices each pile shoes each pile cutoffs foot num work included in payment the following work will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
extra length pile used as a follower b .
material and backfill placement for prebored holes for bearing piles including class g concrete in rock sockets c. temporary casing and oversizing of prebored holes to accommodate temporary casing d. steel reinforcement required in steel pipe piles filled with concrete e. furnishing and driving pile to replace piles which were previously accepted by the project manager and are subsequently damaged through improper handling driving or construction operations prior to completion of the contract f. increases to the contract quantity of prebored holes for bearing piles which are not called for in the contract but are approved by the foundation engineer will be paid for at a negotiated unit price per foot as established by the project manager g. piles that have been driven or partially driven and are subsequently rejected by the project manager and are pulled or left in place h. class a concrete and placement in pipe piles i. mobilization and time lost due to remobilization of new hammer due to poor hammer performance or as determined by dynamic testing j. restriking of piles in pile groups to determine pile capacity .
k. pile splices provided within the plan pile length .
section num drilled shafts page num section num drilled shafts num description this work consists of constructing drilled shafts .
drilled shaft construction with or without underreamed bottoms bell bottoms includes excavation bottom hole cleaning reinforcing steel placement and concrete .
num work experience demonstrate to the state geotechnical engineer that the contractor is able to perform the work in accordance with the contract .
provide evidence of two num projects within two num years of the bid date involving drilled shaft construction for the conditions expected and use a superintendent with experience from one num of those projects who will provide all oversight responsibility of all aspects of drilled shaft construction covered in section num .
provide the latest nmdot drilled shaft inspection form of each drilled shaft element signed by the drilled shaft superintendent indicating drilled shaft construction completed in accordance with section num requirements .
num submittals submit construction and field designs to the project manager for review and approval by the state geotechnical engineer .
num materials num general provide materials in accordance with table num applicable bearing pile standards .
table num applicable bearing pile standards material description standard portland cement concrete class g section num portland cement concrete reinforcing steel cage section num steel structures reinforcing steel hp pile astm a num grade num steel pipe longitudinal or continuous spiral welded piles and columns astm a num grade num num additional requirements num concrete for class g concrete requirements see section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num temporary casings provide temporary steel casings with an inside diameter equal to or greater than the shaft size in accordance with the contract .
ensure the casings are smooth clean watertight and of ample strength to withstand both handling and driving stresses pressures of concrete and the surrounding soils .
num permanent casings provide permanent casing with a wall thickness that is at least the thickness specified for the shaft construction .
provide a greater wall thickness if necessary to withstand handling and installation stresses .
the casing dimensions are subject to the american pipe institute tolerances applicable to regular steel pipe .
if approved by the project manager the contractor section num drilled shafts page num may use casings larger than specified at no additional cost to the department .
num construction requirements num equipment num excavation and drilling equipment use excavation and drilling equipment that can excavate a hole of the specified diameter num deeper than what is shown in the contract .
use excavation equipment that can complete a flat shaft bottom .
ensure that the cutting edges are normal to the vertical axis of the equipment within a tolerance of num in per foot of diameter .
ensure that underreaming tools do not allow the base diameter to exceed three num times the specified shaft diameter .
the foundation engineer may approve a change in other underreaming plan dimensions to accommodate the equipment .
when the foundation engineer requires overreaming of the shaft sidewall use an overreaming bucket grooving tool or other approved equipment .
use an overreaming tool that over sizes the shaft diameter from num inch to three num inch .
if the contractor can not drill the material with conventional earth augers the contractor shall use special drilling equipment such as core barrels rock tools and other equipment as necessary .
blasting is not allowed .
num slurry equipment use desanding equipment to keep the slurry sand content to less than eight percent num by volume for mineral slurry and less than one percent num by volume for polymer slurry .
this is required during shaft excavation to maintain mix consistency of the slurry in the shaft .
use slurry tanks for slurry circulation storage and treatment .
do not use excavated slurry pits in place of slurry tanks without the written permission of the project manager .
use a slurry sampling tool to conduct the slurry control tests in accordance with section num slurry control tests .
use a slurry sampler capable of sampling slurry from the bottom of the hole and withdrawing the sample without loss or contamination of sample fluid .
num concrete placement equipment depending on the type of shaft construction place the concrete in the excavated shaft with a rigid tremie pipe a concrete pump line or a drop chute .
num tremies use a rigid tremie pipe that can deposit concrete at the shaft bottom .
do not use a tremie with aluminum parts that will have contact with the concrete .
ensure the inside diameter is at least ten num inch .
ensure the tremies inside and outside surfaces are clean and smooth .
ensure that the tremie is watertight .
in slurry displacement shafts use a plug initially placed at the top of the tremie to separate the concrete from the displacement fluid until the concrete is flowing through the orifice .
ensure that plugs left in the shaft concrete are made of material approved by the project manager .
construct the discharge end of the tremie to permit the free radial flow of concrete during placement operations .
num concrete pumps and lines use watertight pump lines with a diameter of at least five num inch .
use schedulenum steel pipe or heavier .
use plugs in accordance with section num tremies .
num drop chutes use rigidpipe drop chutes that are either onepiece or sectional .
ensure they can be added and removed from a metal hopper .
do not use flexible trunk line hose .
num submittals provide the required drilled shaft submittals to the project manager for the state section num drilled shafts page num geotechnical engineers review and approval .
the contractor may use documented work experience per section num work experience and proposed construction procedure submittals per section num proposed construction procedure approved on previous department projects of similar size difficulty and geology in lieu of the detailed submittal requirements listed below .
num work experience submit documentation verifying the required work experience in accordance with section num work experience .
include the names and phone numbers of references that can verify successful completion of the listed projects .
num proposed construction procedure at least num days before the drilled shaft concrete bearing pile work begins submit a complete written proposal of the construction procedure .
the following information is required num .
superintendent name and experience record num .
list of proposed equipment including cranes drills augers bailing buckets final cleaning equipment desanding equipment slurry pumps core sampling equipment tremies or concrete pumps casing etc .
num .
description of construction operation sequence num .
description of shaft excavation methods num .
details of mixing circulating and slurry desanding methods num .
manufacturer and type of apparatus for testing slurry num .
description of methods for cleaning the shaft excavation num .
details for placing reinforcement including support and centralization methods and num .
details for placing concrete including operational procedures for free fall tremie or pumping methods .
num review and approval the state geotechnical engineer will evaluate the proposed construction procedure and will notify the contractor if additional information is required and changes are necessary within num days after receiving the proposed construction procedure .
administrative approvals are subject to field verification of performance .
num construction preparations num site and subsurface conditions the departments test results and rock core samples are available for examination upon request .
num protection of existing structures if specified submit a preventativemeasures plan to the project manager at least num days before the construction of the shaft .
num site preparation if footings are present excavate to the footings bottom elevation before beginning shaft construction unless the contract or project manager allows otherwise .
if the contractor drills shafts in conjunction with placing embankment drill the shafts after placing the fill unless the contract or project manager allows otherwise .
num proof drilled shafts construct a proof drilled shaft when specified at the location shown in the contract .
section num drilled shafts page num construct the shaft after the state geotechnical engineer approves the equipment and methods .
if specified in the contract load test the proof shaft in accordance with the contract and section num load testing of bearing piles .
drill the shaft to the maximum depth of any production shaft unless otherwise shown in the contract .
underream the proof shaft to establish the feasibility of underreaming in a specific soil strata or rock .
fill the proof shaft with concrete in the same way as the production shafts .
if the methods and equipment produce inadequate results as determined in num acceptance the project manager will require the contractor to demonstrate acceptable results with another proof shaft .
once the proof shaft is approved construct production shafts using the same means and methods .
do not change the means or methods without written approval from the state geotechnical engineer .
cut off the proof shafts five num ft below finished grade and leave in place .
restore the proof shaft sites to their original condition .
num safety do not allow workers to enter the excavation for any reason .
num construction of drilled shafts num construction methods num dry construction method the state geotechnical engineer will approve the dry construction method when the following occurs num .
the shaft accumulates less than num inches of water above the base over a one num hr period without pumping num .
the shaft remains stable without caving sloughing or swelling over a four num hr period immediately following excavation num .
the contractor can remove loose material and water before inspection and concrete placement and num .
use of low strength grout collars to stabilize running sands or unstable zones within the drilled shaft excavation .
use the slurrydisplacement construction method or the casing construction method for shafts that do not meet these requirements .
the dry method consists of the following num .
drilling the shaft num .
removing accumulated water and loose material from the excavation num .
approval of bottom hole conditions by certified drilled shaft inspector num .
placing the reinforcing cage and num .
concreting the shaft .
num casing construction method use the casing construction method when called for in the contract or where the dry construction method is inadequate .
if necessary use the casing method combined with the slurry displacement or dry construction method .
place the casing by twisting driving or vibrating into the ground before cleaning it out unless the contract requires the contractor to place the casing in a predrilled hole .
if the contractor elects to use casings or shafts larger than those specified the contractor shall provide the concrete necessary to fill the additional volume at no additional cost to the department .
num temporary casing the department will consider subsurface casing to be temporary unless shown as permanent in the contract .
remove the temporary casing when placing concrete for the section num drilled shafts page num drilled shaft when the concrete is in a fluid state .
if the contractor removes a casing or replaces it with a longer or larger diameter casing through caving soils the contractor shall stabilize the excavation with slurry before installing the new casing .
other methods to control the stability of an excavation require approval of the foundation engineer .
before withdrawing the casing ensure that the level of concrete in the casing is at least ten num ft above either the hydrostatic water level or the drilling fluid level whichever is higher .
maintain a concrete level in the casing as it is removed so that fluid trapped behind it is displaced upward and discharged without contaminating or displacing the shaft concrete .
temporary casings that become bound or fouled during shaft construction and can not be practically removed constitute a defect .
repair defective shafts in accordance with num correction of defective drilled shafts .
num permanent casing make permanent casing continuous from top to bottom .
cut off the permanent casing at the prescribed elevation after installation .
complete the shaft by placing the reinforcing steel and concrete in the casing .
if using temporary casings in conjunction with permanent casings keep the temporary inner casing aligned with the permanent outer casing .
maintain a watertight seal between the two num casings during excavation and concrete placement where an oversized hole or temporary casing is approved by the project manager .
when approved by the foundation engineer to allow drilling an oversize hole to aid in the placement of the permanent casing post grout the exterior annular space outside of the permanent casing such that the direct contact between casing and the surrounding soilrock is created .
num slurry displacement construction method use the slurry displacement method at sites where maintaining a dry excavation is not possible .
use a mineral or polymer slurry or water to maintain stability around the holes perimeter while advancing excavating placing the reinforcing cage and placing concrete .
displace the slurry during final cleaning of the excavation with a bailing bucket air lift or submersible pump .
place concrete with a tremie or concrete pump beginning at the shaft bottom .
during construction keep the slurry level in the shaft excavation high enough to prevent caving and at least five num ft above the highest expected piezometric pressure head along the depth of the shaft .
if not using permanent casings provide temporary surface casings to aid shaft alignment and to prevent sloughing unless otherwise approved by the foundation engineer .
if the slurry construction method does not produce the necessary results discontinue operations and make corrective modifications to the procedures and equipment .
num polymer slurry requirements use polymer slurry that will stabilize the hole and inhibit the influx of ground water .
table num polymer slurry requirements emulsified or dry phpa polymer lists acceptable ranges of values for slurry viscosity and gel .
table num polymer slurry requirements emulsified or dry phpa polymer property units requirements at time of introduction or before concreting test method density pcf num num density balance viscosity secondsquart num marsh funnel ph num ph paper sand content by volume num api method note perform tests when the slurry temperature is above num f. premix the polymer slurry according to the manufacturers directions .
prevent the slurry from losing the required viscosity and gel characteristics in the shaft .
neutralize expended section num drilled shafts page num polymer slurry with bleach and remove from project to a site approved by the project manager .
num mineral slurry requirements use attapulgite in lieu of bentonite where saline or chemically contaminated groundwater occurs .
use mineral slurry with a grain size that remains in suspension and has sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport excavated material to the screening system .
provide mineral slurry in accordance with table num mineral slurry requirements sodium bentonite or attapulgite in fresh water .
table num mineral slurry requirements sodium bentonite or attapulgite in fresh water property units at time of slurry introduction in hole at time of concreting test method density pcf na num num density balance viscosity secondsquart num na marsh cone ph num num ph paper sand content na num api method note perform tests when the slurry temperature is above num f. premix the slurry according to the manufacturers directions .
prevent the slurry from setting up in the shaft .
dispose of the slurry offsite in accordance with section num disposal of other materials and debris .
num slurry control tests perform control tests on the mineral slurry to determine density viscosity ph and sand content .
do not place concrete unless the certified drilled shaft inspector has approved the bottom hole test results and after test results show acceptable values .
provide test reports to the project manager upon completion of each drilled shaft .
num preentry tests perform tests to determine viscosity and ph before pumping the slurry into the excavation .
take at least two num sets of tests during the first num h of slurry processing .
decrease the testing frequency to one num set every eight num hours when the results are consistent .
num bottom hole tests test slurry samples taken from the shaft base before placing concrete in any shaft excavation .
test until samples produce acceptable values for density ph and sand content .
num shaft excavation extend drilled shaft tip elevations when the foundation engineer determines that the material encountered during excavation is unsuitable .
dispose of materials from the shaft excavation as directed by the project manager .
when using vibrating casing do not place adjacent casings or excavate shafts until num h after pour completion of an adjacent shaft or when concrete from the adjacent shaft pour breaks at least num psi whichever comes first .
this requirement applies to excavating any shaft within four num shaft diameters of another .
num underream and overream use sidewall overreaming when the foundation engineer determines the sidewall has softened due to excavation methods swelled due to concrete placement delays or degraded section num drilled shafts page num because of slurry cake buildup .
the foundation engineer will direct the thickness and elevation of sidewall overreaming .
num obstructions remove surface and subsurface obstructions .
obstructions may include manmade materials such as old concrete foundations or natural materials such as boulders or nested cobble zones that are not anticipated in the contract .
the departments foundation or geotechnical report includes the soil boring and rock core information as well as groundwater conditions present at the time of the field investigation .
use this information to anticipate conditions .
when obstructions are encountered notify the department certified drilled shaft inspector as shown in section num obstruction removal .
num soil samples and rock cores take soil samples or rock cores at the locations shown in the contract or as directed by the foundation engineer to determine the character of material directly below the bottom shaft elevation .
perform soil borings before excavating the shafts .
perform rock cores before excavating the shaft from the bottom of an exploration hole at no additional cost to the department .
extract and ship the core samples in accordance with the departments manual of highway structure foundation investigation and subsurface exploration .
unless otherwise specified in the contract begin bore holes or rock cores at the top of the rock socket elevation to at least ten num ft below the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation .
record the rock quality designation percent recovery joint orientation and infilling and joint water from the rock cores extracted .
after exploration fill the core holes with grout slurry or mortar having a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days .
deliver the geologists field log cards to the project manager after completing the logs .
the department will not require the contractors geotechnical consultant to perform laboratory testing on soil samples or rock cores unless specifically specified in the contract .
the foundation engineer will notify the contractor of the final required shaft depth after receiving the geologists field log sheets and the lab testing results .
this notification may take as long as num h from the time the foundation engineer receives the field log sheets or the soil and rock samples test results .
num shaft excavation inspection measure the final shaft depths .
ensure that at least num of each shaft base has less than num in of sediment when placing the concrete .
ensure that the sediment depth or debris at any place on the shaft base does not exceed num inches .
for dry shafts ensure that the water depth does not exceed three num inches before pouring concrete .
inspect slurry displacement shafts using the methods that the foundation engineer deems appropriate .
receive approval of bottom hole conditions from certified drilled shaft inspector prior to continuing with the work .
num inspection procedures the project manager will notify the contractor which procedures will be used for the shaft inspections .
supply equipment and labor the project manager will need to inspect the shaft .
inspection procedures may include num .
inserting a casing in the shaft excavation temporarily for alignment cleanliness and dimension checks num .
inserting a rigid rod assembly with several num offsets equal to the shaft diameter num .
using department video equipment or num .
using a weighted tape and evaluation of results of desanding and density tests for slurry displacement excavations .
num remedial work for substandard excavation if the foundation engineer determines that a shaft excavation is substandard develop propose and implement corrective measures .
corrective measures may include section num drilled shafts page num num .
overdrilling to a larger diameter to permit reinforcing steel placement with the required minimum cover num .
overreaming sidewalls of the shaft num .
increasing steel reinforcement bar number and size or num .
enlarging the underream within allowed tolerance .
num reinforcing steel unit placement the reinforcing steel unit consists of longitudinal bars and circular ties or a structural steel shape .
place the structural shape or the reinforcing steel cage as a unit immediately after the certified drilled shaft inspector approves the shaft excavation and before placing concrete .
tie and support the reinforcing steel unit in the shaft so that it remains within allowable tolerances given in section num location and alignment tolerances .
use concrete spacers or other approved noncorrosive spacing devices at sufficient intervals near the bottom and at maximum intervals of ten num ft up the shaft to ensure concentric spacing for the entire reinforcement unit length .
use spacers equal in quality and durability to the concrete specified for the shaft .
inspect the bottom of the shaft immediately before placing of the cage to ensure that there is no sloughing .
check the top elevation of the reinforcement unit before and after placing the concrete .
if the reinforcement unit is not maintained within the specified tolerances make corrections .
do not construct additional shafts before modifying the reinforcement unit support to the satisfaction of the project manager .
maintain the reinforcement unit at the proper elevation and orientation with an approved support mechanism at the ground surface .
place shaft concrete immediately after installing the cage .
if more than num h elapses between the placement of the cage and concrete placement remove the cage and inspect the shaft for sloughing or other damage .
num concrete placement place concrete in accordance with section num concrete structures .
place concrete as soon as possible after placing reinforcing steel .
ensure that the time from when the concrete is batched at the plant to placement does not exceed num h. the project manager may approve a longer time period if the concrete mixture remains workable and plastic .
use admixtures for the job conditions so the concrete remains in a workable plastic state through the approved placement limit .
num concrete placement by free fall use free fall placement in relatively dry holes where the maximum water depth does not exceed three num inches .
ensure that free fallplaced concrete falls directly to the base without contacting either the rebar cage or hole sidewall .
use a hopper at the top of the shaft or a rigid pipe extension from the hopper .
ensure that free fall placement does not exceed num ft below the bottom of the hopper or the rigid pipe extension .
do not use free fall in slurry displacement shafts .
if the project manager determines that concrete can not be placed using the free fall method use either a tremie or pumping to accomplish the pour .
num concrete placement with tremie or by pumping use rigid tremie pipe or concrete pumps for concrete placement in either dry or slurry displacement shafts .
place plug within tremie or pump line to ensure concrete does not segregate prior to developing concrete pressure head within tremie or pump line and that plug does not discharge from tremie or pump line prior to concrete developing continuous flow .
do not begin underwater placement before placing the tremie or pump line within one num tremie or pump line diameter of the shaft base elevation .
remove plugs from the excavation if the project manager does not specifically approve them to remain in the shaft .
keep the discharge end continually immersed at least five num ft in concrete after starting the flow of concrete .
keep the concrete flow continuous .
maintain the concrete in tremies or pump lines continuously at a positive pressure differential to prevent water or slurry intrusion into the shaft section num drilled shafts page num concrete .
when lifting pump lines during concrete placement temporarily reduce the line pressure until the orifice has been repositioned at a higher level in the excavation .
if at any time during the concrete pour the orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level the department will consider the shaft defective .
the contractor may at its own risk and cost remove the reinforcing cage and concrete to complete the necessary sidewall removal as directed by the foundation engineer .
the department will base final acceptance in accordance with section num acceptance .
num location and alignment tolerances adhere to the following construction tolerances unless otherwise stated in the contract or directed by the project manager num .
ensure the drilled shaft and the concentric reinforcement steel unit is within three num inches of plan position at the top of the shaft num .
do not vary the vertical alignment of a vertical drilled shaft from the plan alignment by more than num inch per foot of depth .
do not vary alignment of a battered drilled shaft by more than num inch per foot of depth from the specified batter num .
ensure that the top of the reinforcing steel unit is no more than six num inches above and no more than three num inches below plan elevation and num .
ensure that the top elevation has a tolerance of num inch or num inch from the plan top of shaft elevation .
num load testing when the contract includes load testing complete the testing before construction of production shafts unless otherwise approved by the state geotechnical engineer .
allow three num working days after the last load test is completed before receiving tip elevations of the production shafts from the state geotechnical engineer and proceeding with the construction of production shafts .
after testing is completed cut off the test shafts and reaction shafts at an elevation of five num ft below the finished ground elevation .
num acceptance num concrete strength the department will accept drilled shafts after the numday compressive strength is verified .
if the contractor does not achieve the numday compressive strength the department may completely reject the shafts or accept them in place in accordance with subsection num price adjustments .
num location and alignment tolerances the department will accept drilled shafts if the construction tolerances are satisfied in accordance with section num location and alignment tolerances .
if the shafts exceed the location or alignment tolerances the department will reject the shafts .
if the state geotechnical engineer determines that the extent of overloading is not detrimental to the performance of the shaft the department will accept the shaft .
num shaft integrity if applicable the department will accept shafts when the pile integrity testing reports verify the structural integrity of the piles .
the department may reject a shaft if integrity testing shows conclusive evidence that a defect exists in the shaft that may result in inadequate or unsafe performance under service loads .
if the report is inconclusive the state geotechnical engineer may require the contractor to drill a core hole in the shaft .
if the core hole confirms the defect the department will not pay the coring costs .
if the core hole does not find a defect the department will pay for coring costs including pressure grouting .
num correction of defective drilled shafts section num drilled shafts page num if the department determines that a shaft is unacceptable submit a plan for remedial action to the project manager for approval .
provide calculations and working drawings stamped by a new mexico registered professional engineer for all foundation elements affected by the proposed corrections .
make corrections to drilled shafts r at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement num drilled shafts the department will not measure additional shaft depth or additional shafts used due to defective procedures .
the department will only measure the first proof shaft constructed in place .
num soil borings and rock cores the department will measure soil borings from the bottom of the exploration hole to existing grade .
the department will measure rock cores from the point at which rock cores are recovered to the bottom of the rock coring .
num obstruction removal the department will measure an obstruction vertically beginning where it is encountered and ending where conventional drilling equipment adequately advances the hole .
to qualify for obstruction removal measurement get the certified drilled shaft inspectors authorization and meet the following requirements num .
hole advancement requires special procedures and tools such as chisels boulder breakers percussion hammers core barrels air tools hand excavation temporary casing or increasing hole diameter or num .
the rate of auger advancement is decreased to where the drilling rate through the obstruction is less than num of the drilling rate above the obstruction .
obstruction removal cost will include delay costs .
the department will not allow additional contract time unless the project manager approves a detailed schedule analysis establishing the critical path of the additional time required to complete the obstruction removal .
the department will not measure obstruction removal outside the specified shaft diameter .
num certified drilled shaft inspector provide a certified drilled shaft inspector to oversee and inspect all aspects of the drilled shaft construction and sign the nmdot drilled shaft inspection reports .
provide certification through nmdot ttcp or international association of foundation drilling also identified as adsc .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit drilled shaft foundation____diameter foot permanent casing____diameter foot steel shape reinforcement pound soil borings foot rock cores foot obstruction removal foot section num drilled shafts page num steel reinforcement in the drilled shaft is paid for under section num except for overhead sign structures which are address in section num .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
methods employed by the contractor to maintain stability of the shaft including the use of temporary casings slurry assisted shaft excavation or use of grout collars b .
all work associated with sidewall overreaming c. drilled shaft concrete required to fill shafts including oversized excavations underreams and overreams d. excavation of anticipated materials shown in the contract of different densities and character including employment of special tools and procedures necessary to accomplish the excavation through bedrock e. additional wall thickness required for handling and installation of permanent casing f. the equipment and labor required for the shaft inspection procedure and g. certified drilled shaft inspection .
section num load testing of bearing piles page num section num load testing of bearing piles num description this work consists of static axial compressive load tests pile load test static axial tensile load tests pile pullout tests and high strain dynamic measurements dynamic measurements of piles for the purpose of determining ultimate bearing capacity and pile pullout capacity .
for driven piles dynamic measurements determine driving stresses pile integrity and hammer efficiency .
for castinplace concrete piles drilled shafts dynamic measurements verify pile integrity .
num contractors responsibilities num dynamic measurements provide labor equipment and materials necessary to drill the dynamic test piles holes and for mounting transducers .
provide the analysis equipment power supply .
where dynamic measurements are to be made on castinplace piles provide a gravity drop hammer and pile cushioning .
excavate around the pile cut the permanent casing drill holes in the test piles and provide impacts on castinplace dynamic test piles as required .
num pile load and pile pullout tests provide everything necessary to perform pile load or pile pullout tests .
record load measurement and pile movement readings and produce a reports showing the load displacement curves .
num departments responsibilities num dynamic measurements the department will provide the equipment to perform dynamic measurements .
the department will provide personnel to take the dynamic measurements .
num pile load and pile pullout tests the contract will specify the anchor pile requirements .
the department will provide personnel to observe and monitor the contractors test apparatus test methods and data collection .
num pile testing mobilization mobilize testing equipment as needed and as designated by the contract or authorized by the state geotechnical engineer .
mobilize testing equipment only after receipt of written authorization .
num submittals num load test frame submit the proposed load test frame and anchorage method details and design computations num days before the start of pile load tests and pile pullout tests .
use a professional engineer licensed in new mexico to prepare and seal the proposed loading apparatus detail plans .
num certificates of calibration submit a calibration certificate and a calibration chart relating pressure to load for the section num load testing of bearing piles page num load pressure gauges from a certified laboratory before use .
calibrate each jack and its gauge as a unit .
submit a calibration certificate for load cells .
calibrate gauges and cells within six num months before use .
num pile and equipment data form submit a pile and driving equipment data form as required in section num pile driving equipment submittals when proposing a gravity drop hammer for dynamic measurements of castinplace piles .
num equipment num equipment for dynamic testing num power supply provide dynamic test equipment electric power that supplies num a num v num hz to num hz a.c. only .
if a field generator is used as the power source provide functioning voltage and frequency level monitoring meters .
num gauge mounting equipment provide a power drill bits taps and expandable masonry anchor studs to drill holes in the dynamic test piles for bolting transducers to the piles .
provide a six num lb rubber mallet hammer when dynamic testing is specified on precast concrete piles .
num personnel lift to assist the departments installation of instruments provide a hydraulic telescoping arm personnel lift .
provide a personnel lift with adequate length to reach the top of the pile located in the leads .
the contractor may use an alternative to a personnel lift in accordance with section num preparation for testing .
num gravity drop hammer provide a gravity drop hammer and pile cushion when castinplace piles dynamic testing is specified .
provide the minimum hammer ram weight and free fall height and cushion thickness specified in the contract .
equip gravity hammers with guides to ensure concentric drive head impact .
if approved by the state geotechnical engineer the contractor may use a diesel hammer with the minimum required ram weight and impact energy .
cutoff the fuel flow .
num equipment for pile load test provide testing equipment and measuring systems in accordance with astm d num except as modified within these specifications .
num load system provide a load system capable of applying num of the required ultimate pile capacity .
provide a load test frame design compatible with the anchor pile requirements in accordance with section num test pile and anchor pile requirements .
construct the apparatus so that it is possible to place load increments gradually without causing test pile or load test frame vibration .
num load application system section num load testing of bearing piles page num use hydraulic jacks to apply the load .
when using multiple jacks fit each jack with a pressure gauge in addition to the master hydraulic pressure gauge .
use jacks from the same manufacturer with the same rated capacity .
connect jacks to a common manifold with pressure supplied by one num hydraulic pump .
num load measuring system provide a dual load measuring system gauge and load cell to verify the test pile load .
calibrate the load cell and mount it between the load frame and the pile head to confirm the load recorded from the pressure gauge .
num settlement measuring system use a dual settlement measuring system .
provide two num dial gauges bearing on the reference beams at opposite sides of the pile below the test plate .
support the reference beams outside of pilesoil movement influences .
provide two num linear variable differentiating transformers with remote digital readouts bearing on reference beams on opposite sides of the pile .
num equipment for pile pullout test use testing equipment and measuring systems in accordance with section num equipment for pile load test except as modified within these specifications .
num load system provide a load system capable of applying num of the required ultimate pile pullout capacity .
num reaction system it is permissible to use suitable cribbing or other bearing plates for reaction points instead of anchor piles .
use cribbing or bearing plates of sufficient size and stiffness to limit undesirable reaction frame movement .
num testing requirements num dynamic pile testing requirements perform dynamic testing during the pile driving as described in the contract as dynamic test piles .
the state geotechnical engineer may decide to designate additional piles shown in the contract as dynamic test piles .
num notification to proceed notify the project manager at least num days before commencing dynamic test pile testing .
confirm the testing schedule with the project manager num days before the testing date .
notify the project manager promptly of any changes in the schedule .
test dynamic test piles before any other piles are driven or installed unless the project manager approves otherwise .
num preparation for testing prepare dynamic test piles as follows num .
drilling for mounting transducers .
drill holes for mounting the transducers .
bolt the instruments near the head of the pile at the location and using a bolt pattern designated by the state geotechnical engineer .
drilling requirements for each test pile include the following num .
steel pipe piles seven num holes drilled with a num inch diameter bit tapped to accommodate ¼ in bolts num .
steel hp piles five num holes drilled with a num inch diameter bit through the section num load testing of bearing piles page num web num .
precast concrete or castinplace concrete piles seven num ¼ inch x num ½ inch holes with ¼ inch expandable anchor studs set in the holes to accommodate ¼ inch bolts num .
wave speed measurements .
when precast concrete piles are specified as dynamic test piles place the pile horizontally on wooden sleepers so that it is not in contact with the ground or with other piling .
the state geotechnical engineer will take wave speed measurements for the pile driving analyzer pda by hitting the pile with a six num lb rubber mallet hammer .
the department will not require wave speed measurements for steel piles num .
transducer installation .
install the instruments while the pile is in the leads using a manlift raised to the top of the pile .
as an alternative to the manlift requirement the state geotechnical engineer may install the instruments after the pile is driven to a tip elevation of ten num ft above the plan tip elevation .
num procedure for testing driven piles the following are the procedures for testing driven piles num .
drive the test pile in accordance with section num pile driving operations while the state geotechnical engineer monitors the dynamic measurements num .
monitor the test pile stresses that result from the driving to ensure that the compressive or tensile stresses do not exceed the allowable driving stresses as defined in table num wave equation analysis allowable driving stress .
if the monitored pile stresses exceed these criteria stop driving .
perform necessary modifications to the driving operation to ensure that pile damage does not occur num .
monitor the test pile stresses on individual gauges to determine if nonaxial driving is indicated .
if the pile bends beyond acceptable allowances stop driving and realign the driving system num .
if the contract specifies an estimated penetration elevation drive the first dynamic test pile until the required ultimate capacity or the estimated penetration elevation is achieved if the contract specifies a minimum penetration elevation drive the first dynamic test pile to that elevation if the test pile does not achieve the required ultimate capacity at the estimated or minimum penetration elevation splice the test pile with additional length of pile .
remove and relocate the instruments to the spliced section .
proceed with driving until the ultimate driving capacity is achieved num .
fortyeight hours after the initial drive restrike each test pile previously driven with the dynamic measuring equipment installed .
the state geotechnical engineer may allow shorter wait periods depending on soil and test conditions .
alternatively the contract may require longer wait periods multiple restrike intervals or both on a given test pile .
use a warm hammer that has previously driven at least one num pile other than the test piles to restrike the test piles .
the maximum total number of hammer blows for the restrike is num .
num procedure for testing castinplace piles the following are the procedures for testing castinplace piles num .
when the contractor casts the dynamic test piles the inspector will make three num test cylinders of concrete or grout for each test pile in accordance with aashto t numm .
provide concrete that will achieve a compressive strength at seven num days of num psi num .
after seven num days weigh the three num concrete test cylinders and report the average unit weight to the state geotechnical engineer .
section num load testing of bearing piles page num test one num concrete cylinder at seven num days .
if the compressive strength is at least num psi test the other two num cylinders .
report the average of the three num breaks to the state geotechnical engineer .
perform the dynamic test on the test pile the same day that the cylinders are broken num .
if the first test cylinder breaks at less than num psi report the result to the state geotechnical engineer .
the state geotechnical engineer may decide either to have the last two num cylinders tested the same day or to wait up to a maximum of num additional days before breaking the last two num cylinders .
the day the last two num cylinders are tested reweigh the cylinders and determine the average unit weight of the concrete .
perform the dynamic test on the test pile the same day the last two num cylinders are broken there will be no added compensation to the contractor and no time extension to the contract if delays occur because the concrete does not achieve the required strength at seven num days .
num .
use the average compressive strength and the average unit weight of the concrete to estimate the modulus of elasticity and the wave speed of the concrete for input into the pda num .
perform excavation around the test pile as needed to mount the gauges .
typically the required depth of excavation will be twice the diameter of the pile num .
attach the instruments to the pile head and impact the pile with the ram at the free fall height directed by the state geotechnical engineer .
each test pile will not require more than num blows .
monitor the pile stresses that result from the ram impact to ensure that the compressive or tensile stresses do not exceed the allowable pile driving stresses defined in table num wave equation analysis allowable driving stress .
if the monitored pile stresses exceed these criteria the department will direct the contractor to reduce the ram free fall height or add pile cushioning .
num case pile wave analysis after restriking a dynamic test pile the state geotechnical engineer may phone an approved firm and transmit a record of a representative blow from the dynamic test pile .
the firm must have proven experience using the case pile wave analysis program model and be capable of returning analysis results to the state geotechnical engineer within one num working day from the time of transmission .
at the option of the state geotechnical engineer department personnel may perform the case pile wave analysis program .
num pile load and pile pullout testing requirements num test pile and anchor pile requirements num .
driven piles .
apply the load to a production pile driven in the final plan location unless otherwise specified in the contract and apply the test frame against anchor tension piles use production piles driven in final plan locations for the anchor piles unless the layout of the test frame reaction points is fixed and inconsistent with the production pile layout or unless an alternative pile type is required to develop adequate pullout resistance .
the project manager will decide if anchor piles that are not final production piles may be cutoff below final grade or pulled after the testing is completed num .
castinplace piles .
apply the load to a production pile located in the final plan location unless otherwise shown in the contract .
use either driven piles or castin place piles as anchor piles .
do not use anchor piles as final production piles .
section num load testing of bearing piles page num provide castinplace anchor piles with reinforcement capable of carrying the pile tension force .
num commencement of load test unless otherwise specified in the contract wait a minimum of num h between driving or installing anchor piles or the test pile and commencing with the pile load or pile pullout test .
when testing pipe piles filled with concrete or castinplace concrete piles begin load tests after the concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
num load testing procedures conduct pile load tests and pile pullout tests in accordance with the following requirements num .
perform the quick load test method for individual piles in accordance with astm d num but take the load test to the first of either failure of the test pile or capacity of the load system num .
test pile failure is defined as total vertical pile movement equal to the greater of either five percent num of the pile diameter or two num inches num .
if failure occurs remove the test load in four num approximately equal amounts with a fiveminute interval between removals num .
for pile load tests where piles are num inch or less in diameter or width the ultimate capacity is the load that produces a settlement of the pile head in accordance with the following equation .num num .num num d s sf num where sf is the settlement at the ultimate pile capacity in inches d is the pile diameter or width in inches s is the elastic deformation of pile length in inches use the following equation for piles with diameters or widths greater than num inches num d s sf num where sf is the settlement at the ultimate pile capacity in inches d is the pile diameter or width in inches s is the elastic deformation of pile length in inches num .
for pile pullout tests the state geotechnical engineer will determine when the ultimate pile capacity is attained .
num completion of dynamic testing of driven piles after completing the dynamic test piles at a substructure element prepare the piles for any specified pile load or pile pullout tests .
if no load testing is required as determined in section num pile acceptance the required field acceptance criteria for the production piles is dynamic testing .
when dynamic testing alone is specified the state geotechnical engineer will require up to num h after completion of the last test pile to provide the driving criteria .
drive production piles no deeper than the estimated or minimum penetration elevation section num load testing of bearing piles page num before receiving the field acceptance criteria .
record the average hammer stroke and pile set after driving of each pile to determine pile acceptance once the driving criteria is established .
after receiving the field acceptance criteria drive piles until attaining the required ultimate capacity .
num completion of dynamic testing of castinplace piles base the required production pile tip elevation on the dynamic testing and load testing results if specified .
the state geotechnical engineer will require up to num h after completion of the last test pile to provide the pile tip elevation .
unless the state geotechnical engineer directs otherwise place no other piles until receiving the production pile tip elevation .
num completion of load testing after completing the specified load tests to the project managers satisfaction dismantle the test apparatus and equipment and remove from the site .
use the load test results to determine the ultimate pile capacity acceptance criteria of driven piles as established under section num pile acceptance and to confirm ultimate pile capacities determined by dynamic pile tests .
pulled anchor piles of the same type as the production piles may be reused as production piles if not rejected by the project manager due to damage as covered in section num damaged pile limitations .
for castinplace piles use the load test results to determine the pile penetration requirements if no subsequent dynamic testing is specified .
the state geotechnical engineer will require up to num h after completion of the last test pile to provide the pile tip elevation .
redrive production piles used as anchor piles in accordance with section num pile acceptance .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit pile testing mobilization lump sum pile load test each pile pullout test each pile dynamic test each case pile wave analysis test each num work included in payment the following work will be considered as included in the payment for the mail items and will not be measured or paid for separately nonproduction anchor and test piles which will not remain in use as part of the permanent structure .
section num pile integrity testing page num section num pile integrity testing num description num general this work consists of pile integrity testing for verifying structural integrity and determining the extent and location of pile defects .
defects may include internal voids necking of the piles perimeter transverse cracks soil intrusions weak concrete or grout in drilled shaft foundations .
num test methods use crosshole sonic logging csl or low strain integrity lsi testing for integrity testing .
the department may require lsi testing to corroborate the results of csl testing that show potential defects .
only an approved integrity testing consultant or department personnel will perform csl or lsi testing .
num consultant integrity testing if an integrity testing consultant is required the consultants qualifications must meet the requirements of the geotechnical design section and the equipment used must meet the requirements of section num csl testing equipment and section num lsi testing equipment .
perform field testing with an experienced technician or engineer having at least one num year of experience with the integrity testing methods .
use a licensed professional engineer having at least three num years of experience in the integrity testing methods performed to interpret the recorded measurements .
num department integrity testing department personnel will only perform integrity testing when the contract specifies csl or lsi department testing .
department personnel will use departmentowned equipment to perform testing .
num assistance provide additional labor to perform the testing if required by the testing consultant or department personnel .
provide access to the piles .
if required provide a num v num hz to num hz ac power supply .
num materials num csl access tubes use two num inch internal diameter id access tubes of schedule num pvc with a round regular id free of defects or obstructions to allow passage of the source and receiver probes .
provide watertight tubes with clean internal and external surfaces to ensure a good bond between the concrete and tubes .
fit the tubes with glued caps at the bottom and threaded caps at the top .
num construction requirements num equipment num csl testing equipment use csl equipment in accordance with the following requirements num .
use ultrasonic source and receiver probes capable of producing records with strong signal amplitude and energy through uniform high quality concrete .
use probes with a diameter and cabling that will descend freely through two num inch id pipe for the full pile depth section num pile integrity testing page num num .
record probe depth num .
use a microprocessorbased csl measurement system for analogdigital conversion and data recording individual record display receiver response analysis and log printing num .
ensure that the csl system has filteramplification of data and cables num .
use a csl system that has a synchronized triggering feature with the ultrasonic pulse for the recording system .
num lsi testing equipment use lsi testing equipment that meets the following requirements num .
use equipment that has a digital data acquisition system with a dynamic signal analyzer magnetic disk storage and hardcopy plotting capabilities .
ensure that the analyzer has both signal conditioning and power supply with high signaltonoise ratios and variable frequency filtering to mitigate steel reinforcing and surface waves vibration noise .
ensure that the data is displayed in the field so that a preliminary data quality evaluation is possible num .
provide a receiver that is a suitable velocity transducer or accelerometer and place on the pile head .
num csl testing requirements num preparation of csl access tubes place access tubes in drilled shafts where the wethole construction method was used or as directed by the state geotechnical engineer .
install access tubes as shown in the plans .
fasten the tubes to the exterior reinforcement cage so the tube bottoms are six num inches above the shaft bottom and the tube tops are num inches above the shaft top .
tie the tubes to the cage and glue the tubes together while lowering the cage into the shaft .
immediately after concrete or grout placement fill the tubes with clean water and cap .
num csl testing procedure before construction of the substructure above the foundation direct the csl consultant to test the completed piles from two num days to ten num days after completing concrete or grout placement .
provide information about the piles bottom and top elevations tube lengths and positions and construction dates to the integrity testing consultant or department personnel before logging .
log between each adjacent pair of tubes in the pile .
place the source and receiver probes in the same horizontal plane unless test results indicate potential defects .
if potential defects are indicated evaluate the area further using angled tests with the source and receiver vertically offset in the tubes .
additional testing of other untested tube pair combinations may be required .
simultaneously pull the probes from the tube bottom of the over the depth wheel or other measuring device once the slack is taken out of the cables to provide accurate depth measurements .
take the csl measurements at num num inch intervals or less from the bottom to top of the pile .
report defects indicated by longer pulse arrival times and significantly lower amplitudeenergy signals to the state geotechnical engineer .
the state geotechnical engineer may require further tests to evaluate the extent of the defects .
refill csl tubes with water after testing the shafts containing defects indicated by the initial csl testing .
num csl testing results report the results of completed csl testing at a given substructure element within num days after testing completion for that element .
provide report copies to the state section num pile integrity testing page num geotechnical engineer and the project manager that contain the following information num .
csl logs indicate defect zones on the csl logs num .
initial pulse arrival time versus depth and pulse amplitudeenergy versus depth analyses and num .
narrative .
num lsi testing requirements num pile head preparation ensure that the pile head is perpendicular to the piles vertical axis and is made of sound concrete .
remove weak poor quality or broken concrete from the pile head to expose sound concrete .
clearly expose the pile head and free it of debris and water .
ground the pile head center impacted by the impulse hammer smooth along with the pile edge area where transducers are attached to provide a flat horizontal surface for the lsi test .
num lsi testing procedure perform lsi testing only when specified or when required by the state geotechnical engineer due to potential defects indicated by csl testing results .
impact the pile head with a hammer that can produce a compression wave capable of being reflected from the pile toe .
lsi testing may only be effective to depths of num times to num times the pile diameter .
take lsi testing measurements in both the time and frequency domains .
display the motion record pile top velocity on a hard copy as a function of time .
high soil friction may require velocity signal magnification using integration with exponentially increasing magnitude to enhance the pile toe reflection .
average several consistent records .
in addition to the velocity records as a function of time the amplified and averaged difference between velocity and force may be displayed to provide additional information about the pile top quality including dynamic stiffness .
use transient response or impulse response using hammer force in the frequency domain mobility to provide additional defect determination of the pile .
num lsi testing results report lsi testing results completed at a given substructure element within num days after completing testing for that element .
provide report copies to the state geotechnical engineer and the project manager that contain the following information num .
pile length and concrete quality analyses num .
pile integrity opinions based on lsi testing num .
correlation of potential defects to those indicated by the csl test results if performed num .
pile head dynamic stiffness num .
mobility a measure of crosssectional area and concrete quality num .
plots of the averaged amplified velocity and acceleration versus time and if required the mobility versus frequency and num .
narrative .
num acceptance and rejection of piles the department will accept piles if pile integrity testing reports verify the structural integrity of the piles .
pile rejection will require conclusive evidence that a defect exists that may result in inadequate or unsafe performance under service loads .
if the report is inconclusive the state geotechnical engineer may require the contractor to drill a core hole into the defective pile .
the department will reject shafts where velocities are less than num ft per second and section num pile integrity testing page num the anomalous velocity is less than num of the baseline velocity of the csl record .
such rejection may be due to tubes not being tied in a plumb position and with equal offsets from adjacent tubes .
if a pile is unacceptable submit a remedial action plan to the state geotechnical engineer .
provide calculations and working drawings stamped by a registered professional engineer for foundation elements affected by modifications to the foundation piles and load transfer mechanisms caused by the remedial action .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit csl consultant testing each csl department testing each lsi consultant testing each lsi department testing each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and no direct payment will be made therefore a .
furnishing all materials labor tools and equipment necessary to complete the work b .
assistance to the consultant or department personnel necessary to complete the work c. csl access tubes and d. calculations and working drawings stamped by a registered professional engineer for all foundation elements requiring remedial action and all labor and materials necessary to complete corrections for rejected piles .
if a defect is confirmed by coring of the concrete materials and labor for coring will be at the expense of the contractor .
if no defects are found the department will pay for all coring costs including pressure grouting of the core holes .
the time period allowed to perform testing shall be no less than num hours to no more than num days from time of completion of the construction of the pile .
section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures page num section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures num description this work consists of designing providing and constructing mechanically stabilized earth mse retaining structures .
num materials num precast concrete elements provide precast concrete elements conforming with section num precast concrete structures .
provide class aa concrete .
the precast concrete supplier shall prepare the mix design and the state materials bureau will approve it .
num casting place the precast concrete face panels on a horizontal surface with the front face of the panel at the bottom of the form .
set connection hardware in the rear face .
place the concrete in each precast concrete panel without interruption and consolidate it with an approved vibrator and hand tamping to force the concrete into the corner of the forms and eliminate the formation of stone pockets or cleavage planes .
use clear form oil throughout the casting operation .
num finish num nonexposed surfaces screed the rear faces of precast concrete panels to create a uniform surface texture that is free of open pockets of aggregates and surface distortions greater than num inch .
apply a class i finish per section num concrete structures to other nonexposed surfaces .
num exposed surfaces provide the type of finish on the exposed surface per the contract .
if the contract requires an exposed aggregate finish produce as follows num .
before placing concrete apply a set retarder to the casting forms in accordance with the manufacturers instructions num .
after removing the forms and after the concrete has set sufficiently to prevent dislodging expose the aggregate with a combination of brushing and washing using clean water to a depth of between num inch and num inch and num .
apply an acrylic resin sealer consisting of num thinner and num acrylic solids by weight to the exposed aggregate surface at a rate of one num gal per num ftnum .
num tolerances manufacture the precast concrete elements in accordance with the following tolerances num .
dimensions within precast concrete panels num inch num .
surface defects num .
smooth formed surfaces not greater than num inch within five num feet num .
texturedfinish surfaces not greater than num inch within five num feet .
num .
differences in diagonal lengths not greater than num inch .
num identification and markings inscribe the manufacture date the production lot number and the piece mark on a non exposed surface of each element .
section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures page num num handling storage and shipping handle store and ship units in a manner that eliminates damage and discoloration .
num compressive strength do not ship or place elements in the wall until the design strength is reached .
cast wall panels on a flat area and fully support them until the concrete reaches a minimum compressive strength of num psi as determined by the maturity method detailed in section num inplace concrete strength measurements .
unless otherwise specified by the wall manufacturer do not handle the elements until they reach a compressive strength of num psi .
num rejection the following defects are sufficient cause for rejection num .
connection defects and outoftolerance connection imbedsinserts num .
defects indicating imperfect molding num .
defects indicating honeycombing or open texture concrete num .
cracked or severely chipped panels num .
color variation on front face of panel due to excess form oil or other reason and num .
presence of oil on panels .
num reinforcing steel provide reinforcing steel in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num soil reinforcement do not use geosynthetics for soil reinforcement .
galvanize steel connection hardware in accordance with aashto m num .
support the soil reinforcement while lifting and placing so that the galvanization remains intact and does not crack .
num reinforcing strips hot roll reinforcing strips from bars to the required shape and dimensions .
provide reinforcing strips with physical and mechanical properties in accordance with aashto m numm grade num or equivalent .
provide shopfabricated tie strips of hot rolled steel in accordance with astm a num grade num or equivalent .
the minimumbending radius of the tie strips is one num inch .
apply galvanization after strip fabrication .
num reinforcing bar mats provide reinforcing bar mats of colddrawn steel wire in accordance with aashto m num and weld the mats into the finished mesh fabric in accordance with aashto m num .
form mesh button heads so that variations between the longest and shortest wire in any mesh is less than one num inch .
apply galvanization after mesh fabrication .
provide a numinch coil embed of cold drawn steel wire in accordance with aisi c num .
num connector pins provide connector pins and mat bars from anum steel and weld to the soil reinforcement mats .
provide connector bars of cold drawn steel wire in accordance with aashto m num .
num fasteners provide fasteners in accordance with the contract or the approved working drawings .
cast fasteners in the precast concrete panels so that the fasteners are in alignment .
this will result in fasteners transferring a full and even load to the grid or strap reinforcement .
the section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures page num tolerance between the fastener and the reinforcement grid or straps for field installation is num inch .
galvanize and provide fasteners in accordance with aashto m num .
num precast concrete panel joints where walls wrap around a corner provide a corner block panel with flange extensions that will allow differential movement without exposing the panel joints .
provide joint filler bearing pads and filter fabric in accordance with the wall manufacturers recommendations and the approved working drawings .
if required provide flexible foam strips for filler in vertical joints between panels and in horizontal joints where pads are used in accordance with the plans .
provide the following for horizontal joints between panels num .
preformed ethylene propylene diene monomer epdm rubber pads in accordance with astm d num for numaa num rubbers num .
neoprene elastomeric pads having a durometer hardness astm d num of num num or num .
highdensity polyethylene pads with a minimum density of num lb per cubic foot in accordance with astm d num .
cover the joints between panels on the backside of the wall with a geotextile meeting the requirements for filtration applications in accordance with section num separator geotextile class num .
provide a minimum lap width of one num ft. num reinforced soil backfill material provide backfill that is free of shale organic matter and other soft particles of poor durability .
provide backfill with a soundness loss of num or less if tested in accordance with aashto t num using a magnesium sulfate solution with a test duration of four num cycles .
determine gradations in accordance with aashto t num and table num backfill gradation requirements unless otherwise specified .
table num backfill gradation requirements sieve size passing four num inch num no .
num num no .
num num provide backfill with a pi no greater than num in accordance with aashto t num .
the department defines rock backfill as the material described in section num backfill material that is composed primarily of rock fragments material having less than num passing a num inch sieve and no more than five percent num passing a no .
num sieve .
if using rock backfill place a separator geotextile over the top of the backfill material before placing the top two num ft of backfill .
also place a separator geotextile between the rock backfill and the random fill as the reinforced soil backfill is placed .
provide a separator geotextile in accordance with the minimum requirements for filtration applications in aashto m num and section num soil and drainage geotextiles .
ensure the upper two num ft of backfill does not contain stones larger than three num inches at their greatest dimension and is free of rock backfill .
num internal friction angle requirement provide backfill that exhibits an angle of internal friction of at least num in accordance with aashto t num unless otherwise specified in the contract .
run the test on the backfill material passing the no .
num sieve .
compact the sample in accordance with section num compaction at optimum moisture content to num of maximum density .
the department will section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures page num not require direct shear testing for backfills when the gradation is less than num passing a num inch sieve .
num electrochemical requirements provide backfill in accordance with table num electrochemical requirements when using steel soil reinforcement .
table num electrochemical requirements characteristic requirement test method ph num aashto t num resistivity num ohmcm aashto t num chlorides num ppm a aashto t num sulfates num ppm a aashto t num organic content one percent num aashto t num the department will not require electrochemical testing for backfills when the gradation is less than num passing a num inch sieve and less than five percent num passing the no .
num sieve .
recycled concrete aggregate is not allowed .
num castinplace concrete provide castinplace concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs section num portland cement concrete and section num concrete structures .
unless otherwise approved use class a concrete for castinplace concrete .
num submittals ensure a new mexico registered engineer signs and seals working drawings and design calculations .
num working drawings submit working drawings to the state bridge engineer for review and approval at least num days before beginning work on mse retaining structures .
submit three num complete sets of halfsize prints for preliminary review .
the state bridge engineer will return one num set of prints to the contractor with notations .
make necessary corrections and submit eight num sets of prints for final review approval and distribution .
do not begin fabrication or erection before receiving written notification that the drawings are approved .
working drawings shall include the following num .
layout of the wall including plan and elevation views num .
existing ground elevations field verified by the contractor for each location that will involve wall construction wholly or in part on natural ground num .
complete details of elements and component parts required for the proper construction of the system num .
a complete listing of materials specifications num .
earthwork requirements including specifications for material and compaction and num .
other information required by the contract or requested by the state bridge engineer .
approval of the final working drawings covers the requirements for strength and detail and the department assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions in the working drawings .
provide three num sets of the manufacturers written erection instructions with the final working drawings submittal .
num design calculations section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures page num along with the working drawing submittals submit complete design calculations including those required to establish service life to the state geotechnical engineer for approval .
ensure the calculations confirm that the proposed design satisfies the design parameters in accordance with the contract and aashtos standard specifications for highway bridges or fhwa standards publication fhwanhinum mechanically stabilized earth walls and reinforced soil slopes design and construction guidelines whichever is more restrictive .
provide structures in accordance with table num design parameters unless otherwise specified in the contract .
table num design parameters description value factor of safety against overturning num factor of safety against sliding num service life num years service life supporting structure loads num years soil unit weight retained num lbft num soil unit weight reinforced num lbft num friction angle retained soil num friction angle reinforced soil num coefficient of sliding friction a allowable bearing pressure a ain accordance with the contract .
num certificates of compliance provide the project manager with a certificate of compliance for the material excluding backfill and concrete that certifies that the material is in accordance with the contract and the approved working drawings .
num exposed surface finish panel sample if the contract requires an exposed aggregate or other architectural finish deliver a num inch num inch panel finished as specified to the project for approval by the landscape architect .
num construction requirements num excavation conduct wall construction excavation as unclassified excavation in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment .
num foundation preparation grade the foundation for the structural volume level for the entire area of the base of the structure plus num inches on all sides or as shown in the contract .
before wall construction proofroll the foundation with a minimum of three num passes of an eight num ton smoothsheet vibratory roller or equal as approved by the project manager .
remove unacceptable foundation material replace with suitable material and compact in accordance with this paragraph unless otherwise approved by the state geotechnical engineer .
num concrete leveling pad provide a leveling pad in accordance with the approved working drawings .
cure the pads at least num hours before placement of wall panels .
section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures page num num wall erection erect walls in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
ensure that a field representative from the manufacturer is available during the erection of the first ten percent num of the wall and as directed by the project manager to assist the fabricator contractor and project manager .
place panels so that their final position is vertical or battered in accordance with the contract .
sequence the placement of panels in successive horizontal lifts during backfill placement in accordance with the working drawings .
num placement tolerances when placing backfill material maintain the panels in the specified vertical alignment with temporary wedges or bracing as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure that vertical and horizontal alignment tolerances do not exceed .num inch if measured with a ten num ft straightedge .
ensure that the overall horizontal tolerance plumbness of the vertical wall does not exceed .num inch per ten num ft .
ensure that the offset at any panel joint does not exceed num inch .
num placement of reinforcement elements place the reinforcement elements normal to the face of the wall unless otherwise shown on the plans .
ensure that the reinforcement bears uniformly on the compacted reinforced soil from the connection to the wall to the end of the reinforcing elements .
do not cut the reinforcement elements to accommodate obstructions within the reinforced soil zone .
do not weld soil reinforcements shop or field welds to extend lengths of longitudinal reinforcements .
the department will allow approved shop welds at the connections and approved spotwelds at the transverse and longitudinal intersections of bar mats .
num backfill placement perform backfill placement immediately after erecting each level of wall panels .
place backfill carefully to avoid damage or disturbance of the wall materials misalignment of wall panels or damage to soil reinforcement .
replace wall materials damaged during backfill placement at no additional cost to the department .
if backfill placement causes misalignment or distortion of wall panels correct at no additional cost to the department .
num compaction compact backfill in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified note num to num of the maximum density except as modified in accordance with section num compaction of bridge approaches and section num compaction against faces of walls .
num compaction of bridge approaches compact the backfill to num of maximum density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified within num ft of the centerline of a bridge abutment .
control this density adjacent to and around pile or casing penetrations through the reinforced soil mass at the abutment .
num compaction against faces of walls compact the backfill to num density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified within num ft of the wall .
compact with a minimal number of passes using a lightweight mechanical tamper roller or vibratory system .
determine the number of passes with a test section before compaction against the wall as approved by the project manager .
use approved compaction equipment from the test section for production work .
if changing equipment create a new test section to determine the number of passes for the project managers approval .
num moisture control section num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures page num uniformly distribute the moisture content of the backfill material throughout each layer before and during compaction .
ensure that backfill materials have an inplace moisture content of three percent num less than optimum to optimum .
remove backfill material with inplace moisture content greater than optimum and rework or replace with acceptable backfill material .
num lift thickness ensure that the maximum lift thickness after compaction does not exceed eight num inches .
decrease the lift thickness if necessary to obtain the specified density .
num protection of the work at the end of each days operation slope the last level of backfill away from the wall to direct runoff away from the structure .
do not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the wall construction site .
num method of measurement the department will measure the face of mse walls based on the dimensions shown in the contract or approved modifications .
the department will measure authorized excavation of unsuitable foundation material from the foundation surface to the depth of excavation in its original location .
the department will not measure material excavated outside the area bounded by vertical planes two num ft beyond the limits of the material designated for removal .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit mse wall square foot excavation of unsuitable foundation material cubic yard num work included in payment the department will consider the following work as included in the payment for mse walls and will not pay for it separately num .
excavation for mse retaining structures other than authorized excavation of unsuitable foundation material and including any required temporary shoring num .
placement and compaction of suitable material for excavation of unsuitable foundation material num .
dewatering for excavation of mse retaining structures or authorized unsuitable foundation materials num .
leveling pads facing elements reinforcing bars soil reinforcements attachment devices backfill coping foundation preparation and geotextile fabric and num .
providing the manufacturers field representative .
section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num section num portland cement concrete mix designs num description this work consists of developing submitting and getting approval to use pcc mix designs on department projects .
num materials test materials in accordance with aashto and astm methods or other test procedures designated by the department .
the state materials bureau will decide questions about test procedure interpretation .
correct or remove and dispose of improperly graded or segregated material that fails to meet the requirements as directed by the project manager and at no additional cost to the department .
use preapproved materials in accordance with the current departments approved products list .
the department will not allow changes in the source or character of the materials without notifying the state materials bureau and obtaining written approval .
num reserved num portland cement use type ii lowalkali portland cement in accordance with astm c num unless otherwise specified .
if the results of the alkalisilica reactivity asr mitigation tests required in section num alkalisilica reactivity are less than num for each of the individual aggregates in the mixture the department will waive the lowalkali requirement .
num source approval and acceptance the department will accept portland cement based on certification of the approved sources and satisfactory test results from project verification samples .
the state materials bureau must approve cement from a particular source or contractor before use .
include the following information in the request for source approval num .
the supplier or company num .
cement plant location num .
storage facility type and capacity num .
average and maximum production capabilities num .
production procedures num .
details regarding the inhouse quality control program information num .
routine sampling and testing frequency num .
documentation that the laboratory responsible for the certified astm c num astm c num and astm c num test results is currently participating in the cement and concrete reference laboratory ccrl proficiency sample and the pozzolan inspection programs num .
a copy of the laboratory letter authorizing ccrl to send copies of the ccrl inspection programs and proficiency result reports directly to the state materials bureau num .
documentation of measures taken to ensure that the supplier keeps unacceptable cement separated from acceptable cement num .
copies of quality control program test reports for the previous six num months including at least one num comprehensive astm c num analysis for each month .
the department will maintain a list of approved sources .
num sources on approved list section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num provide the following information from approved sources to the state materials bureau monthly num .
copies of routine quality control program test results and num .
a certified astm c num or astm c num analysis for each lot tested .
an average over a period of time or over several different test lots will not be acceptable .
num withdrawal of source approval the state materials bureau may withdraw source approval for any of the following reasons num .
a change in equipment or production procedure from that on the original request for approval num .
project sample failure to comply with specification requirements num .
chemistry or physical properties that vary more than allowed num .
a source becomes inactive for a period of num months or num .
a source does not provide cement to the department for a period of num year num .
the appropriate mill certificates are not regularly received .
manufacture cement at the same production facility unless otherwise approved by the state materials bureau .
obtain approval for changes in cement sources .
submit a written source change request to the project manager .
the state materials bureau will issue a written decision within seven num days of receipt .
provide documentation that the proposed source will provide cement that produces concrete with hardened properties equal to or better than the original source .
compliance with astm c num is not sufficient documentation .
num blended portlandfly ash cement use blended portlandfly ash cement in accordance with astm c num or astm c num .
blend or intergrind portland cement with fly ash .
provide proof that the blended portlandfly ash cement contains the appropriate percentage of the proper fly ash by weight of the cement only to mitigate asr concerns for the aggregates used .
num approval of blended portlandfly ash cement source provide test data showing that the proposed source can provide blended portland fly ash cement that produces concrete in accordance with table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures and section num concrete mix design development .
num packaging mark portland cement and blended portlandfly ash cement packages with the name brand the source manufacturing facility and the cement type .
provide the same information on the shipping documents for bulk cement deliveries .
num storage protect cement from moisture .
store different brands or types of cement or cement from different production facilities separately .
provide separate identifiable blended portlandfly ash cement storage at the project or plant site .
store portland cement and portlandfly ash cement separately .
num cement rejection the department will reject cement if it num .
has come in contact with moisture fly ash or other cements or section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num num .
has partially set or is lumpy .
num fly ash use fly ash that complies with the physical and chemical requirements of astm c num and the optional requirements for available alkalis and reactivity with cement alkalis as modified by table num fly ash requirements .
use class f fly ash if either the coarse or the fine aggregate is reactive .
if both the coarse and the fine aggregate are nonreactive the contractor may use a cf blend fly ash or a class c fly ash .
table num fly ash requirements characteristics class c class f sum of alnumonum sionum and fenumonum num moisture content maximum num num loss on ignition maximum num num magnesium oxide mgo maximum num num available alkalis maximum num num calcium oxide cao maximum a num num anmdot will only consider a fly ash as class f if the cao is less than eight percent num .
fly ash meeting the requirements of astm c num and containing more than eight percent num by weight of bulk cao is considered as class c fly ash and can only be used in concrete that is not exposed to sulfate environments or with potentially reactive or reactive aggregate .
use waterproof and clearly labeled bags when supplying fly ash in bags .
label with the name brand the manufacturer type and source .
provide an executed certificate of compliance with each fly ash shipment .
permission for blending class c and class f fly ash depends upon approval by the state materials bureau .
ensure the blended fly ash is in accordance with astm c num and is limited to concrete mixes in which the coarse and fine aggregates are nonreactive .
num source approval and acceptance the department will accept fly ash based on certification of approved sources and satisfactory test results on project verification samples .
obtain approval from the state materials bureau before using fly ash from a particular source or supplier in pcc .
include the following in source approval requests num .
supplier or company name num .
source power plant location num .
coal type and origin num .
combustion process num .
storage facilities and capacity num .
production procedures num .
details regarding the suppliers quality control program including the following num .
routine sampling and testing frequency num .
documentation showing that the laboratory responsible for the certified astm c num test results is currently participating in the ccrl proficiency sample and pozzolan inspection programs .
submit a letter authorizing ccrl to send the laboratorys inspection and proficiency reports directly to the state materials bureau and num .
measures taken to ensure that fly ash not meeting specification requirements are kept separate from material meeting the requirements num .
copies of the quality control program test reports for each lot tested for the previous six num months including at least one num complete astm c num analysis for section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num each month .
the department will maintain an approved products list .
do not substitute the approved material source for a different source without prior department approval .
the department will consider a fly ash source change only after receiving a written request .
the state materials bureau will review the request and provide written approval once they have verification of the equivalency of the proposed material .
compliance with astm c num is not sufficient documentation to permit a change of sources .
provide information that verifies the proposed source material performs equally as material from the original source .
num sources on approved list sources on the approved list are required to provide the state materials bureau with the following information on a monthly basis num .
test results obtained in their routine quality control program and num .
a certified astm c num analysis for each lot tested .
num withdrawal of source approval the department may withdraw source approval for any of the following reasons num .
if there is a change in equipment or production procedures from what was shown in the original request for approval num .
if a project sample fails to comply with specification requirements num .
if a source becomes inactive for num consecutive months or more or num .
if a source does not furnish fly ash to the department for a period of num year .
num storage protect fly ash from moisture .
store different brands or types of fly ash or fly ash from different production facilities separately .
provide separate identifiable blended portlandfly ash cement storage at the project or plant site .
store portland cement and portlandfly ash cement separately .
num aggregate the department will allow the contractor to combine aggregates from two num or more approved sources based on the following criteria num .
each source complies with material requirements other than gradation and num .
the blended material meets all requirements .
num aggregate testing test coarse and fine aggregate in accordance with the methods shown in table num aggregate test methods .
concrete mixture design approval involving a designated source will remain in effect as long as annual test results for specific gravity absorption gradation and sand equivalent for fine aggregate only and annual tests for other requirements except asr demonstrate material compliance .
table num aggregate test methods aggregate test method sampling aashto t num clay lumps aashto t num amount of material passing no .
num sieve aashto t num absorption specific gravity of coarse aggregate aashto tnum or tp num section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num table num aggregate test methods aggregate test method absorption specific gravity of fine aggregate aashto tnum or tp num sieve analysis aashto t num soundness with magnesium sulfate aashto t num sand equivalent aashto t num soft fragments aashto t num flat and elongated pieces astm d num alkalisilica reactivity aashto tnum or astm cnum num coarse aggregate coarse aggregate is crushed stone crushed gravel or natural washed gravel .
unless otherwise specified ensure that at least num of the aggregate by weight has a minimum of num fractured face .
ensure that class g mixes are composed of at least num particles with no fractured faces .
the department may waive the fractured face requirement for mixes other than class g mixes if less than num of the material passes the no .
num sieve .
num deleterious materials do not exceed the deleterious substance tolerances in accordance with table num deleterious materials tolerances for coarse aggregate .
perform tests in accordance with table num aggregate test methods .
table num deleterious materials tolerances for coarse aggregate substance maximum by weight soft fragments num coal and lignite num clay lumps num materials passing no .
num sieve num flat and elongated pieces a aensure that material larger than num inch contains no more than num flat or elongated particles with a num or greater dimensional ratio in accordance with ttcp .
add the percentage of flat pieces to the percentage of elongated pieces to determine specification compliance .
count pieces that are both flat and elongated only once .
provide aggregate that is free of organic matter .
the department will reject contaminated aggregate .
num coarse aggregate quality requirements provide coarse aggregate with an ai of num or less calculated in accordance with section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa .
the department will reject aggregates with an ai greater than num .
num coarse aggregate gradation requirements if the combined gradation procedure detailed in section num combined gradation has been chosen by the contractor then the gradation requirements specified below do not apply .
comply with all other aggregate properties and characteristics including the amount of material passing the no .
num sieve .
use coarse aggregate that complies with table num coarse aggregate section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num gradation requirements .
table num coarse aggregate gradation requirements sieve size of aggregate passing sieve num in num in num in num in class g num inch num num inch num num num inch num num num num inch num num num num num inch num num num inch num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num num provide coarse aggregate that meets the following num .
num of the material has at least num fractured face and num .
num or less by weight of the material passes a no .
num sieve .
the department may accept coarse aggregate with more than the maximum percent passing the no .
num sieve if the combined gradation of the coarse and fine aggregate percent passing the no .
num sieve does not exceed num .
num portland cement concrete pavement pccp gradations meet the coarse aggregate gradation requirements shown in table num coarse aggregate gradation requirements for pccp unless using the combined gradation procedure .
additionally except when the gradation of the coarse and fine aggregate combined has less than one percent num passing the no .
num sieve all of the particles retained on or above the num inch sieve must have at least one num fractured face .
the contractor may eliminate the fractured face requirement by washing the aggregate to produce a combined aggregate of which less than one percent num passes a no .
num sieve .
provide proof that the mix design meets performance and minimum specified hardened properties .
num fine aggregate use fine aggregate that consists of natural sand manufactured sand or a combination of both .
num deleterious materials provide fine aggregates in accordance with table num deleterious material tolerances for fine aggregate .
table num deleterious material tolerances for fine aggregate substance maximum by weight soft fragments num coal and lignite num clay lumps num materials passing no .
num sieve num num fine aggregate quality requirements provide fine aggregate with the following properties section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num num .
a soundness loss of num or less when tested in accordance with aashto t num using magnesium sulfate solution and a test duration of five num cycles and num .
a sand equivalent of at least num when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
num fine aggregate gradation requirements if the combined gradation procedure detailed in section num combined gradation has been chosen by the contractor then the gradation requirements specified below do not apply .
comply with all other aggregate properties and characteristics including the amount of material passing the no .
num sieve .
use wellgraded fine aggregate in accordance with table num fine aggregate gradation requirements .
the gradation requirements represent the limits that the department will use to determine source acceptability .
the department will not approve fine aggregate that has more than num passing any sieve and retained on the next finer sieve shown in table num fine aggregate gradation requirements .
use a fineness modulus calculated in accordance with aashto m num to determine the degree of uniformity between representative samples .
if the combined gradation procedure has not been chosen the department may reject fine aggregate from designated sources with variation in fineness modulus greater than num above or below the fineness modulus shown on the approved concrete mix designs .
variations in excess of these tolerances may be cause for rejection .
the department may accept the aggregate once the contractor assures the state materials bureau that the source maintains the designated production tolerances .
table num fine aggregate gradation requirements sieve size passing num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num the department may accept fine aggregate with more than three percent num percent passing the no .
num sieve but not more than five percent num passing the no .
num sieve if the combined fine and coarse aggregates passing the no .
num sieve does not exceed three percent num .
num alkalisilica reactivity prevent damage from asr in accordance with the following procedures .
perform the initial proofofreactivitypotential test using standard rio grande type iii low alkali cement from the rio grande cement plant located at tijeras new mexico .
use cement with an alkali content of from num to num .
the department considers aggregates with mean mortar bar expansions of greater than num at num days potentially reactive and those less than num as nonreactive .
expansions greater than num are considered reactive .
if tested using astm c num the department will consider aggregate non reactive if the average expansion at the end of one num year is less than num .
once the state materials bureau decides a particular aggregate source is nonreactive it will not require the source to reevaluate for three num years unless concerns arise from possible aggregate source changes .
obtain a list of reactive potentially reactive and nonreactive aggregate sources tested to date from the state materials bureau .
section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num if the results of the initial proofofpotentialreactivity test show the aggregate to be potentially reactive or reactive repeat the test procedure using the actual cement fly ash and if desired any of the asr inhibiting admixtures shown in table num asr inhibiting admixtures .
report the minimum amount of class f fly ash and the minimum amount of asr inhibiting admixture required to provide a maximum expansion at num days that is less than num .
report the fly ash required as a percentage of the cement weight .
table num asr inhibiting admixtures material requirement fly ash class f section num fly ash blended cement only class f fly ash may be used section num blended portland flyash cement ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs grade num and num aashto m num silica fume aashto m num lithium nitrate linonum section num lithium use admixtures in accordance with table num asr mitigation dosage rate requirements unless it is determined that larger dosages are required to control the expansion .
table num asr mitigation dosage rate requirements material dosage rate fly ash class f as required to mitigate asr expansion but not less than num by weight of cement only for binary blends not less than num by weight for ternary blends as long as the total pozzolan dosage is at least num blended cement as required but not less than num by weight of cement only ggbfs as required but not less than num by weight of cement only silica fume as required but not less than ten percent num by weight of cement only lithium nitrate num galyd³ of solution for each pound of cement sodium equivalent num asr mitigation evaluation criteria the department will consider an admixture effective if the mean mortar bar expansion at num days is less than or equal to num when tested in accordance with section num alkalisilica reactivity .
retest aggregates classified as potential reactive or reactive for asr mitigation each time the comprehensive mix evaluation is performed .
if the test results from aashto t num or astm c num indicate potentially reactive or reactive material but the contractor believes that the aggregates are nonreactive submit the following documentation as proof of nonreactivity num .
a letter signed and sealed by an engineer registered in new mexico confirming direct knowledge of the fundamentals of asr in concrete and stating that the subject aggregates have never caused asr concrete deterioration and num .
a report from an approved petrographer .
the report will confirm that at least two num different concrete core samples obtained from different numyear old exposed structures that used the subject aggregates in a cementonly mixture were examined and that there is no evidence of asr reactivity .
after receipt of a stamped letter from the registered professional engineer indicating no section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num evidence of asr gel found in either of the cores the department will consider the aggregate sources nonreactive .
num admixtures ensure the total admixture or combinations of admixtures of soluble and insoluble chloride content does not exceed num ppm .
use only admixtures on the departments approved products list .
num air entraining admixtures use airentraining admixtures that comply with aashto m num .
num chemical admixtures use waterreducing and setcontrolling admixtures set retarding admixtures and non chloride set accelerating admixtures that comply with section num admixtures and aashto m num .
num water test nonpotable water before use in accordance with aashto t num .
use water for mixing and curing concrete or washing concrete aggregates that does not contain acid oil alkali organic matter or other deleterious material that will adversely affect the concrete .
use water with a ph value of from num to num in accordance with aashto t num .
do not use water with a sulfate content or chloride content that exceeds num ppm .
prevent contamination from silt clay organic matter or other deleterious material .
do not use residual water wash water or recycled water generated by equipment mixer trucks or central mixers in concrete mixtures .
num fibrous concrete reinforcement use fibers in the concrete mix at a minimum dosage rate of num lb per cubic yard of concrete .
use only num virgin polypropylene fibrillated fibers containing no reprocessed olefin materials and specifically manufactured for use in pcc .
num pcc mixture design and approval num classifications the classes of pcc are shown in table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures and as specified table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures class use specified compressive strength at num days psi laboratory design slumpa in percent air content b a cast inplace structural num num to num aa cast inplace structural num num to num d nonstructural num num to num e slip form structural num c num to num f slip form structural num c num to num fls pccp low shrinkage num num to num section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures class use specified compressive strength at num days psi laboratory design slump a in percent air content b g drilled shafts num no entrained air agent allowed hpd bridge decks and other low shrinkage applications num num to num special the contract requirements for the individual project will address special mix requirements .
aas determined by aashto t num. bproject risk zone requirements apply see section num freezethaw risk zones .
cthe specified age for class e and class f is num days .
num details for table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures use table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures only for designing concrete mixes .
do not use to evaluate concrete delivered to department projects .
use the minimum air content shown below in the laboratory mix num .
high risk zones num num .
medium risk zones num num .
low risk zones num use a minimum compressive strength overdesign at least num psi greater than the specified compressive strength for new mixes if there is no additional information available .
for existing mixes with at least num compressive strength tests or for plants which can provide at least num consecutive compressive strength tests for a similar mix same entrained air and same specified compressive strength determine the minimum allowable average compressive strength using one num of the following equations .
use the equation that produces the largest value to determine the minimum allowable compressive strength .
.num num s k f f c cr num num .num num s k f f c cr num where f cr is the minimum laboratory compressive strength at the specified age c f is the specified compressive strength k is the kfactor from table num kfactor for increasing standard deviation for standard deviation increase if the total number of tests is less than num but equal to or greater than num s is the standard deviation for the compressive strength tests submitted of the same specified strength table num kfactor for increasing standard deviation total number of tests kfactor num num section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num table num kfactor for increasing standard deviation total number of tests kfactor num num num num num num the department will allow linear interpolation for an intermediate number of tests .
a mix that was developed from a history of num or more test results from the preceding nummonth period is considered an existing mix .
a mix developed without historical test results is considered a new mix .
class e and class f concrete must attain minimum strength at num days .
the minimum class f overdesign is num psi at num days unless a lower value is calculated using the greater value from either equation num or equation num .
the minimum class e overdesign is num psi at num days unless a lower number is calculated using the greater value from either equation num or equation num .
class g shall have the following characteristics num .
a minimum cementitious content of at least num lb num .
a maximum watercementitious ratio no greater than num num .
a maximum sized aggregate no greater than num inch num .
a sandaggregate ratio between num and num by total aggregate volume num .
a maximum air content no greater than three percent num num .
no air entrainment agent num .
a slump range of seven num inch one num inch except when placing under a drilling fluid num .
a slump range of eight num inch one num inch for placement under a drilling fluid and num .
adjust admixtures for the job site conditions encountered so that the concrete remains workable and plastic for the two num h placement limit .
num freezethaw risk zones design the concrete mixture for use in the freezethaw zone in which the project is located .
one freezethaw cycle is defined as a day in which the lowest recorded temperature is equal to or less than num f as recorded on the western regional climate center database .
the web address is www.wrcc.dri.edu .
the risk levels are defined as follows num .
lowrisk .
the annual average number of freezethaw cycles is equal to or less than num cycles per year num .
mediumrisk .
the annual average number of freezethaw cycles is greater than num but less than or equal to num cycles per year num .
highrisk .
the annual average number of freezethaw cycles is greater than num cycles per year .
obtain the number of freezethaw cycles using the closest weather station to the project with the most similar environmental conditions .
use table num statewide concrete risk zones to determine the required risk zone .
table num statewide concrete risk zones district no .
county name station name concrete risk zone num dona ana county wide low num grant county wide low section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num table num statewide concrete risk zones district no .
county name station name concrete risk zone num hidalgo county wide low num luna county wide low num sierra county wide low num socorro county wide medium num chaves county wide low num curry county wide medium num de baca county wide medium num eddy county wide low num lea county wide low num lincoln county wide a medium num lincoln ruidoso high num otero county wide medium num roosevelt county wide medium num bernalillo county wide a medium num bernalillo sandia crest high num sandoval county wide medium num valencia county wide medium num colfax county wide high num guadalupe county wide medium num harding county wide medium num mora county wide high num quay county wide medium num san miguel county wide medium num union county wide medium num los alamos county wide medium num rio arriba county wide a medium num rio arriba chama high num rio arriba dulce high num rio arriba el vado dam high num rio arriba gavilan high num rio arriba lindrith high num rio arriba tres piedras high num san juan county wide medium num santa fe county wide medium num taos county wide high num torrance county wide medium num catron county wide high num cibola county wide high num mckinley county wide a high num sandoval county wide high aexcept as otherwise listed the minimum allowable air content for mix design submittal purposes is num .
num for lowrisk zones section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num num .
num for mediumrisk zones num .
num for highrisk zones .
confirm these contents by the pressure method and the volumetric method in accordance with section num mix design submittal .
num pcc mixture development submit representative samples of all proposed materials to a ptl that is preapproved to design pcc mixtures by the state materials bureau .
provide a professional civil engineer licensed by the state of new mexico with a minimum of three num years experience in proportioning and testing pcc mixes to directly supervise all testing .
num combined gradation the combined gradation procedure is optional for all concrete mixes except for class f ls and high performance deck hpd mixes .
class fls and hpd mixes must be prepared using the combined gradation procedure .
evaluate aggregates for concrete mixtures prepared for the combined gradation procedures in accordance with the following num .
coarseness factor .
determine the coarseness factor in accordance with the following equation num i q q cf num where cf is the coarseness factor q is the weight of the aggregate retained on or above the numinch sieve i is the weight of the aggregate passing the num inch sieve but retained on the no .
num sieve num .
workability factor .
the weight of the aggregate passing the no .
num sieve divided by the weight of the combined gradation represented as a percent .
num .
mortar factor .
the volume of the cement fly ash water air other pozzolans and aggregate passing the no .
num sieve divided by the volume of the entire concrete mixture represented as a percent .
num .
paste factor .
the volume of the cement fly ash water air and other pozzolans divided by the volume of the entire concrete mixture represented as a percent .
combine aggregates to produce a uniform gradation .
ensure that combined aggregates comply with the required individual physical and chemical properties .
individual gradation requirements will not apply .
use the .num power curve to blend the aggregates to achieve the densest grading possible .
approximate targets for the coarseness factor and the workability factor are shown in table num recommended workability factor and coarseness factor targets for concrete mixtures designed using combined gradation .
table num recommended workability factor and coarseness factor targets nominal maximum aggregate size workability factor coarseness factor num inch num num num num num inch num num num concrete mix design development use fly ash in all concrete mixtures .
if fly ash is the only pozzolan used add at a minimum of num by weight of cement only .
only use class c or cf blended fly ash with nonreactive aggregate .
when using class c or cf blended fly ash instead of the class f fly section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num ash use at a minimum dosage rate of num by weight of cement .
when using additional pozzolans such as silica fume metakaolin or ggbfs the minimum amount of fly ash required is num for mixtures using class f fly ash and num for mixtures using class c fly ash .
when using multiple pozzolans ensure that the total pozzolan content is at least num with class f fly ash and num with class c or cf blend fly ash .
num concrete mix design documentation submit documentation to the state materials bureau that verifies num .
all materials used comply with section num materials num .
the ptl prepared and tested a proof mix using the designated materials and batch weights num .
a complete companion set of compressive strength test cylinders was delivered to the department district laboratory for comparison testing and num .
the cylinders were cured for at least num h after casting and the cylinders were transported upright in protected and cushioned containers to the department district laboratory .
num concrete mix design designing proportion design and proportion the concrete mixtures to comply with the following performance requirements num .
except for concrete mixtures to be used exclusively in prestressed applications all structural concrete mixtures must demonstrate strength gain characteristics as follows num numday strength of at least num of the seven numday strength num numday strength at least num of the numday test num .
for class fls concrete mixtures the minimum average flexural strength for three num beams cast in the laboratory shall be num psi at num days when tested in accordance with aashto tnum num .
structural concrete mixtures must achieve a minimum durability index num greater than or equal to num for lowrisk zones num greater than or equal to num for mediumrisk zones and num greater than or equal to num for highrisk zones num .
determine the durability index from at least one num prism tested at num days for num cycles in accordance with astm c num method a .
cure prisms tested for durability index by bathing in lime saturated water at a temperature of num f num f for the first seven num days followed by num days in lime saturated water at a temperature of num f num f. num .
if the specimen can not be tested immediately after curing place immediately in a freezer at a maximum temperature of num f until testing num .
hardened air void system characteristics required of all structural concrete classes when examined in accordance with the astm c num linear traverse method include num a minimum air content of five percent num num a specific surface greater than num innum and num a spacing factor less than num inch num .
ensure that concrete complies with section num alkalisilica reactivity and section num asr mitigation evaluation criteria as determined by the state materials bureau num .
provide chloride ion permeability at num days for structural concrete tested in accordance with astm c num that is num less than or equal to num coulombs for lowrisk zones or num less than num coulombs for mediumrisk zones or section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num num less than num coulombs for highrisk zones num .
cure concrete for chloride ion permeability the same way as the durability index specimens in accordance with num above num .
the maximum shrinkage value for class fls concrete mixtures and for hpd concrete mixtures is num at num days when tested with three num inch x four num inch x num inch prism or three num inch x three num inch x ten num inch prism and cured in a standard cure for the first seven num days .
following the seven num day initial cure cure in a relative humidity of num and test in accordance with aashto t num num .
for class g mixtures provide trial mix and slump loss test results that verify compliance with the concrete slump requirements for class g. only technicians who are currently certified by ttcpconcrete or aci concrete field technician level i shall determine concrete fresh properties in accordance with the appropriate aashto procedures .
laboratories approved by the departments state materials bureau shall determine hardened properties .
technicians performing tests on aggregates and aggregate gradations shall be certified by ttcp or aci concrete laboratory level i .
those technicians performing strength tests on hardened concrete must be certified as an aci level i laboratory technician or by ttcp for compressive strength testing of concrete .
develop concrete mixtures with compressive strengths as close as possible to the over design strengths calculated in accordance with section num details for table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures .
concrete with strengths substantially in excess of these overdesign strengths will be rejected and returned to the submitting laboratory for the appropriate adjustments .
num mixture design submittal submit a completed electronic copy of the nmdot concrete mix design submittal form to the concrete unit of the state materials bureau .
ensure that the following information is included num .
company name of the requestor num .
company address telephone number and email address num .
ptls name and signature and num .
the new mexico registration number of the professional engineer who is responsible for the concrete mixture design work num .
ensure that the following information and the required documentation are provided electronically and through backup documentation num .
a comprehensive materials list and the properties of each component including num .
aggregates num .
source names num .
specific source locations num .
for sources not on the department approved list provide a complete astm c num petrographic examination of aggregates for concrete and an astm c num constituents of natural mineral aggregates for both the coarse and fine aggregate material after completing processing and manufacturing procedures and the aggregate is ready for use include the geologic origin of the material perform and certify the analysis using a petrographer previously approved by the department num .
soundness loss with calculations num .
percent of fractured faces for the coarse aggregate num .
gradations including aashto t num num .
bulk saturated surface dry specific gravities num .
los angeles wear abrasion section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num num .
fineness modulus num .
aggregate absorption num .
aggregate correction factor num .
sand equivalent of fine aggregate num .
dryrodded coarse aggregate unit weight num .
fine aggregate clay lumps content and num .
organic impurity content including soft fragments coal and lignite flat or elongated pieces and other deleterious substances .
num .
cement num .
astm c num analysis num .
chemical and physical cement properties including the amount of cnums cnums cnuma the amount finer than the no .
num sieve and the blaine fineness and num .
cube strengths num .
fly ash num .
astm c num analysis num .
specific gravity num .
material retained on a no .
num sieve num .
moisture content num .
loss on ignition num .
magnesium oxide content and num .
calcium oxide content .
num .
blended cement num .
astm c num and astm c num analyses num .
chemical and physical cement properties including the percent of cnums cnums cnuma the amount finer than a no .
num sieve and the blaine fineness num .
total alkalis num .
astm c num analysis and num .
percent of fly ash num .
admixtures num .
documentation of compliance with appropriate astm requirements and num .
verification of supply availability num .
water num .
concrete mixture proportions state clearly if submitting request under the combined gradation provisions num .
watercementitious ratios num .
type and amount of admixtures use admixtures on the departments approved products list num .
water source and location include ph available alkalis and a full chemical analysis if the water source is not a certified nmed public potable water supply num .
plastic concrete properties num .
air temperature num .
concrete temperature num .
slump when using superplasticizer document the slump before and after addition of the superplasticizer num .
unit weight and num .
air content measured in accordance with aashto t num or aashto t num section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num num .
when using superplasticizer document the measured air content before and after adding the superplasticizer num .
hardened concrete properties num .
new concrete mixtures num .
compressive strength tests the average of three num cylinders tested at seven num days num days and num days except for class e class f and class fls mixes which shall have two num cylinders tested at num num num and num days num .
type of fracture of each cylinder num .
flexural strength test results for class flsaverage of three num beams num .
durability index for structural mixes only num .
hardened air void analysis for structural mixes only num .
rapid chloride permeability for structural mixes only and num .
expansion data from aashto t num num .
existing concrete mixtures num .
consecutive compressive strength data with individual specimen test results from seven num days num days and num days at least num tests required present this data in chronological order num .
durability index for structural mixes only num .
hardened air void analysis for structural mixes only num .
rapid chloride permeability for structural mixes only and num .
expansion data from aashto t num num .
incidental concrete mixtures only for specific projects concrete mixes intended for projects that anticipate less than num yd num of each concrete class but not more than num yd num for concrete used on the project num .
compressive strength data field performance data if using the mix within the previous num months or laboratory mix performance data not using it in the field and num .
air content as measured by the pressure method or the volumetric method when using superplasticizer show the air content before and after adding superplasticizer .
num mixture design approval the department will require at least num days to review the submittal packages after receipt by the state materials bureau of all required information .
the department will approve designs for a period of num year from the date of issuance if the documentation verifies compliance with all requirements .
at least num days before the numyear approval expires the contractor may request that the mix design be reissued .
the contractor must provide test reports showing that the mix design met specification requirements during the issue period .
mix designs may be reapproved for no more than num additional years .
the department will grant each approval period if the documentation verifies the following num .
constituent material sources and the materials properties remain the same num .
the compressive strength performance data verifies compliance with section num acceptance of concrete based on cylinders num .
compliance with other fresh and hardened properties is verified where the mixture was used num .
the coefficient of variation cv determined in accordance with aci num is less than num and num .
when field performance data shows the cv exceeds num a comprehensive operations qcqa manual that shows how the contractor will reduce the variability and improve the consistency of its production process will be required .
section num portland cement concrete mix designs page num at the discretion of the state concrete engineer a mixture can be adjusted without re batching by using cement efficiency calculations to determine the amount of change to the cement and the total cementitious content that is necessary to achieve the desired level of performance .
when this procedure is allowed the ratio of pozzolan to cement ratio will remain unchanged the water content will remain unchanged and the aggregates will be adjusted without changing the overall gradation to accommodate the changes in volume from changes made to the cement .
all changes made by this method must be approved by the state concrete engineer before being implemented in the field .
if the constituent materials change immediately provide documentation to the state materials bureau describing how to resolve the problem .
return the affected material to an approved condition or submit a new concrete mixture design package .
if the compressive strengths do not comply with department requirements describe the needed adjustments .
submit a written summary of the adjustments to achieve compressive strength to the state materials bureau for approval .
do not use the concrete mixture on department projects before receipt of written approval from the state materials bureau .
the department will not consider the addition of more cement a sufficient explanation or resolution without additional documentation explaining why other measures are not appropriate .
num construction requirements reserved num method of measurement reserved num basis of payment the department will pay for concrete in accordance with the section of these standard specifications for which the concrete is used .
section num portland cement concrete page num section num portland cement concrete num description this work consists of placing portland cement concrete pcc .
num materials test materials in accordance with aashto and astm methods or other test procedures designated by the department .
the state materials bureau will decide questions about test procedure interpretation .
correct or remove and dispose of improperly graded or segregated material that fails to meet the requirements as directed by the project manager and at no additional cost to the department .
use preapproved materials in accordance with the current departments approved products list .
the department will not allow changes in the source or character of the materials without notifying the state materials bureau and obtaining written approval .
num portland cement concrete mixture use a portland cement concrete mixture that has been reviewed and approved in accordance with section num for the freezethaw risk zone in which the project is located .
num aggregate use aggregates that are the same as those used on the approved mixture design .
do not use aggregate from a different source as that shown on the approved mix design .
if the concrete mixture is approved under the conventional stockpile procedures ensure the gradations comply with table num coarse aggregate gradation requirements and table num fine aggregate gradation requirements .
if the concrete mixture is approved under the combined gradation procedures ensure that the most current gradations have been reviewed and the coarseness factor and the workability factor comply with section num combined gradations .
num curing materials num liquid membrane forming compounds use type numd or type num liquid membraneforming concrete curing compounds that comply with aashto m num .
num linseed oil emulsion do not use linseed oil emulsioncuring agent .
num sheet materials for curing concrete use concrete curing sheet materials in accordance with aashto m num .
the department will only allow the white reflective type .
num fogging system use a fogging system which uniformly applies a constant uniform fog of water comprised of droplets that are too small visually discern any individual droplets and that does not splash or mark the surface of the concrete .
num water see section num water .
section num portland cement concrete page num num construction requirements num general use num freezethaw use a concrete mixture which has been approved for use in a freezethaw zone of equal or greater risk than the zone in which the project is located .
num class substitution the contractor may substitute an approved structural class of concrete with a higher compressive strength than that of the specified class of concrete as long as the design slump characteristics remain the same i.e .
class aa for class a class f for class e. do not substitute class a for class e or class aa for class f concrete mixtures .
perform concrete fieldtesting with concrete field testing technicians certified by aci or ttcp .
num alternate batching facilities a request may be made to the state materials bureau to allow a currently approved concrete mixture to be batched out of facilities not under the direct control of the contractor to whom the concrete mixture approval is granted .
the department will permit offsite batching of an approved concrete mixture when the following occur num .
use the same materials as those used at the plant where the mixture is approved and as shown on the approved mix design num .
use the same admixtures as those used at the plant where the mixture is approved and as shown on the approved mix design num .
prepare a written qc plan for the alternate batch facilities personnel and operations that adequately addresses how the alternate batch plant will assure the quality of the mixture num .
the operations at the alternate batch facility has confirmed compliance with the approved qc plan with other mixtures num .
provide concrete performance statistics that assure the same level of performance can be achieved from the alternate batch facilities .
num plastic properties the allowable slump range for nonsuperplasticized class aa class hpd and class a concrete is num inches num inch .
the allowable slump range for class e and class f slip formed concrete is num inches num inch .
all test procedures and frequencies will be performed in accordance with the minimum testing requirements .
measure the air content in accordance with aashto t num .
the air content determined by aashto t num will be used to confirm compliance with the specified air content for structural concrete .
num .
low risk freezethaw zone from num to num or num .
medium risk freezethaw zone from num to num or num .
high risk freezethaw zone from num to num .
num troubleshooting if the approved mixture design fails to meet requirements the project manager will immediately contact the ptl that designed the mixture and the state concrete engineer .
the ptl shall work with the state concrete engineer to make the necessary changes to resolve section num portland cement concrete page num the problems .
efforts to evaluate problems with the concrete does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to provide a concrete mixture that meets project requirements .
num batching produce readymixed concrete and sitemixed concrete in accordance with aashto m num section num to num .
ensure that production facilities are certified in accordance with the national ready mix concrete association nrmca criteria for concrete production facilities .
num batching plant the department will review and approve facilities and equipment before batching operations begin .
ensure that batching plants have clearly separated aggregate bins or stockpiles silos for cement and fly ash weighing hoppers and scales .
ensure that the batch plants are equipped to proportion aggregates bulk cement and fly ash using calibrated weighing devices .
weigh aggregates on separate scales or accumulatively on a single scale .
if weighing fly ash on the same scale as the portland cement weigh the cement first then add the fly ash .
ensure that the batch plant operator has a direct view or live video of each scale and admixture sight tube while preparing batches of concrete .
it is not sufficient to be able to see only the computer measurements .
ensure that the batch plant is capable of num .
accurately weighing and batching materials for the portland cement or portland cementfly ash concrete mixture within the tolerances specified num .
providing readily visible scale dials or instrumentation devices for admixture bottles beam scales and load cells even if using a computer to prepare the batch num .
using weighing hoppers of sufficient size to contain the material without loss or spillage and num .
properly combining and recombining various mixture components to obtain the required uniformity and consistency .
use weighing hoppers that efficiently discharge weighed materials for each batch .
ensure that the material charging equipment can deliver the batch to the mixer without loss or spillage .
provide scales for weighing aggregates cement water and fly ash in accordance with section num measurement of quantity .
num portland cement and fly ash use cement and fly ash in bulk or in sacks .
weigh fractions of sacks before using cement or fly ash in a concrete batch .
measure cement and fly ash by weight .
weigh bulk cement and fly ash on an approved scale except when using continuous proportioning and mixing equipment .
provide cement and combined cementitious weights within one percent num of the required weights .
if the weight of cementitious materials is expected to weigh less than num lb ensure that those materials weigh within num lb of the target weight .
if the material varies from the target weight by more than one percent num the department will immediately notify the contractor to take corrective action .
if the weight is no more than two percent num above or num below the target weight the department may at the project managers discretion accept a maximum of five num loads out of the first ten num consecutive loads of concrete delivered of any continuous placement with these weight discrepancies regardless of whether the discrepancies are for the same material or for other weighed materials .
any batches of concrete produced after the first ten num have been batched that have cement or total cementitious weights that are more than one percent section num portland cement concrete page num num will be rejected and not allowed to be placed on the project .
dispose of rejected loads at no additional cost to the department .
equip cement and fly ash scales and hoppers with a device that indicates the complete discharge of cement and fly ash into the mixer .
contain bulk cement and fly ash in weather tight bins and weighing hoppers .
do not suspend discharge chutes from the weighing hoppers .
arrange the discharge chutes so that cement and fly ash do not lodge in or leak from them .
protect cement and fly ash from moisture .
store different brands or types of cementfly ash or cementfly ash from different production facilities separately .
provide separate identifiable blended portlandfly ash cement storage at the project or plant site .
store portland cement and portlandfly ash cement separately .
num water mixing water consists of free water ice added to the batch and surface moisture on the aggregates .
measure the added water by weight or volume to ensure that the amount of water in the mixture design is not exceeded .
measure added ice by weight .
for truck mixers discharge the wash water before loading the next batch of concrete .
num aggregates num stockpiles ensure the separation of stockpiles of different sizes or from different sources .
stockpile aggregates so that the coarse and fine particles do not separate .
provide stockpiles that can produce enough concrete for the section constructed during a scheduled operation .
ensure that aggregates are not contaminated by material from adjacent stockpiles or from contact with the ground dust or other deleterious materials .
do not use aggregates that become segregated or mixed with deleterious material .
do not use frozen lumps of aggregate in concrete batching .
ensure that a sacrificial layer of the same size aggregate at least six num inches deep is maintained below the bottom of the stockpile so that the frontend loader will not pick up non complying materials that would contaminate the concrete mixture .
num gradations all gradation tests performed to fulfill the requirements of this section must be performed by ttcp certified technicians .
the project manager may cancel concrete placements that have gradation data that is more than seven num days old .
num .
if the mixture design is approved with the conventional stockpile procedure ensure that the stockpile gradations comply with the standard gradation requirements for each sieve size shown in table num coarse aggregate gradation requirements and table num fine aggregate gradation requirements .
num .
if the mixture design is approved with the combined gradation procedure it is the contractors responsibility to continuously monitor the gradation of each of the stockpiles .
provide new gradation results to the project manager in one num of the following ways num .
if placing more than num ydnum per week provide new gradation results every num yd num num .
if regularly making placements that total less than num yd num per week provide new gradation results once per week .
section num portland cement concrete page num num .
if placements are irregular and limited to no more than two num placements in a single week provide new gradation results at least num hours before the first scheduled placement in any week .
num .
the contractors responsibilities to monitor gradations are not related to the qcqa testing requirements .
the department considers these responsibilities to be part of the standard operation and maintenance of the batching facilities .
num .
determine if the combined gradation is within the following limits num .
coarseness factor is num percentage points of the value in the approved mixture design num .
workability factor is num percentage points of the value in the approved mixture design num .
the aggregate batch weights will automatically be adjusted when the gradation information determined by the supplier is entered into the field report form .
the supplier will be required to use the most recent gradations to determine if the coarseness factor or the workability factor does not comply with num or num above .
if the coarseness factor or the workability factor does not comply with num or num above the mix batch weights must be adjusted to bring these factors into compliance .
when adjusting these factors adjust them to the tolerances in num and num below .
num .
coarseness factor is num percentage points of the value in the approved mixture design num .
workability factor is num percentage points of the value in the approved mixture design num .
if the gradation tolerances in num and num can not be met do not place concrete until the gradations are corrected to meet the designated tolerances .
num batch weights batch aggregate target weights over num lb to within two percent num of the target weight .
for target weights less than num lb batch to within num lb of the target weight .
if any of the first ten num loads of concrete have a fine or coarse aggregate weight that differs from the target weight by more than two percent num but not more than three percent num the department may at the project managers discretion accept the concrete .
the department will allow no more than five num loads out of the first ten num consecutive loads of concrete of any continuous placement to exceed the maximum allowable weight tolerances .
any batches produced after the first ten num that differ from the target weight by more than two percent num will be rejected from the project and can not be placed on the project .
dispose of rejected loads at no additional cost to the department .
num moisture control num .
for a manually operated facility or for hoppers not equipped with automatic moisture sensors measure the moisture content of each stockpile not monitored by automatic moisture sensors at least every four num hours or as required by changing moisture conditions within the stockpiles num .
for plants equipped with automatic moisture probes for each stockpile monitored by an automatic moisture probe measure moisture content manually at least once a day .
compare the manual measurement immediately before preparing the first concrete load to the measurement shown by the moisture sensing equipment .
if the measurements differ by more than num recorrelate the moisture probe .
num for stockpiles not monitored by an automatic moisture probe follow the requirements of num .
num .
send a certificate showing the moisture content determined by manual methods in accordance with paragraph num below and the moisture correlation to the project manager with the first load of concrete .
if this information is not included with the section num portland cement concrete page num first load of concrete delivered to the project that load of concrete and all subsequent loads of concrete are subject to rejection until the information is received at the project .
num .
determine the aggregate moisture content to the nearest num in accordance with one num of the following procedures num aashto t num the shelf life of the calcium carbide is relatively short .
closely monitor the age of the calcium carbide and replace it in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations num aashto t num the department will allow the hotplate or microwave methods for this purpose as long as no material is lost and the pan is continuously agitated during the drying process .
num .
provide the following information on the moisture certificate to the project manager num pan weight it is not acceptable to tare out the pan weight on scales equipped to do so num wet weight of the pan and the sample num first dry weight of the pan and the sample num second dry weight of the pan and the sample num third dry weight of the pan and the sample if necessary num absolute moisture content of the sample num the moisture probe reading from the tested sample if equipped and num the calculated difference between the actual moisture content test and that shown by the moisture sensing equipment .
allow washed aggregates to drain before use .
the project manager may require the aggregates to remain in the stockpile or storage area for longer if the moisture contents are excessive .
num airentraining and chemical admixtures store admixtures in separate containers to avoid contamination evaporation and damage .
protect liquid admixtures from freezing and from damaging temperatures .
for admixtures used as suspensions in nonstable solutions provide agitating equipment to ensure the thorough distribution of the ingredients .
measure liquid admixtures within three percent num of the target amount .
num mixing ensure that the uniformity of the concrete mixture complies with aashto m num section num .
if using a central plant mixer it must have a rated mixing capacity of at least num yd³ .
batch and deliver concrete in accordance with nrmca standards .
num transporting transport mixed concrete in nonagitating trucks only when the slump is less than two num inches .
revolvingdrum mixer trucks must be used to transport concrete with a slump in excess of two num inches .
transport concrete produced in a drybatched concrete plant in revolvingdrum mixer trucks .
num nonagitator trucks use only nonagitating trucks with bodies that are smooth mortartight metal containers capable of discharging the concrete at a satisfactory controlled rate without segregation .
provide covers needed for protection .
section num portland cement concrete page num num truck mixers and agitators equip agitator trucks with a plate directly attached to the truck in a readily visible location labeled with the specific truck properties including the designated drum mixing speed .
keep documentation for review by department personnel upon request to show that the mixers and agitators have been inspected in accordance with nrmca guidelines within the last num months .
department personnel will check the water tank site tube when the truck arrives at the project site .
if there is water missing from the tank the department will reject the truck unless the driver can account for the missing water .
num upon arrival at the project remix the concrete that arrives at the project site in agitator trucks as follows num .
for concrete mixed in a central mix plant mix at the designated mixing speed for a minimum of two num min before discharging num .
for concrete mixed inside an agitator truck mix at the designated mixing speed for a minimum of five num min before discharging num .
if any water waterreducing admixtures entrained air or other ingredients are added to the concrete mix the additional material at the designated mixing speed for at least five num min before discharging .
num placing num temperature and weather limitations see section num temperature and weather limitations .
num mixing time mixing time is the elapsed time from when the cement is exposed to the aggregates until the concrete has been placed into its final location .
do not use concrete mixed less than the minimum specified time .
the maximum mixing time for concrete hauled in truck mixers or truck agitators is num min .
do not exceed num min of mixing time when num .
the concrete temperature is num f or above for bridge decks or approach slabs num .
the concrete temperature is num f for other concrete .
when hauling the concrete in nonagitating trucks all concrete must be placed into its final location within num min of initial mixing .
if the concrete temperature is num f or above place concrete within num min from initial mixing .
concrete arriving at the project with a temperature greater than num of can not be used .
num extended mixing time in rural and remote areas of the state where mixing time can not be met submit a written request to the assistant district engineer for additional time .
include the following information num .
the reason for requesting additional time num .
the additional time needed in excess of the specified mixing time num .
the proposed procedures methods and type of materials or admixtures to be used so that the concrete will meet required fresh and hardened properties and num .
documentation to prove that the additional time will not damage the quality of the concrete .
section num portland cement concrete page num this information will be forwarded to the state concrete engineer for review .
the state concrete engineer will issue a written recommendation within num working days from receipt of the request .
if the department allows a mixing time extension prepare a trial batch consisting of at least one num full load of concrete at the designated production facility and haul to the project site .
batch the concrete in the same quantities as anticipated for the project .
place the trial batch in a noncritical application to assess the mixture .
if the dosage used is found to provide a final setting time within num num minutes after the concrete has been unloaded then the contractor will be approved for the use of the designated hydration stabilizer at the dosage determined from this trial .
num concrete sampling and testing the contractor shall test for quality control and the department will test for acceptance .
num .
measure concrete for specification compliance only by the test methods shown in the minimum testing requirements .
the department will not accept results from the inplace test methods described in section num inplace concrete strength measurements as an alternative to these requirements .
obtain representative samples of concrete from the approximate middle of the truck being tested for the required properties from the point of discharge into the structure being placed .
the department will provide test results to the contractor after the final compressive strength tests for each set of test specimens is completed with a copy to the supplier on a weekly basis num .
mold and cure concrete cylinders for compressive strength tests in accordance with aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the field using four num inch eight num inch single use plastic cylinder molds with plastic lids .
use cylinder molds that are six num inch num inch if the nominal maximum size of the aggregate is equal to or greater than num inch num .
use a rod to consolidate the concrete for all slump air content and unit weight tests and all compressive strength test cylinders cast with normal slump concrete class a class aa class g and class d. use a vibrator to consolidate the concrete in all air content and unit weight tests and all test cylinders cast from slip form concrete class e and class f. do not use a rod to consolidate slipform concrete num .
provide all necessary support for all testing and to maintain sufficient safe storage space including but not limited to water bath container water for initial curing of concrete cylinders heating or cooling as necessary generators and alternate power sources as needed and all vibratory equipment and all equipment required to operate the vibratory equipment as required by section num .
num .
immediately after molding begin curing of test cylinders by submerging in a water bath with a temperature of num f num f. do not exceed num min from the time the concrete was sampled to the start of initial curing .
use water that complies with section num water for the initial curing .
all cylinder curing containers for testing of the concrete must be in the same location and within num ft of the testing site chosen in advance by department inspection personnel unless an alternative location has been approved by the project manager prior to the placement .
the project manager can not authorize any location that does not provide sufficient time for the casting of the test specimens and subsequent delivery to the initial curing location within the num minutes allowed to begin initial curing of the test specimens .
maintain the waterfilled containers with the test cylinders undisturbed for a minimum of num h but not more than num h from the time of placement .
ensure that the level of water never drops below the tops of the cylinders .
num .
after initial curing strip the concrete cylinders and place into a standard curing tank or moist room in accordance with aashto t num section num .
if the cylinders are to be shipped to an offsite laboratory for testing maintain the cylinders in the standard curing environment at a temperature of num num of until they are ready to be transported .
do not ship test cylinders until they are at least num h old .
section num portland cement concrete page num num .
the party that prepared the test specimens is responsible for transporting them from the initial curing environment to the final curing location .
protect the test specimens from being damaged in any way .
specific attention will be paid to protection from sun wind rain vibrations moisture loss and any sudden drops or impacts during transport .
num testing frequency department personnel will perform all testing in accordance with the minimum testing requirements .
num continuous concrete placements it is common practice to place and test concrete at the same time therefor as concrete is being placed and tested concrete tests which are outside the allowable concrete test ranges may be encountered and are to be immediately reported to the project manager .
concrete that has already been placed shall be removed if the slump is more than one numinch over the specified limits and air is more than ½ below the minimum air specified .
the project manager then can determine to place or halt the placement of the remaining concrete .
the project manager can determine if the placed concrete needs to be removed or if it can remain .
in the event that two num consecutive trucks or any two num out of six num trucks are outside the allowable testing ranges concrete shall not be placed in the structure until the concrete testing is performed prior to the placement operation and the allowable concrete test ranges are shown to be in the allowable range .
if concrete from five num consecutive trucks are delivered within allowable concrete testing parameters then the placement and testing of concrete can once again be performed concurrently .
payment of concrete that deviated from required parameters will receive a numcu yd pay reduction in addition to the outcome of the final pay factors for the concrete .
num superplasticizers if using a superplasticizer measure the initial slump before adding the superplasticizer and again immediately after the superplasticizer has been properly mixed into the load .
do not exceed slump specifications defined on the approved mixture design before introducing the superplasticizer .
do not exceed a slump of eight num inches after adding the super plasticizer .
check superplasticized concrete for segregation before and during placement .
do not place segregated concrete .
num acceptance num concrete strength determine the compressive strength for compliance by averaging two num or more concrete cylinder test results from the same concrete sample and tested at the specified age .
make handle and store in accordance with aashto t num and test in accordance with aashto t num .
consider the result from a single cylinder only as an indicator .
it will not be considered an actual strength measurement .
num individual strength test unless otherwise specified verify compliance with the specifications by determining the concrete strength at the age designated in table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures .
make at least num cylinders for each set .
test the first cylinder at seven num days for use as an early concrete compressive strength indicator .
test the second and third cylinders to determine the individual strength test result .
reserve the fourth cylinder for testing if the withintestcoefficientofvariation exceeds five percent num in accordance with aci num .
if the fourth cylinder is tested average all of the section num portland cement concrete page num cylinders tested at that age to determine the individual strength test unless any of the following conditions exist num .
there is a visible cylinder defect or a defect in the capping .
num .
a significant irregularity occurred while loading the test specimen to failure such as a sudden load burst cyclic or pulsating loads or a loading rate not in accordance with aashto t num .
num inplace concrete strength measurements if the contractor requests measurement of inplace concrete strength for construction related purposes the contractor must provide testing equipment and perform strength tests at no additional cost to the department .
field cured test cylinders will be tested by a ptl approved by the state materials bureau .
use one num of the following procedures to determine the inplace concrete strength num .
core testing .
perform in accordance with aashto t num and section num investigation of low strength cylinder test results num .
the maturity method astm cnum .
integrates the heat of hydration and the time since the concrete was batched correlated for the specific concrete mixture before use in the field num .
the windsor probe astm cnum .
measures the penetration depth of a specially fabricated probe into the concrete calibrated to the concrete mixture num .
the pullout test astm cnum .
measures the pullout resistance of a plug cast into the concrete calibrated to the concrete mixture num .
the matchcure method .
places additional cylinders into a specially controlled chamber that maintains the temperature of the cylinders to that of the concrete represented num .
the castinplace cylinder method astm cnum .
tests a cylinder that was cast into the concrete being evaluated and subsequently removed for testing .
the hole remaining after removal of the castinplacecylinder must be filled with a nonshrink grout or a type k cement num .
the rebound test astm c num as modified herein this procedure must be performed in accordance with directions from the state concrete engineer .
at a minimum a test shall consist of at least num credible rebounds obtained from an area approximately num inches in diameter .
the highest two num and the lowest two num rebounds will be deleted and the remaining num rebound results averaged to determine the rebound number from the test location .
num .
field curing .
cast cylinders in accordance with aashto t num and cure in accordance with aashto t num section num .
before using any method of measuring inplace concrete strength in the field with the exception of method num field curing submit complete supporting documentation for the method proposed for use and intended procedures to be followed to the project manager for approval by the state materials bureau .
do not use field cured cylinders to determine the inplace strength for any structural applications .
the department will not permit any test samples to be extracted from bridge decks prestressed members or approach slabs .
prohibited testing for these structures includes core testing pullout tests or castin place cylinder test methods .
if the inplace compressive strength is at least equal to the strength required for the intended application the contractor may strip forms or allow traffic on the structure or pavement .
num compressive strength compliance of concrete based on cylinders the department will accept concrete based on the compressive strength cylinder tests when the compliance tests equal or exceed the specified strength .
if the compliance test is section num portland cement concrete page num less than the specified strength the test will be considered acceptable if both of the following requirements are met num .
the running average of three num consecutive individual strength tests meets or exceeds the specified strength and num .
no individual strength test as defined in num falls below the specified strength by more than num psi .
if the compliance test does not meet cylinderbased acceptance requirements the department will review the strength tests and notify the contractor whether the concrete will be accepted at a reduced price or if the contractor has to replace it .
num investigation of low strength cylinder test results do not use the following test procedures as a substitute for the compliance test program in section num concrete sampling and testing .
the procedures described below will not be allowed more than twice during the course of the project .
if problems with low strength cylinder tests persist the department may suspend the project at no additional cost or time to the department and require the contractor to comply with section num troubleshooting .
if the corrective actions taken by the contractor are insufficient the department may suspend work again at no additional cost or time to the department until the project manager determines acceptable action as proposed by the contractor .
the contractor may use any of the inplace strengthtest methods in accordance with section num inplace concrete strength measurements to investigate areas of concern if normal acceptance tests do not comply with section num acceptance of concrete based on cylinders .
however the schmidt hammer test shown in section num can not be used for final acceptance or to determine the pay factor .
do not use core testing pullout testing or castin place cylinder test methods for any investigation of concrete contained in bridge decks prestressed members or approach slabs .
num testing cores if the contractor uses cores to determine inplace compressive strength obtain cores in accordance with aashto t num and immediately seal each core in an air tight plastic bag .
test cores in accordance with aashto t num .
if the concrete structure will be dry under normal service conditions cure the cores inside the plastic bags at a temperature range between num f to num f for seven num days before testing .
test the cores dry .
if the concrete structure will be more than superficially wet under normal service conditions cure the cores in limesaturated water for at least num h before testing .
test the cores wet .
obtain the cores num days after concrete placement num days for class e or class f concrete .
take at least three num cores from any area of concern to evaluate the area of that had low strength test results .
the department will approve core locations before the cores are obtained .
test for compressive strength of the concrete cores at num days num days for class e or class f concrete .
for bridge concrete exclusive of bridge decks with low strength test results the bridge design section will develop a coring plan within num days of the initial concrete placement .
obtain cure and test cores in accordance with the previous paragraph .
the department will accept the concrete when the average of the cores representing each area of concern equals or exceeds the specified strength .
num alternate testing section num portland cement concrete page num as an alternative to using cores for testing inplace compressive strength method num num num num num or num can be used to investigate the inplace strength of the concrete in question .
for bridge decks prestressed members and approach slabs use only inplace strengthtest methods num num num or num described in section num inplace concrete strength measurements .
submit a written request to the project manager for permission to use the selected method .
do not proceed until receipt of written approval from the state materials bureau .
method num can only be used to investigate the areas of concern and can not be used for final acceptance of for determination of the pay factor .
the department will accept the concrete when the average of the tests is equal to or greater than the num of the specified strength .
num state concrete engineer analysis if the inplace strengths are not adequate for acceptance at full price the state concrete engineer will evaluate the concrete .
after reviewing the state concrete engineers recommendations the department will take one num of the following actions num .
direct the contractor to remove and replace the failed concrete at no additional cost to the department or num .
pay the contractor for the concrete in accordance with flow chart num price adjustment percentages for low strength concrete based on labcured cylinders .
num price adjustments the department will make price adjustments for noncompliance with concrete strength specifications based on labcured strength tests unless alternate inplace strength tests have been previously approved .
if the compliance strength test is num or more of the specified strength then the contractor may choose to have a hardened air content test on a core obtained from the concrete in question performed by a department approved petrographer in accordance with astm cnum linear traverse method .
if the result of the hardened air content analysis meets the requirements below the concrete will be paid for at full price .
num .
a minimum air content of num num .
a specific surface greater than num innum and num .
a spacing factor less than num inch .
num cylinder based price adjustments if low strength concrete is accepted based on labcured cylinders the department will pay for concrete in the lot represented by the low strength tests in accordance with flow chart a price adjustment percentages for low strength concrete based on labcured cylinders .
num price adjustments based on inplace strength tests num .
if the department accepts low strength concrete based on core tests the department will pay for the concrete represented by the cores in accordance with flowchart b pay factor determination for portland cement concrete by inplace strength tests num .
if the concrete strength is based on one num of the inplace test methods specified in section num inplace concrete strength measurements methods num through num the price adjustment factor will be determined by first multiplying the specified strength by num .
this value will then be used as the denominator to determine the percentage of the measured inplace strength compared to the adjusted specified strength .
the pay factor shown in flow chart b price adjustment percentages for low strength concrete based on inplace strength tests for that percentage will be section num portland cement concrete page num applied to all of the affected concrete .
the department will not allow use of field cured cylinders to determine price adjustments .
section num compres greater th compres compres than num compres pay fact strength num num num num num num num num num compres strength within num specified compres strength pay fact tests in num flow portland cement ssive strength is equ han the specified ssive strength no ssive strength test is psi below specified ssive strength tor for amount comp is less than specifie num num num num num num num num rem ssive test num of d ssive yes no tor determined from accordance with sec num ye no wchart a price concrete ual to or yes s more pressive ed strength move replace hardened air system determine n inplace ction es yes no adjustment per based on lab pay repr yes pay factor for l compressive s strength num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num m ed lowest av compress any three c including equal to or specified c strength no see f pay f deter inpla meas rcentages for lo cured cylinder y factor for all concre resented by test is num lowest average trength as of spec remove no verage ive strength of consecutive tests this test is r greater than the compressive hardened air system in compliance with num flow chart b for factor rmination from ace strength surements no ow strength co rs page num ete num. cified replace yes yes oncrete section num num me the d of these s num ba the d specificati concre a bridg membe y inplac method pay fac by inp of sp num. of fc x num .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num onl or num portland cement ethod of mea department will standard specific asis of payme department will ions for which th ete being evaluated is ge deck prestressed er or approach slab yes e strength determin ds num num in section num ctor for all concrete place strength test e pecified strength mu .num pay facto num num num num num num num num num num num num num remove flowchar y methods num num num from section num can be used concrete asurementr measure concre cations for which entreserved pay for concrete e concrete is use s no c c n ed from num represented xpressed as ultiplied by or e replace rt b pay facto concrete by reserved ete or concrete it the concrete is u d e in accordance ed .
core twic cores used to determ compressive strengt pay factor strength d specified s of fc num num num num num num num num num num num num num additiona factor de avera of numc area spec o yes or determination y inplace stren tems in accordan used .
with the section e tests used more th ce on this project no mine inplace th r for all concrete rep determined at num days strength pay facto num num num num num num remo no al core tests not per eterminations .
refe yes age compressive str cores from designate equals or exceeds ified strength at num d n for portland c gth tests page num nce with the sec n of these stand pay factor for all concrete represen by test is num. han resented by core s as a percentage of or ove replace yes rmitted for pay r to flow chart a. rength ed days yes cement ction dard nted f the section num concrete structures page num section num concrete structures num description this work consists of constructing concrete box culverts headwalls retaining walls abutments bents piers slabs girders and incidental structures requiring the use of concrete except prestressed members .
num materials num general use concrete mixes that have been designed in accordance with section num and approved for use on nmdot projects by the state materials bureau for the freezethaw risk zone in which the project is located .
a higher risk zone concrete may be substituted .
num joint sealing materials provide premolded expansion joint sealing material in accordance with the contract .
provide nonextruding and resilient expansion joint filler in accordance with aashto m num .
provide preformed asphalt expansion joint filler in accordance with aashto m num .
provide elastomeric compression joint seals in accordance with section num elastomeric compression joint seals .
num curing material use curing material in accordance with num .
num certificates of compliance for curing materials submit a certificate of compliance in accordance with section num control of materials .
num steel reinforcement provide steel reinforcing bars and epoxycoated steel reinforcing bars in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num construction requirements num concrete placement concrete shall be placed and tested for compliance with the project specifications in accordance with section num .
num falsework and falsework foundation construct superstructure in accordance with section num concrete structures and section num superstructure concrete .
design construct and maintain falsework and falsework foundation to provide the required strength and rigidity and to support loads without settlement .
have a professional engineer licensed in the state of new mexico design the falsework and its foundation .
the design of the falsework and foundation will be required if one num or more of the following conditions apply num .
if the height of the structure is greater than ten num ft excluding concrete culverts with bottom slabs num .
where the supported span is greater than num ft num .
where traffic other than workmen involved in constructing the structure will travel under the falsework .
section num concrete structures page num place the falsework on an adequate foundation .
the maximum foundation bearing pressure is num pounds per square foot unless a geotechnical investigation indicates a higher value can be used .
provide methods for measuring settlement or movement of falsework and forms under load .
if falsework shows settlement of no greater than num inch of the vertical supports stop the work and correct the settlement or movement .
if pilings are used for falsework pull or cut off falsework pilings .
ensure the cutoff elevations are one num ft below the low water level natural ground or bottom of proposed channel .
if required submit plans for falsework to the state bridge engineer for approval .
submit proposed changes to existing structures required for maintenance of traffic to the project manager for approval .
the approval process may require up to num days .
num form construction make forms mortar tight and sufficiently rigid to prevent deformation due to the pressure of the concrete and other loads incidental to the construction operations including vibration .
construct and maintain forms to prevent the joints from opening .
construct and maintain forms used on surfaces in public view with a smooth surface of uniform color and texture .
do not weld reinforcing or structural steel except as required in the contract .
remove loose dirt laitance and miscellaneous debris from the bottom of the forms before placing concrete .
fillet forms and chamfer them num inch unless required otherwise in the contract and give them a bevel or draft for easy removal of projections such as girders and copings .
num form lumber use lumber that is planed on at least one num side and the two num edges for exposed concrete surfaces .
place the planed face so that it will be the formed surface for the concrete being placed .
num metal ties construct metal ties and anchorages within the forms to permit the removal of a portion of the tie connections without damaging the concrete and provide at least num inch depth of cover from the concrete surface .
num surface treatment of forms ensure that all forms have been properly treated with an approved form release agent before placing reinforcing steel .
ensure that forms have been properly wetted before placing concrete .
do not use form oil that adheres to or discolors the concrete .
num metal forms provide metal forms thick enough to prevent bending and maintain their shape .
use countersunk bolts and rivet heads .
use clamps pins and other connecting devices designed to hold forms rigidly together and for removal without damaging the concrete .
use metal forms that have a smooth surface and line up properly .
the contractor may use metal forms that remain part of the structure in accordance with the contract or as approved by the state bridge engineer .
use permanent steel bridge deck forms in accordance with section num permanent steel deck forms .
num reuse of forms section num concrete structures page num continuously maintain the shape strength rigidity water tightness and surface smoothness of reused forms .
resize warped or bulged lumber before reusing it .
num temperature and weather limitations keep the concrete mixture temperature between num f to num f at the time of placement .
num cold weather concrete do not place concrete directly onto any surface that is less than num f unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
do not place concrete on frozen ground .
place cold weather concrete in accordance with aci num cold weather concreting .
if placing concrete at or below air temperatures of num f provide suitable enclosures and heating devices .
vent exhaust from combustion type heating devices outside the placing area so that the exhaust fumes can not come in contact with the freshly placed concrete .
ensure the concrete surface temperatures never fall below num f during placement and the first three num days after placing .
do not let the surface temperature fall below num f during the next four num days after placing or until the inplace strength determined by the maturity method as described in section num portland cement concrete indicates that num of the design strength is achieved .
monitor the minimum concrete temperatures at various locations including edges and corners of slabs or other structures and check immediately before placing insulating material over the concrete .
if heating the aggregates or water use heating methods and equipment that can heat the material uniformly .
do not heat the materials to more than num f. during the heating or mixing process do not add cement to water and aggregate combinations that are hotter than num f. if air temperatures are likely to fall below num f during the placement or curing periods submit a cold weather concreting and curing plan to the project manager for approval by the state concrete engineer before concrete placement .
allow num days for review .
ensure that the plan details the methods and equipment to maintain the required concrete temperatures .
information submitted will include but not be limited to o whether or not outside heating sources will be used and how the exhaust will be vented away from the fresh concrete o what the target mix temperature will be o how the concrete will be protected from the ambient conditions o how soon after the placement the protection from the ambient conditions will be implemented o who will be responsible for insuring that the proper protection from the environment is properly implemented o how the actual temperature of the concrete will be monitored o how often will this be checked o who will do the checking o what actions will be taken if the temperatures fall below the target points o who will be responsible for taking the necessary actions o who the contact will be if department personnel need to talk transmit notices or information about the cold weather conditions .
num hot weather concrete place hot weather concrete in accordance with aci num hot weather concreting .
section num concrete structures page num num wind break if a wind break is used the wind break shall be a minimum height of eight num ft num inches and constructed in a perimeter enclosing the bridge deck approach slabs sleeper footings andor transition slabs if applicable .
all areas of the freshly placed concrete must be protected by the wind break .
the nature and type of windbreak to be used shall be approved by the project manager prior to placement of any superstructure concrete .
num fogging system if a fogging system is used a water fog shall be continuously applied over the surface of the freshly placed concrete in such a manner that the entire surface is kept at a relative humidity of num or greater and the surface of concrete is kept at an evaporation potential of num poundsquare foothour or less as determined from figure num .
the evaporation potential shall be determined prior to fogging and outside the wind protection and continuously monitored with evaporation potential measurements taken and recorded at least once every five num min throughout the entire placement and continuing until the concrete curing system has been completely installed .
if a wind break andor fogging are being used obtain these readings from the protected area at a height of approximately five num feet above the protected concrete .
the area to be fogged shall be the entire area of the freshly placed concrete which has not had the final finish applied .
this fog shall be delivered through a network of nozzles which are properly spaced to provide a uniform fog at the surface of the concrete .
the nozzles used shall be of the type which atomizes the water so that there are no visually discernible droplets of water .
the area of coverage from each nozzle shall overlap all adjacent nozzle coverage by at least one num ft .
it shall be demonstrated prior to the placement of the concrete that the intended system is capable of delivering the required fogging environment for at least twice the anticipated required time .
do not finish or otherwise mix any of the fogging water into the fresh concrete .
the intended system must be properly field tested and approved by the state materials bureau before being used on any superstructure concrete .
fogging shall continue until the surface is covered with an approved curing compound .
the wet burlap shall not be applied over the curing compound until the superstructure concrete can receive the wet burlap and any placement loads without deformation .
the use of a monomolecular film mmf evaporation retarder shall only be used in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if used it shall be applied and no further finishing efforts will be permitted in any location that has received the mmf .
under no circumstances shall the mmf be used as a finishing aid in the working of the concrete surface .
do not place concrete until the project manager approves the reinforcing steel and forms .
ensure that forms are clean and free of rust grease and other deleterious material immediately before placing the concrete .
remove wooden form spacers immediately before placing concrete in that area .
vibrate the concrete during placement to force the coarse aggregate from external surfaces and to bring mortar against the forms to produce a smooth finish significantly free of water air pockets and honeycombs .
place concrete in girders walls and other similar structures in horizontal layers .
ensure that the concrete is not too thick for the vibrator to consolidate and merge it with the previous layer .
do not pour concrete layers deeper than two num ft. do not place concrete faster than the rate used for the design of the forms .
adjust the rate for the temperature of the concrete being placed .
num rate of evaporation limitations applies to bridge decks approach slabs sidewalks curbs cbc top and bottom slabs slipped formed concrete structures all pccp structural shotcrete and concrete slope paving review listing of structures how to match top paragraph section num concrete structures page num do not place concrete unless the average combination of air temperature temperature of fresh concrete relative humidity and wind velocity evaporation potential at the site over any ten num minute period is less than num lb per square foot per hour in accordance with figure num surface evaporation from concrete by using a continuous reading computerized weather station set to intervals not greater than five num minutes apart .
measurements of the wind speed relative humidity and ambient air temperature used to determine the surface evaporation from the concrete shall be taken at a height of approximately five num feet above the deck .
utilize an automated system that does not require any human support or effort after its initial setup .
continue obtaining and recording the surface evaporation from the concrete after all of the concrete has been placed until the final curing system has been physically applied .
do not place concrete during periods of high air temperature low humidity or high winds unless one num or more of the following measures have been taken upon by the contractor at his expense and maintained to the satisfaction of the project manager to reduce the rate of evaporation to within the specified rate num .
erect windbreaks to reduce the wind velocity over the concrete surface num .
place concrete during nighttime or early morning hours num .
use cool aggregate and mixing water to lower the fresh concrete temperature during hot weather num .
increase the relative humidity at the site with a fog spray or num .
protect the concrete with temporary wet coverings during an appreciable delay between placing and finishing .
num chutes and troughs avoid segregation of the materials and the displacement of the reinforcement when placing the concrete .
use metal or metallined open troughs and chutes do not use aluminum .
all tools used for the moving andor spreading of the concrete shall be square pointed tools .
do not use round nose shovels and spreading tools .
where the contract requires steep slopes equip the chutes with baffle boards or use short lengths that reverse the direction of movement .
keep chutes troughs and pipes clean and free of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing with water after each pour .
discharge the water used for flushing away from the placed concrete .
do not allow concrete to free fall for more than five num ft unless confined by closed chutes or pipes .
for walls equal to or less than num inch thick such as culvert walls concrete may have a free fall of less than nine num ft .
fill each part of the form by placing the concrete as close to the final position as possible .
vibrate the concrete during placement to force the coarse aggregate back from the forms and around the reinforcement without displacing the bars .
after the concretes initial set do not jar the forms or place strain on the ends of projecting reinforcement .
section num concrete structures page num figure num surface evaporation from concrete to use this chart num .
enter with air temperature move up to relative humidity num .
move right to concrete temperature num .
move down to wind velocity num .
move left read approximate rate of evaporation num concrete pumping if placing concrete by pumping install pumping equipment so that vibrations resulting from the operation do not damage the concrete being placed .
obtain project manager approval before using concrete pumping equipment .
before placing the concrete clean the equipment thoroughly .
operate the equipment so that it pumps a continuous flow of concrete without air pockets and without an appreciable loss of slump or entrained air .
control the loss of entrained air by one num or more of the following methods num .
tie the end of the pump hose so that the discharge end is pointing upward forming section num concrete structures page num a j at the end of the hose num .
install a series of four num consecutive elbows to form a num loop num .
reduce the diameter of the end of the pump line or num .
limit the enclosed angle of the boom arms to an angle of num or more .
make sure that the discharge of the concrete from the pump is as close as possible to the bottom of the structure being placed but in no case shall it be allowed to drop a distance greater than four num feet .
do not use aluminum pipe .
do not add water to the concrete during pumping .
if water is added at the pump hopper to clear a clogged pump dispose of the concrete in the hopper and the line .
num conveyers and belts the contractor may use conveyor belts to transport the concrete from the point of delivery to the point of placement .
if using multiple belts ensure that the drop from one num belt to the next is no greater than num inches .
at the end of the last belt do not allow the concrete to freefall more than four num ft .
ensure that the concrete coming off the end of any belt is not being segregated .
if segregation occurs slow down the speed of the belt until segregation no longer occurs .
num placing concrete under water if placing concrete under water submit a mix design and procedure plan to the project manager .
the project manager may require up to num days to approve them .
allow time in the schedule to accommodate this approval process .
num vibratingconsolidation unless otherwise directed by the project manager and excluding drilled shafts compact concrete with suitable mechanical vibrators operating within the concrete .
during concrete placement keep enough personnel vibrators and other tools available to assure adequate consolidation .
if necessary supplement vibrating with hand spading with suitable tools to assure proper consolidation .
if using vibrators use procedures in accordance with aci num .
do not use a jitterbug or any other flat tool that could cause concrete segregation .
use approved vibrators that can transmit vibration at frequencies up to num vpm .
provide vibrators that have each been certified within the last num days to provide num to num vpm .
operate vibrators to consolidate the concrete thoroughly around the reinforcement and embedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms .
do not use vibrators to make concrete flow or run .
vibrate long enough to accomplish consolidation but do not vibrate so long to cause segregation or air bubbles .
insert the vibrators vertically into the concrete and immediately withdraw upward along the same line with the opposite motion .
do not drag the vibrator horizontally across the placing area .
when operating vibrators avoid contact with reinforcing bars particularly epoxy coated reinforcing bars or bars that extend into concrete that has taken an initial set .
if vibrating concrete in areas reinforced with epoxycoated bars cover the vibrators with nonmetallic sleeves to prevent damage to the epoxy coating .
num sequence of placement and application of load do not place superimposed loads on or against load carrying members floor slabs or retaining walls until the concrete reaches num of specified compressive strength but no less than num psi as determined by the maturity method in accordance with section num inplace concrete strength measurements .
concrete box culverts and section num concrete structures page num cbc wingwalls shall not be backfilled until specified compressive strength has been achieved .
submit a concrete placement schedule to the project manager upon request .
plan and schedule concrete placement to prevent damage to previously placed concrete or to the curing or protection systems of previously placed concrete .
the following applies to concrete placement scheduling num .
the contractor may erect reinforcement and formwork for walls columns and pier caps num h after placement of footings or floor stab concrete num .
unless otherwise provided the contractor may concrete columns walls and pier caps num h after placement of footing or floor slab concrete num .
do not set beams or girders or place superstructure concrete until substructure forms have been stripped sufficiently to determine the quality of the concrete num .
do not place the load of the superstructure on the substructure until the substructure concrete has been in place for at least num days or until inplace strength measured by the maturity method indicates that the concrete has attained the design strength num .
ensure that the concrete has achieved sufficient strength as determined by the maturity method in accordance with the form design before placing concrete for integral horizontal members such as pier caps or roof slabs num .
place the vertical members at least seven num days before mounting friction collars or falsework brackets that will support the weight of horizontal members .
ensure that the vertical members have attained the specified strength before applying loads unless the department approves otherwise num .
limit monolithic casting of walls and deck slabs of concrete box culverts to culverts that are six num ft high or less .
construct box culvert walls higher than six num ft in accordance with this subsection num .
if the strength gain of the concrete is retarded the district construction engineer may extend the waiting periods .
conduct construction operations in a manner that does not damage the previously placed concrete .
num supplementary lighting do not mix place or finish concrete when the natural light is insufficient without using an adequate artificial lighting system approved by the project manager .
test the lighting system at least one num day before placing the concrete to assure that the system will provide sufficient light without shadows or dark areas for placing testing and finishing concrete .
ensure that the lights do not create a hazard for traffic on adjacent roadways or detours .
num removal of forms do not remove the forms until the concrete is strong enough to avoid damage by removing the forms and the temperature differential between the concrete surface to be exposed and the core of the concrete structure is less than num f per inch .
if inplace strength tests in accordance with section num inplace concrete strength measurements are not used to control field operations remove forms in accordance with table num timetable for removal of forms not counting those days when the temperature is below num f. section num concrete structures page num table num timetable for removal of forms structural component minimum time for removal bottom of beams num days bridge decks a seven num days floor slabs seven num days cbc floors seven num days cbc covers seven num days walls num h columns num h sides of beams num h all other parts num h aadditional requirements of section num superstructure concrete shall apply .
if one num of the test methods in section num inplace concrete strength measurements is used to control the field operations the contractor may remove forms from the bottom of beams and floor slabs when the concrete reaches num of the design compressive strength .
num joints make construction joints in concrete structures in accordance with the plans unless otherwise directed or approved by the project manager .
if the concrete placement is interrupted and additional construction joints are required place the additional joints in planes perpendicular to the principal lines of stress and at points of minimum shear as approved by the project manager .
roughen the joint surface to increase the bond with future concrete except in areas near the forms .
num keyed joints mechanically bond construction joints with keys formed by beveled strips embedded in the surface of the concrete .
make the keys from num num inch to num num inch deep .
place the keys centrally within the thickness of the joint .
ensure that the keys have a width that is onethird of the depth of the smallest dimension of the joint .
the keys do not need to exceed the clear distance between reinforcing mats or be greater than num inches .
provide raised keys in accordance with the plans .
num bonding new concrete to existing if bonding new and existing concrete retighten the forms before depositing new concrete on or against the hardened concrete .
roughen the surface of the hardened concrete without loosening the aggregate or damaging the concrete on the surface .
thoroughly clean the surface of foreign matter and laitance .
have an approved private testing laboratory measure the water vapor being transmitted through the concrete surface in accordance with astm f num .
do not place new concrete on existing concrete if the water vapor exceeds five num lb per num ftnum per num h. provide a bonding agent at the interface between the hardened and fresh concrete by covering the cleaned and saturated surfaces with a coating of mortar neat cement grout or an approved bonding agent .
place the new concrete before the grout reaches an initial set .
if using an approved bonding agent follow the manufacturers instructions .
do not use a bonding agent that is water soluble or is delivered in a waterbased solution .
place the concrete continuously from joint to joint and finish the face edges of exposed joints in accordance with the plans .
section num concrete structures page num num water stops and flashings provide and place water stops and flashings .
splice or solder water stops and flashings to form continuous watertight joints .
num joint fillers accurately shape the preformed joint filler to fit adjacent concrete and hold the filler firmly in place to prevent formation of concrete fins under and between sections of the material .
num miscellaneous construction num setting of bearings ensure the surfaces on which metal masonry plates and elastomeric bearing pads will rest are flat and on level planes .
if using elastomeric bearing pads finish the bridge seats slightly high and grind to the correct elevation .
if it is necessary to adjust the elevation of a bearing upward make the adjustment by placing full size shim plates .
if it is necessary to adjust the elevation of a bearing downward make the adjustment by diamond grinding to a level planebearing surface .
do not use grout to level or adjust elevation .
if placing a bearing surface below the level of adjacent concrete ensure water drains away from the masonry plate or elastomeric bearing pad .
finish sections of bridge seats on abutments or piers on both sides of bearing assemblies to drain with a slope of from num inch to num inch per foot .
correct depressions that retain water .
num waterproofing if required in the contract protect the backsides of abutment backwalls and wingwalls by waterproofing .
the contract defines the vertical and horizontal limits of the waterproofing .
select a membrane type waterproofing system from the departments approved products list .
num finishing perform finishing after removing forms in accordance with the contract .
num exposed surfaces the department considers exposed surfaces as surfaces that are not buried in the ground or permanently covered by the fill or against which the fill is not permanently placed .
however the department does not consider the inside surfaces of concrete box drainage culverts and concrete box girders and the bottom side of concrete bridge decks as exposed surfaces .
num class num ordinary surface finish apply a class num finish to exposed surfaces as a final finish or before a class num rubbed surface finish or a class num special surface finish .
a class num finish includes the removal of rods bolts or other form ties to at least num inch deep from the face of the concrete .
fill tie holes and honeycombs with mortar composed of one num part cement and two num parts sand use the same brand and type of cement as used in the concrete .
section num concrete structures page num remove objectionable fins bulges and projections by rubbing with carborundum bricks or by other methods approved by the project manager .
if necessary clean the entire surface .
keep such surfaces in an acceptable condition until final acceptance of the work .
apply a class num finish to surfaces buried in the ground or permanently against the fill except that form ties may be cut off even with the concrete surface and fins minor bulges projections stains and discolorations do not need to be removed .
unless specified otherwise in the contract apply a class num finish to the front faces of backwalls of abutments the top surfaces of bridge seats on piers and abutments and concrete curtain walls between pier pilings .
apply a class num finish to the inside surfaces of concrete box drainage culverts except as noted in section num class num rubbed surface finish .
num class num rubbed surface finish apply a class num finish to concrete surfaces generally exposed to public view .
the contract may specify a class num special surface finish with selected colors for various components or parts of components .
if the contract specifies a class num special surface finish apply a class num finish first unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
a class num finish consists of a class num finish then thoroughly wetting the surface and applying a mortar .
apply a thin mortar composed of one num part cement and four num parts sand and rub it into holes and pockets use the same brand and type of cement as used in the concrete .
use sand passing a no .
num sieve .
allow the mortar to remain until it has set sufficiently to prevent removal by subsequent rubbing operations .
rub the surface with a no .
num to no .
num carborundum brick then rub with burlap to remove excess mortar .
if the completed rubbed surface does not look uniform make a final finish by wet rubbing with a no .
num carborundum brick .
apply class num finish to the following num .
outside vertical surfaces of bridge decks num .
outside surfaces of exterior girders curb and rail posts seen in elevation view num .
curb tops post tops inside faces of curbs and faces of hand rails num .
exposed surfaces of pier columns and caps num .
abutment wingwalls and bridge seats one num ft below final grade num .
bridge rehabilitation projects with existing slope paving num .
top surface of slope paving tops of bridge seats require only a class num finish num .
exposed surfaces of barrier railings on bridges or concrete box culverts num .
exposed surfaces of miscellaneous concrete structures extending above shoulder line grade and inside walls of concrete underpass structures .
num .
concrete box culverts used for drainage on the soffit and streamside faces of headwalls and wingwalls and for six num inches down the back side of wingwalls and num .
the interiors of sidewalls to one num ft back from the face of the culvert at the tops of the sidewalls and extending on a num line downward and inward .
num class num float finish apply a class num finish to upper surfaces not formed such as tops of walls parapets tops of slabs and bottom slabs of box culverts copings and bridge seats except tops of bridge decks sidewalks or curbs .
section num concrete structures page num a class num finish consists of placing an excess amount of concrete in the forms and striking off this excess concrete with a template forcing the coarse aggregate below the surface .
after striking off the concrete thoroughly work the surface with a wooden cork or canvas float without adding water or cement .
before the final finish has set use a fine brush to remove surface film and to produce a fine grain smooth sanded texture .
num class num special surface finish apply a class num finish on new structures over the class num finish unless directed otherwise by the project manager .
if applying a class num finish apply it throughout the structure and on adjacent structures for concrete surfaces where the contract specifies a class num finish .
if repairing existing structures apply a class num finish to the entire surface of the repaired components .
for a class num finish use materials from the departments approved product list for special surface finish on concrete structures .
use the same material and methods for surfaces the contract requires to receive a class num finish .
submit sample panels for each type of class num finish showing colors and texture to the project manager at least num days before beginning finishing operations for approval by the landscape architect .
unless otherwise shown in the contract use sample panels that are at least one num ft one num ft .
if applying a class num finish and penetrating water repellent on a concrete surface allow the penetrating water repellant to cure for at least seven num days before applying the class num finish .
num penetrating water repellent treatment solution saturate the exposed surfaces of the following concrete structures with a penetrating water repellent treatment in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment num .
bridge wingwalls num .
front and side faces of abutment bridge seats num .
front faces of abutment backwalls num .
top surfaces of bridge seats on piers and abutments num .
pier columns stem walls and vertical surfaces of pier caps num .
top and vertical side surfaces of bridge decks except in the areas where using epoxy bridge deck overlays num .
top surfaces of concrete approach slabs num .
concrete barrier railings num .
concrete wall barriers and num .
sidewalks curbs and gutters on structures .
extend treatment to at least one num ft below the final groundline .
do not treat the underside of pier caps sides and end surfaces of concrete approach slabs .
num curing use curing methods in accordance with table num curing of concrete structures unless the contract specifies otherwise .
for structures with formed surfaces such as barrier walls barrier railings on bridges wingwalls or parapets on bridges or box culverts remove the forms finish the concrete and resume curing with method num .
do not pause curing for more than two num h. keep the section num concrete structures page num concrete surface moist throughout the finishing and curing operations .
for other formed vertical surfaces the contractor may strip or partially strip forms before the end of the specified seven num day curing period if the contractor immediately resumes curing by method num .
cure construction joints in box culverts bridge substructures and superstructures and other concrete structures with wet burlap for seven num days or until covered with the next lift of concrete .
alternatively cure these structures with method num provided that the surfaces are sandblasted and thoroughly cleaned before placing the new concrete .
table num curing of concrete structures method designation curing method description method num water curing method num curing compound method num form curing method num combination of method num and method num structure description curing methods bridge decks a num approach slabs num concrete curbs gutters and sidewalks num or num top surfaces of pier caps abutment bridge seats num or num wingwalls and parapet walls num or num other concrete b num num or num asee section num curing for additional curing requirements for bridge decks .
bunless the contract specifies otherwise .
the contractor shall not apply curing compound to surfaces that will receive a class num or class num finish unless the contractor sandblasts and thoroughly cleans the surfaces before applying the finish .
if the department allows the contractor to choose the curing method the contractor shall obtain the approval of the project manager before beginning curing operations .
during curing operations keep unsprayed surfaces wet .
num method num water curing keep the concrete structures thoroughly and continuously wet and covered for at least seven num days .
place and anchor covers mats and sheeting to ensure continuous contact with the concrete surfaces .
the contractor may temporarily remove the cover of surfaces that require a rubbed finish for finishing but shall restore the cover as soon as possible .
cover concrete slabs as soon as possible with a double layer of clean wet burlap or cotton mats or other moisture retaining material approved by the project manager .
next cover the concrete slab with white plastic sheeting .
the project manager will determine the suitability of burlap or cotton mats for reuse based on the cleanliness and absorptive ability of the materials .
soak burlap in a solution of water and a small amount of detergent .
drain the burlap and cotton mats and lay them flat with no wrinkles on the deck surface .
ensure that adjacent strips of burlap and cotton mats overlap at least num inches .
once in place lightly fogspray the burlap and cotton mats with water .
regularly rewet the burlap or cotton mats so that they are section num concrete structures page num not allowed to become dry .
completely cover the concrete slab with burlap and cotton mats and the plastic sheeting .
if the slabs are on grade extend the mats at least twice the slabs thickness beyond the edges of the slab and make sure that the entire exposed surface of the concrete is protected .
if the slab is a bridge deck place the mats and plastic to fully protect exposed edges and unformed surfaces of the concrete .
num method num curing compound for slabs bridge decks and other flatwork apply the curing compound to the fresh concrete after as soon after finishing as allowed by manufacturer .
thoroughly mix the membrane forming curing compound within an hour of use and agitate it during spraying operations .
do not apply the curing compound in rainy conditions .
apply the curing compound under pressure with an atomizingtype spray nozzle .
uniformly cover the entire surface area at a rate of at least one num gal per num ft num .
use spray equipment with enough pressure to force the curing compound to leave the nozzle as a fine mist .
if the nozzle becomes plugged immediately clear the nozzle before continuing the application .
do not continue to spray curing compound through a nozzle that has become plugged or obstructed .
apply the curing compound by first spraying back and forth in one num direction until a uniform covering has been achieved .
then spray back and forth in a direction perpendicular to the first application until a second uniform covering has been achieved .
ensure that the entire curing surface has been uniformly covered with two num coatings of curing compound .
do not apply the curing compound to exposed reinforcing steel or construction joints .
protect all surfaces covered with curing compound for seven num days after application .
provide walkways and mats for workmen material and equipment .
do not use a curing compound that exhibits separation segregation or skimming .
num method num form curing leave forms in place for at least seven num days .
keep the forms moist during the curing period and replenish the system with water spray to maintain a continuously moist condition .
cure exposed surfaces with methods num or num .
num method num combination of curing compound and water curing apply method num curing first .
when the concrete is hard enough that burlap or cotton mats can be placed without marring the concrete surface apply method num curing directly over the emulsion coated surface .
num equipment and personnel readiness show the project manager that curing material and equipment including backup sprayers and mixers are in working order at least one num day before concrete placement .
num temperature requirements for storage and application store curing compounds in protected areas away from weather and extreme temperatures .
dispose of compounds that have been frozen in storage .
apply curing compounds when the temperature of the compound is between num f and num f. num method of measurement section num concrete structures page num the department will measure all pay items using the dimensions shown in the contract or approved modifications .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit structural concrete class ____ cubic yard structural concrete class ____ ____ inch square yard substructure concrete class ____ cubic yard special surface finish square foot waterproofing square foot wind break lump sum fogging system lump sum the department will pay for class num special surface finish only for existing concrete .
payment for the class num special surface finish on new concrete is included in the payment for the new concrete .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately waterstops and flashings waterproofing membranes for new concrete surfaces premolded and preformed bituminous joint fillers concrete required to fill overbreakage in excavation when footings or walls are cast against vertical or horizontal faces of excavation and installation of drains and weep holes .
wind break and fogging system will be paid for only if the plans list these items in the estimated quantities table .
section num superstructure concrete page num section num superstructure concrete num description this work consists of constructing concrete bridge decks reinforcedconcrete boxgirder bridges slab bridges slantleg bridges truss bridges and other structural configurations requiring the use of superstructure concrete or high performance deck hpd concrete .
castinplace concrete placed in bridges above the bearings will be high performance deck hpd concrete with the exception of abutment backwalls and abutment wingwalls unless otherwise shown in the contract .
bridges with integral abutments will have wingwalls end diaphragms and concrete above the bearings constructed of high performance deck hpd concrete .
approach slabs transition slabs and integral pier and abutment caps will be constructed with high performance deck hpd concrete .
num materials requirements contained in section num portland cement concrete and section num concrete structures will be applicable where appropriate and not expressly modified in this section .
provide high performance deck hpd concrete .
provide superstructure concrete class aa .
provide steel reinforcing bars and epoxycoated steel reinforcing bars in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num construction requirements num deck placement preconstruction conference the project manager will hold a preconstruction conference at least one num week before the anticipated deck placement to review the specification requirements and discuss the contractors preparations .
ensure that at a minimum the following attend the conference num .
project superintendent num .
bridge deck foreman and num .
one num representative of the concrete supplier .
the recommended agenda checklist is available from the bridge bureau .
num profile survey of girders after placing girders and before setting screeds take a profile along each line of girders .
if actual top of girder elevations differ significantly more than a nominal haunch dimension from those shown on the plans such that excessive haunches or deficient slab thickness would result make appropriate adjustments as directed by the state bridge engineer .
num falsework the contractor may not support deck finishing machines with overhang brackets outside of exterior girders unless the contractor designs a lateral bracing system to resist the entire torsion load from the deck overhang .
the maximum vertical deflection of the screed rail due to the rotation of the exterior girder shall be ¼ of less .
the contractor shall submit the drawings for the lateral bracing system and design calculations stamped by a nm licensed professional engineer to the bridge bureau for approval .
the lateral resistance of the steel intermediate diaphragms for the prestressed girders shall not be included in the contractors section num superstructure concrete page num lateral bracing system design .
the cost of the lateral bracing system and its design shall be included in the cost of the bridge .
submit plans and design calculations for the proposed girder bracing system to the project manager for approval at least num days before the anticipated placement date .
num forms use deck forms that produce the desired results .
num permanent steel deck forms provide material and elements for the permanent steel deck form units that are fabricated from steel in accordance with astm a numm anum grades num num and num ..
provide a class g num coating .
provide form sheets and form supports in accordance with the shop drawings that are at least num gauge and num gauge thick respectively .
do not use permanent steel forms in panels where longitudinal slab construction joints are located between stringers .
provide proper vibration of the concrete to ensure adequate consolidation of concrete .
num permanent ventilated steel deck form design design permanent steel forms to support superimposed dead loads of the form reinforcement and plastic concrete plus a live load of num pounds per square foot .
use steel ventilated at a minimum rate of num inchnum per square foot .
the department will not allow the following num .
unit working stresses to exceed the lesser of the following num .
num of the specified minimum yield strength of the material or num .
num psi .
num .
maximum deflections under the weight of the plastic concrete reinforcement and form to exceed the lesser of the following num .
num of the form span or num .
num inch .
num .
a load used to compute the deflection that is less than num lb per square foot .
the form span for design and deflection is the clear distance between the flanges of the supporting girders less two num inches measured parallel to the form flutes .
limit the increase in dead load due to the use of permanent steel deck forms to num lb per square foot .
if the increase exceeds this limit show that the additional load will not be detrimental or strengthen the structure to accommodate the extra load at no additional cost to the department .
calculate physical design properties in accordance with the current american iron and steel institute specification for design of coldformed steel structural members .
design the permanent steel deck forms so that the deck slab laterally supports the steel girder or girder top flanges in compression except where providing shear connectors .
num permanent steel deck form installation do not rest form sheets directly on the top of the stringer or floor beam flanges .
securely fasten sheets to form supports .
use sheets with a minimum bearing length of one num inch at each end .
place form supports in direct contact with the flange of stringers or support beams .
make attachments with welds bolts clips or other approved means do not weld to girder or beam flanges .
all welding must be performed by a certified welder in accordance with the applicable documents and welder qualifications listed in section num .
section num superstructure concrete page num place bottom reinforcing bars with a minimum cover of one num inch .
except in cases where reinforcing bars are not parallel to form corrugations center the bars approximately in the bottom layer of the main reinforcement over the valleys of the forms when necessary to achieve the minimum concrete cover .
do not allow the distance from the top of the slab to the bottom layer of main slab reinforcement to be less than the dimension shown in the contract .
num inspection and acceptance of decks placed with permanent steel deck forms if during the placement of the deck concrete there is adequate evidence to question the consolidation of the concrete the department will require the following procedure .
provide suitable facilities to provide safe access to the work for inspection .
follow one num or more of the following inspection procedures a minimum of two num days after placing the deck concrete num .
test the forms for soundness of the concrete and bonding to the concrete by striking a sharp blow to the form with a geologist hammer as and when ordered by the project manager .
provide the geologist hammer .
num .
as a minimum strike forms at ten num foot intervals parallel to and six num inches from the edge of the steel beam and at ten num foot intervals along the centerline of each bay between the beams in an x pattern with those along the beams .
strike forms at random points on a semicircle or circle as applicable on approximately a two num foot radius from the above points .
strike forms in other places as directed by the project manager to define suspicious or defective areas .
num .
sound areas where efflorescence is evident in accordance with item no .
num of this list .
repair defective areas as directed by the project manager at no expense to the department .
num placing of reinforcing bars firmly support reinforcing bars in deck slabs with approved devices spaced at intervals not exceeding num ft. securely tie down reinforcing bar mats in bridge decks to girders and forms to prevent upward movement during concrete placement .
do not allow the spacing between adjacent reinforcement bars to vary more than num inch from the dimensions shown in the contract .
place and maintain reinforcement bars within num inch of the vertical dimensions shown in the contract .
do not allow the concrete cover over the top layers of reinforcement to be less than two num inches .
for continuous steel bridges complete the forming and placing of reinforcing steel and screed rail settings for the entire length of the bridge before proceeding with any portion of the deck placement unless otherwise authorized by the state bridge engineer .
num preparation for placing concrete num support of finishing machines ensure finishing machines travel on steel rails .
provide pipe for rails with num num inch outside diameter and num num inch inside or heavier .
firmly support rails on adjustable steel supports .
securely fasten supports in place and do not space them more than num inches apart .
the department will not allow the contractor to weld the supports to top flanges of steel girders or girders or to the stirrups of concrete girders .
num setting of screed rails set the steel rails for placing and finishing equipment to finish the deck in accordance with the contract or as directed by the project manager .
make the accuracy of setting the rails consistent with the required tolerances for smoothness .
check elevations and straightness of section num superstructure concrete page num the rails by survey straight edging or string lining and sight by eye .
if supporting the finishing machine over an outside girder check edge forms for the deck for vertical alignment and install in accordance with the contract tolerances for smoothness .
provide rails that extend a sufficient distance beyond both ends of the scheduled length of placement to permit the finishing machine to reach all areas of the concrete placed and to permit offdeck parking of the machine out of the way of the hand finishers .
check the finishing machine setup for correct deck cross sections .
check blockouts for expansion joints for proper depths and widths of openings .
num finish machine trial run at least num h before placing concrete traverse the finish machine the length of the proposed placement or if a continuous steel bridge for the full length of the bridge .
demonstrate that the following performance criteria are met during the trial run num .
use of required deck slab thickness top of deck elevations and the specified reinforcing bar cover unless otherwise noted on the plans provide cover to the top of the top reinforcing bars of from num two inches to num num inches .
when checking the deck slab thickness top of deck elevations and cover allow for deflections of supports resulting from the weight of the concrete num .
do not allow screed rails to deflect excessively num .
the finishing machine is properly adjusted and in good working order and num .
the finishing machine will properly track over the entire length of the proposed placement particularly for decks that are curved superelevated or that have a high skew .
num work bridges provide one num or two num transverse work bridges for floating straight edging and curing operations .
provide work bridges that are structurally sound and do not deflect excessively .
test the work bridges in place before the deck placement to ensure proper adjustments of wheels adequate clearances to safety railings and compliance with other requirements .
num placing of concrete place concrete by pumping or other approved means .
place concrete close to the final position and to the full thickness of the slab .
place concrete far enough in front of the finishing machine to ensure proper striking off and finishing generally a distance not greater than num ft .
unless otherwise directed by the project manager compact concrete with suitable mechanical vibrators operating within the concrete .
during concrete placement keep enough personnel vibrators and other tools available to assure adequate consolidation .
if necessary supplement vibrating with hand spading with suitable tools to assure proper consolidation .
if using vibrators use procedures in accordance with aci num .
do not use a jitterbug or any other flat tool that could cause concrete segregation .
use approved vibrators that can transmit vibration at frequencies up to num vpm .
provide vibrators that have each been certified within the last num days to provide num to num vpm .
operate vibrators to consolidate the concrete thoroughly around the reinforcement and embedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms .
do not use vibrators to make concrete flow or run .
vibrate long enough to accomplish consolidation but do not vibrate so long to cause segregation or air bubbles .
insert the vibrators vertically into the concrete and immediately withdraw upward along the same line with the opposite motion .
do not drag the vibrator horizontally across the placing area .
section num superstructure concrete page num when operating vibrators avoid contact with reinforcing bars particularly epoxy coated reinforcing bars or bars that extend into concrete that has taken an initial set .
if vibrating concrete in areas reinforced with epoxycoated bars cover the vibrators with nonmetallic sleeves to prevent damage to the epoxy coating .
if hydraulic fluid motor oil dirt or other deleterious material leaks or falls onto the deck remove contaminated concrete from the deck before proceeding .
place concrete for abutment andor pier diaphragms monolithically with bridge deck no exceptions .
num pumping of concrete before placing concrete thoroughly clean the equipment .
operate the pump to produce a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets and no appreciable loss of slump .
if placing concrete by pumping do not add water at the concrete entrance hopper .
if adding water at the pump hopper to clear a clogged pump remove and dispose of concrete in the hopper and the line .
obtain the project managers approval of concrete pumping equipment before use .
provide a backup placement system capable of completing concrete placement to a bulkhead in case of a pump failure .
provide bulkheads that are precut and ready for installation .
do not use aluminum pipe as a conduit for concrete placement .
the department will test concrete for acceptance at the discharge end of the pump and collect samples from concrete placed on the deck .
num delays in deck placement stop placement operations and correct if one num of the following problems occur num .
a deckfinishing machine fails num .
placement operations are not within the specification requirements or num .
placement operations are not achieving satisfactory results .
if the concrete placement is delayed stop all other placement operations until the cause of the delay is corrected .
if the contractor fails to correct the problem within num min or within num min if using a set retardant erect a bulkhead parallel to the finishing operations and as close as practical to the location that placement originally stopped .
finish concrete to the bulkhead and discontinue placement operations for the day .
before deck placement cut the bulkhead to length and slot it for reinforcing bars .
for slab bridges install the bulkhead as close to one num of a spans quarter points as possible .
if deck placement operations have been suspended and bulkheads installed do not resume deck construction until after num h and after taking adequate corrective measures to ensure concrete mixing placement finishing and curing are performed in accordance with the contract as approved by the district construction engineer .
num rate of evaporation limitations comply with section num evaporation potential .
num rate of progress section num superstructure concrete page num provide a rate of progress of bridge deck placement in accordance with the contract .
if the contract does not define a rate the rate of progress will be at least num ft per hour over the entire width of the deck except for slab bridges for which the rate will be at least num ft per hour .
if the placement includes integral pier or abutment diaphragms do not include the time required to place the diaphragms in the rate of placement calculations .
include delays in the placement due to other causes in the calculation of the overall rate of pour .
the department may reject decks placed at rates slower than specified .
the project manager may decrease the rate of placement by num if the following conditions exist num .
the rate of evaporation is less than num lb per square foot per hour num .
the wind velocity on the deck is less than ten num mph and num .
the contractor is producing an acceptable finish .
num concrete placement in girders unless otherwise approved by the district construction engineer uniformly deposit concrete in girders the full length of the girder and bring up evenly in horizontal layers not exceeding two num ft in depth .
num temperature and weather limitations num temperature requirements see section num temperature and weather limitations .
num change in weather conditions the contractor shall assume the risk of proceeding with deck placement during marginal weather .
repair or remove and replace concrete damaged due to changing weather conditions .
after placement operations have started if weather conditions change causing evaporation rates to exceed those previously specified or if other adverse weather conditions arise immediately place an emergency bulkhead finish concrete to the bulkhead and discontinue placement operations for the day .
keep materials available to cover and protect unfinished deck areas and completed deck areas ahead of and behind the finishing machine as the machine moves forward to the bulkhead .
num finishing ensure that the rideability drainage and surface texture characteristics of finished bridge deck slabs meet the requirements specified .
provide deck with smooth transitions at ends of bridges and across expansion and construction joints .
provide deck that is free draining with no depressions .
unless otherwise specified in the contract or approved in writing by the district construction engineer operate finishing machines with the skew of the structure .
float and broom the plastic concrete parallel to the finishing operation .
the contractor will provide a tennum foot long lightweight roundbottom straightedge equipped with a long handle as approved by the project manager .
do not add water to the surface of the concrete to assist finishing .
section num superstructure concrete page num num finishing machine finish bridge deck slabs and approach slabs with approved power driven finishing machines unless the use of such machines is impractical and the district construction engineer provides a written waiver .
use finishing machines with one num or more rotating rollers augers and vibratory pans providing from num vpm to num vpm .
num finishing of slab edges if an exterior beam or girder supports a finishing machine the contractor may hand finish the deck slab between the exterior beam or girder and the edge of the deck slab .
num hand finishing plan submittal the contractor may finish the concrete deck slabs by hand if the use of a finishing machine is not possible .
submit a handfinishing plan to the project manager for approval before initiating placement operations .
the plan will describe the screed arrangement and proposed methods of finishing .
num final finishing operations immediately following the initial finishing operations and while the concrete is still plastic test the slab surface for trueness in accordance with section num acceptance criteria by using the straightedge as a float .
advance the straightedge longitudinally along the slab in successive stages not more than num the length of the straightedge .
correct variations in the surface of the slab by striking off projections and filling depressions with freshly mixed concrete .
consolidate and refinish the corrected areas with a long handled float at least three num ft in width .
the contractor may use small hand floats if approved by the project manager .
recheck the surface with a straightedge .
during the floating and straightedging process check and ensure that the deck has the proper crown slope and grade .
construct deck surfaces in the vicinity of deck drains to slope gently toward the drains .
the contractor may use a float three num ft or greater in width to seal the surface behind the finishing machine .
final finishing operations will follow the trailing edge of the finishing machine closely generally at a distance of num ft or less .
do not allow more than one num h to elapse between the time of placement of concrete on the deck and the completion of final finishing operations .
unless otherwise specified in the contract apply a broomed finish to the plastic concrete parallel to the finishing operation .
num final operations num curing unless otherwise specified in the contract cure bridge decks and approach slabs in accordance with section num curing .
ensure forms supporting bridge decks remain in place for at least seven num days .
num acceptance criteria test the smoothness of the completed roadway surfaces of bridge decks approach section num superstructure concrete page num slabs and the adjoining num ft of approach pavement .
after the concrete of bridge decks approach slabs and pavement hardens check the entire surface areas with a ten num foot straightedge .
hold the straightedge in successive positions parallel to the centerline of the roadway and in contact with the slab .
advance the straightedge longitudinally along the slab in successive stages no greater than half the length of the straightedge .
provide a finished surface plane of bridge decks and approach slabs that do not vary more than num inch measured from the bottom of the straightedge .
provide a finished surface of concrete or asphalt approaches that does not vary more than num inch measured from the bottom of the straightedge .
plainly mark variations that exceed the allowable values .
ensure that vertical steps or discontinuities at the ends of bridges and approach slabs do not exceed num inch .
place expansion joints below grade fromnum inch to num inch .
the department will reject expansion joints installed at elevations above the roadway grade .
remove smaller discontinuities or high spots greater than num inch by rubbing with carborundum brick and water .
correct larger areas of deck requiring repair by use of power grinders or similar tools approved by the project manager .
the department will not allow the use of a bush hammer or similar tools to remove irregularities .
when grinding do not reduce the concrete cover over the reinforcing steel to less than num num inch .
if diamond grinding can not satisfactorily correct portions of decks remove and replace them at no additional cost to the department .
after rubbing and diamond grinding restore the curing system on the deck as necessary .
the district construction engineer may direct the contractor to remove and replace unacceptable areas under the following conditions at no additional cost to the department num .
the finished deck surface is exceedingly rough num .
plastic shrinkage cracking or surface tearing is severe or num .
serious damage due to any cause occurs over large areas of the deck placement .
num grooving of hardened concrete straightedge and repair the bridge deck before grooving .
do not groove the deck before the end of the concrete curing period .
num grooving machine groove hardened concrete with diamond blades mounted on a multiblade arbor on a self propelled machine built for grooving concrete pavements .
provide a grooving machine with the following num .
a depth control device that detects variations in the concrete surface and adjusts the cutting head height to maintain the specified groove depth and num .
a device to control alignment .
num groove pattern groove the bridge decks parallel to the centerline of the roadway if bridge decks abut concrete pavement that is to receive longitudinal grooving or if specified in the contract .
otherwise cut grooves perpendicular to the centerline of the roadway .
begin grooving num inches from the gutter line or face of rail and run in a continuous pattern to num inches from the opposite gutter line or face of rail .
the contractor may increase the num inch dimension on one num side of the deck to as much as num inches if the clearance of the grooving machine does not allow a closer approach to the railing .
provide grooves that begin and end within from two num inches to four num inches of expansion joints contraction joints and ends of the slab .
section num superstructure concrete page num lay out the grooving accurately before cutting begins .
provide grooves that are num inch num inch wide and from num inch to num inch deep .
if using transverse grooving space grooves in a random pattern from num inch to num inch centers .
if using longitudinal grooving space grooves from num inch to num inch centers .
num grooving residue removal continuously remove resulting slurry or residue immediately following grooving operations .
clean the lands and the grooves and leave the surface free of slurry residue and other deleterious material .
remove grooving residue by flushing vacuuming or other methods approved by the project manager .
num penetrating water repellent after finishing repairing and machine grooving apply a penetrating water repellent treatment to bridge decks and approach slabs in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
num superstructure appurtenances num construction joints make construction joints smooth and true to line and finish them with an edging tool with a radius of approximately num inch .
if longitudinal construction joints are located off the crown provide a finish across the joint that is smooth and of a slope to provide proper drainage of the deck .
num sealing of construction joints and surface cracks after grooving and applying the penetrating water repellent fill and seal construction joints and cracks that are visible on a dry deck with a hmwm resin in accordance with section num crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers .
apply hmwm resin to joints and cracks that permit the flow of water through the deck thickness as recognized by leaching along the crack or joint lines when viewed from below the deck as determined by the project manager .
num sidewalks curbs and raised medians on structures thoroughly tamp the concrete in sidewalks curbs and raised medians on structures so that a layer of mortar approximately num inch remains on top of the coarse aggregate .
strike off the surface of the concrete with a strike board to a uniformly smooth surface and float it with an acceptable wood or cork float .
test the surface of sidewalks and raised medians with a ten num foot straightedge and ensure the surface does not vary more than num inch from the bottom of the straightedge .
give sidewalks curbs and raised medians a broomed surface finish .
after finishing and curing give the sidewalks curbs and raised medians a penetrating water repellent treatment in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
num opening of bridge deck and approach slabs to traffic if it is necessary to open a roadway to traffic at the earliest possible moment the district construction engineer may allow traffic on a bridge deck or on approach slabs after the seven num day curing period and after cylinders that are field cured in the same environment as the slabs demonstrate a compressive strength greater than num psi .
section num superstructure concrete page num the department will allow traffic on the deck before the application of the penetrating water repellent treatment however the contractor shall perform the specified surface preparation procedures before application .
the contractor shall construct bridge deck prior to approach and transition slabs no exceptions .
approach and transition slabs shall be constructed to match grade and elevation of the adjoining bridge deck as shown in the project plans or as directed by the state bridge engineer if adjustments are required to match the completed bridge deck .
num method of measurement the department will measure superstructure concrete using the dimensions shown in the contract or approved modifications .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit superstructure concrete cubic yard high performance deck hpd cubic yard structural concrete class __ cubic yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
machine grooving all corrective work hmwm construction joint sealing and b .
the pay quantity for superstructure concrete will not be increased for any additional volume of concrete placed because of the use of metal stayinplace forms and c. lateral bracing system .
section num concrete barrier railings for bridges page num section num concrete barrier railings for bridges num description this work consists of constructing concrete barrier railings for bridges .
num materials provide material in accordance with the following requirements num .
class aa hpd concrete will be used for barrier railings concrete on bridges in num. accordance with section num portland cement concrete num .
curing materials in accordance with section num portland cement concrete num .
reinforcing steel in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num construction requirements num general perform work in accordance with section num concrete structures .
the department will not allow welding to anchor bars and other barrier reinforcement .
num deck preparation for barrier placement cure bridge deck tops beneath barrier railings using the water curing method .
if another method of curing is used clean excess curing materials from that portion of the bridge deck by sandblasting before placing the barriers .
before placing the railings thoroughly clean dirt oil and other deleterious materials from the deck surface .
num barrier placement and placement tolerances cast concrete barrier railings in place using removable forms .
slip forming of concrete barrier railings for bridges will not be allowed .
for bridges set on tangents set the forms and place the concrete so that a stringline placed along the top inside edge of the finished barrier shows no horizontal deviations from a straight line greater than num inch within num ft. for bridges set on curves ensure that the horizontal deviations from the horizontal curve do not exceed num inch within num ft .
ensure that the overall vertical tolerance of the outside surface of the barrier railings is less than num inch within the full height .
place concrete for barrier railings in accordance with section num placing concrete .
however do not allow the depth of layers for placing concrete in the barrier forms to exceed num inches .
num curing perform curing in accordance with section num method num water curing or section num method num curing compound .
num final treatment of barrier railing after finishing and curing apply a penetrating water repellent treatment to the exposed surfaces of the barrier railings in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
num drilling holes section num concrete barrier railings for bridges page num core drill holes for attaching thriebeam or wbeam terminal connector plates to barrier railings .
do not spall the concrete during the drilling process .
spalled concrete will be repaired under section num concrete structure repair at no cost to the department .
place the holes for attachments at least six num inches away from joints or ends of barrier railing .
num method of measurement the department will measure concrete barrier railings along the top of the barrier from end to end including barriers over wingwalls .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit concrete barrier railings foot num work included in payment the following items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately reinforcing steel dowels and all embedded steel items penetrating water repellent treatment .
section num reinforced concrete for minor structures page num section num reinforced concrete for minor structures num description this work consists of providing reinforced concrete for minor structures .
num materials provide class a concrete with a design compressive strength of at least num psi in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide grade num or num reinforcing steel in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
the department will allow field bending and cutting .
thread preformed hookbolts for the entire depth of embedment or make hookbolts using reinforcing bar stock .
provide epoxy grout for anchoring hookbolts in accordance with section num concrete chemical anchors .
num construction requirements construct reinforced concrete for minor structures in accordance with section num portland cement concrete section num concrete structures and section num steel reinforcement .
construct collars to fit tightly for joining pipetopipe or pipetobox structures .
ensure concrete plugs at the ends of existing conduits or box openings fit tightly .
provide bulkheads at the junction of different sized pipes and conduits to prevent leakage of fresh concrete and mortar into the conduit .
remove concrete or mortar that leaks into the conduit .
if required to maintain smooth flow conditions within the conduit form fillets of fresh concrete to reduce turbulence at conduit junctions .
num method of measurement the department will measure reinforced concrete for minor structures using the dimensions shown in the contract or approved modifications .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit reinforced concrete for minor structures cubic yard section num flowable fill page num section num flowable fill num description this work consists of providing and placing flowable fill .
num materials num general flowable fill is a flowable mixture of portland cement fly ash aggregates admixtures and water .
num mix design the state materials bureau is responsible for approving the mix design for flowable fill .
approval of a flowable fill mix design by the state materials bureau will be valid for a period of num years unless revoked due to performance problems .
num cement see section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num aggregate provide a uniform mixture of fine aggregate or coarse and fine aggregate .
provide coarse and fine aggregate with a gradation in accordance with table num aggregate mixture gradation requirements .
table num aggregate mixture gradation requirements sieve size passing one num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num water provide concrete mix water in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num airentraining admixture the contractor may use an airentraining admixture to provide air entrainment no greater than num in the flowable fill .
num fly ash provide approved class f class c or class cf blended fly ash in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num waterreducing admixture section num flowable fill page num the contractor may use a waterreducing admixture .
num proportioning and physical property requirements in the laboratory provide a flowable fill mix design in accordance with the following limits num .
cement maximum num lbsyd³ .
num .
fly ash from num lbsyd³ to num lbsyd³ .
num .
air content optional .
num .
slump from eight num inch to num inch .
num .
watercement ratio proportioned by weight to produce a slump within the prescribed limits .
num .
consistent aggregate throughout the concrete mixture .
num .
compressive strength will not exceed num psi at num days .
num .
cast the test specimens in four num inch eight num inch test cylinders perforated on the bottom with four num num inch diameter holes for free draining num .
keep the test cylinders in a moist environment but do not cure in a curing tank .
num .
cast six num compressive strength test cylinders in the laboratory .
test two num cylinders at seven num days two num at num days and two num at num days .
num construction requirements num batching mixing and transporting perform batching mixing and transporting in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
num testing flowable fill in the field obtain the state materials bureaus approval of the flowable fill mix properties before using the mix in the field .
for field testing use a standard num lb tpost fence driver to drive a num reinforcing bar with a flat end into the flowable fill material num h after placement .
lift the driver until the bottom of the driver is even with a mark located six num inches below the top of the rebar and then allow it to fall under its own weight .
remove and replace the flowable fill if fewer than six num blows or more than num blows are required to drive the rebar exactly num inches into the fill .
do not use compressive strength test cylinders for fieldtesting purposes .
num preplacement requirements before placing flowable fill remove any loose or uncompacted soils from the area to be filled .
ensure that all areas in which soils or construction materials have sloughed off or collected are completely cleared .
do not place flowable fill against loose or uncompacted surfacesmaterial .
ensure that all pipes or other embedded items which would otherwise float to the top of the flowable fill are adequately secured to prevent their floating out of position .
num placing place flowable fill uniformly to prevent voids in or segregation of the bedding and filling material .
secure the culvert or pipe from movement .
place the flowable fill by direct discharge from a ready mix truck pumping or other method approved by the project manager .
place the flowable fill in layers no more than num ft high .
place the flowable fill in layers no more than four num ft high for areas that require forming .
do not place the individual layers until flowable fill in a previously placed layer has section num flowable fill page num been in place at least two num h. submit a written request and obtain written approval from the district construction engineer before placing the flowable fill in a full depth layer .
do not place the flowable fill on frozen ground or while it is raining .
protect flowable fill from flooding for at least num h after placement .
if necessary place flowable fill in standing water that is positioned to keep the outside water from contaminating or mixing with the flowable fill .
if required consolidate the flowable fill with internal vibrators in accordance with section num vibratingconsolidation .
do not allow any imbedded items to float or otherwise dislodge .
secure pipe to compensate for buoyancy .
fill the areas between the walls of the existing cbc and an inserted cmp thoroughly .
do not disturb the flowable fill material for at least num h after placement .
the contractor may reduce this numhour period if the penetration resistance of the material justifies as tested in accordance with section num sampling and testing .
num application of load the contractor may cover the flowable fill within num h after placement if a person weighing at least num lb does not sink into the material more than one num inch if standing on a four num inch four num inch wooden block .
num temperature and weather limitations do not place flowable fill when the air temperature is lower than num f. the contractor may begin placement only when weather conditions are favorable and the air temperature is a least num f and rising .
if the air temperature at the time of placement is less than num f place flowable fill that has a temperature of at least num f. num method of measurement the department will measure flowable fill using the dimensions shown in the contract or as approved by the project manager .
the department will consider flowable fill used at the contractors option to be incidental to the associated bid item .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit flowable fill cubic yard num work included in payment the following work will be considered as included in the payment for the main item and will not be measured or paid for separately when called for in the contract or the contractor proposes its use and is approved by the project manager flowable fill can be used for backfill in culvert installations .
no measurement or payment will be made for work and materials associated with backfilling pipes with flowable fill .
this will be included in the contract unit price per linear foot of culvert pipe .
section num precast concrete structures page num section num precast concrete structures num description this work consists of fabricating and installing precast nonstressed components composed of pcc .
the department defines a concrete structure or component that is cast in a location that is not its final intended inservice location to be precast concrete .
the department defines nonstressed components as precast concrete members that are not subject to pretensioning or posttensioning .
num materials unless otherwise specified use class a concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
provide pcc for precast concrete components in accordance with section num portland cement concrete unless otherwise specified in this section .
num design and acceptability requirements before casting obtain the state materials bureaus approval of the concrete mix design .
the contractor may only make changes to the approved mix design in accordance with section num pcc mixture design and approval .
num testing requirements perform sampling and testing of coarse and fine aggregates for alkalisilica reactivity in accordance with section num aggregate .
if specified in the contract or directed by the project manager determine the required compressive strength in accordance with aashto t num at no additional cost to the department .
make and cure or obtain from the manufacturer four num inch eight num inch compressive strength test cylinders in accordance with aashto t num .
if the contractor places more than five num ydnum of concrete in a day the contractor shall make at least three num cylinders from the placed concrete .
if the contractor places less than five num yd num of concrete in a single day the contractor shall cast at least three num cylinders from a random sample for each num yd num of placed concrete from consecutive pours .
a compressive strength test is the average of two num or more compressive strength cylinder tests performed at the same age .
the department will determine acceptance of the concrete in accordance with section num individual strength test .
enter the actual batch weights used in each batch of concrete and the measured moisture contents for each of the aggregates contained within each batch into the field report form provided to the contractor at the same time the approved mix was provided .
insure that all test results for compressive strength and fresh concrete properties including slump air content and unit weight are also entered into the field report .
if compressive strength tests fail to comply with the contract requirements the department will allow the manufacturer to perform inplace compressive strength testing on the members in question .
the department will evaluate these tests in accordance with section num investigation of low strength cylinder test results .
allow department personnel access to obtain test samples and to perform independent assurance testing at the departments discretion .
num steel products num reinforcing steel section num precast concrete structures page num provide steel reinforcement in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num structural steel provide structural steel items in accordance with section num steel structures .
num construction requirements num general manufacture precast components in one num of the following plants num .
a precast concrete institute pci national precast concrete association npca or american concrete pipe association acpa certified plant regularly engaged in design fabrication and construction of precast concrete components or num .
an onsite project specific facility inspected and approved by the project manager .
num quality control ensure that precast concrete manufacturing facilities have a current quality control plan on record that describes the procedures in detail .
the plan shall include an organization chart of the overall casting operation a list of responsible people and a detailed description of their job duties and the telephone number of the responsible party for contact num h per day during fabrication and placement of precast structures .
obtain all batch weights used for each days production directly from the computer generated production record for each batch and record each batch weight on the same field report form as the test results referenced in num .
electronic copies of the report form for each days production will be kept available for review by the department precast concrete inspector upon request .
in addition to the electronic copy a printed copy of the summary page and all original computer generated production records will be kept on file for each days production .
make these copies available to the precast concrete inspector upon his request .
for a facility that has no computer or computerized capability actual batch weights of each ingredient will be recorded before the load is discharged .
any precast items cast from concrete batches that can not be verified or with non complying test results or batch weights can not be used on department projects and will be disposed of at no cost to the department .
submit certificates of compliance for cement reinforcing steel anchor bolts supplemental cementitious materials and liquid admixtures .
num notice of beginning work give the project manager and the precast inspector adequate notice before starting work in the plant as follows num .
plants in the state of new mexico seven num calendar days num .
plants in the contiguous united states num calendar days num .
plants outside the contiguous united states num calendar days .
do not perform work before the project manager and the precast inspector give written authorization for fabrication .
request inspections at least three num calendar days in advance .
num approval of plants and equipment obtain approval of the precast inspector for plants and equipment used in manufacturing precast concrete members before work begins .
the precast inspector may section num precast concrete structures page num forbid the use of machinery equipment or appurtenances that prove unacceptable .
in the event that the contractor fabricates materials on site the project manager shall then approve on site plants and equipment .
num shop drawings fabricate precast concrete structures in accordance with the departments standard drawings .
for modified or project specific precast concrete structures submit shop drawings to the state bridge engineer for review and acceptance .
provide shop drawings that show sizes shapes dimensions and concrete cover for the reinforcing steel and other items embedded in the concrete .
allow num calendar days for review and acceptance of the drawings by the state bridge engineer .
num calculations submit design calculations to the state bridge engineer for modified or unique precast concrete structures not previously reviewed and approved by the department .
ensure that a professional engineer registered in the state of new mexico performs the calculations .
submit the design and calculations at least num calendar days before the start of fabrication .
num precast concrete member assembly num beds and forms use forms that are smooth mortar tight and capable of withstanding forces caused by placement and consolidation of concrete .
accurately fabricate and secure forms in position so that the precast member has true smooth and even surfaces .
provide support for casting beds on unyielding foundations .
the department will not allow internal bracing and holding devices in forms if they remain in the finished member .
provide corners with a chamfer or radius in accordance with the plans .
check the grade and alignment of forms each time they are set and maintain them during concrete placement .
ensure forms are reasonably free of rust grease or other deleterious materials .
thoroughly clean beds and forms after each use and before each casting operation .
do not allow coatings used for release of members to build up .
maintain beds and forms to produce an acceptable product .
construct the forms to facilitate removal without damage to the concrete .
use care in removing forms to not deface or damage the member .
do not use methods of removal that cause overstressing of the concrete .
num forms for internal voids if constructing forms for internal voids use an approved watertight material that is resistant to breakage and deformation during concrete placement .
provide stayinplace internal forms that are as light in weight as practical .
securely anchor internal forms in position to prevent flotation or displacement during concrete placement .
vent and drain stayinplace void forms through the base of the member .
seal splices and ends of stayinplace void forms to prevent concrete from entering .
manufacture internal voids shaped by moving mandrels in accordance with the same dimensional tolerances as formed voids .
the timing and rate of mandrel movement will preclude fallout of inner surfaces tensile cracks and the separation of concrete from reinforcing .
section num precast concrete structures page num num placement of reinforcing bars accurately place and secure reinforcing bars in accordance with the plans and methods approved by the project manager and precast inspector .
pay particular attention to concrete cover requirements over reinforcing bars .
provide lap splices in accordance with the approved drawings and fasten them securely .
num placement and consolidation of concrete place concrete in accordance with section num concrete structures unless otherwise specified in this section .
before placing concrete correct deficiencies found by the inspector .
to ensure that similar deficiencies do no recur implement quality control procedures satisfactory to the inspector .
use internal vibration to eliminate honeycombing .
attach a sufficient number of external vibrators rigidly to the forms so that the vibrations extend throughout the entire length and volume of the member .
the department will not allow vibrating methods that cause segregation .
the department will reject members with voids or honeycombing that exposes reinforcement .
num tolerances the maximum allowable deviations from the dimension and details shown in the contract are listed in the manual for quality control for plants and production of precast and prestressed concrete products published by the pci .
num curing cure precast members in accordance with section num concrete structures .
the contractor may use steam in accordance with section num steam curing .
before placing concrete submit the proposed curing methods and procedures to the project manager or the inspector for approval .
test elevatedtemperature curing facilities for a minimum of num h before approval .
make curing equipment and materials for curing available before casting .
the project manager or inspector will suspend concrete placement if curing facilities are inadequate or the contractor is not attending to the proper curing of the concrete .
placement may resume after the contractor makes the appropriate corrections .
begin curing as soon as possible but not more than two num hours after casting .
to prevent damage and discoloration of a concrete member do not allow mats sheets or blankets to contact the concrete member .
the contractor may remove forms after the concrete has reached sufficient strength in accordance with the specifications for the item being cast .
do not interrupt the curing of members for more than num min when removing forms .
num steam curing if steam curing enclose the member entirely within an approved and supported enclosure so that a clear space forms around the sides ends and top of the member .
after placement and vibration of the concrete allow it to attain its initial set before applying steam .
prevent surface drying during the period between placement of concrete and application of steam by applying coatings a membrane curing compound moisture retention covers or other equivalent methods .
section num precast concrete structures page num ensure that the rate of temperature rise and the maximum temperature in combination with the cement used in the concrete mix does not promote or initiate delayed ettringite formation .
equip each enclosure with accurate temperature recording devices spaced at no more than numfoot intervals to keep continuous hourly records .
if the air temperature is num f or greater do not admit steam fog to the enclosure for a period of from two num h to six num h after final placement of concrete into the forms to allow the initial set to take place .
maintain the steam fog surrounding the member at a temperature between num f and num f until the member attains the required strength .
if the air temperature is less than num f admit steam no hotter than num f to the enclosure immediately .
allow the two num to num hour initial setting period to elapse before raising the steam temperature to the specified curing temperature range .
admit steam into the enclosure at a low pressure and in a saturated condition .
position steam jets so they do not discharge directly onto the concrete forms or test cylinders .
carefully check the housing to ensure uniform distribution of steam fog and uniform application of heat and moisture .
when discontinuing the steam decrease the temperature of the air surrounding the member at a nearly constant rate not to exceed num f per hour until it reaches a temperature num f above the temperature of the surrounding air .
at that time terminate the steam curing .
maintain the temperature of the member above num f for four num consecutive days after completion of steam curing .
remove side forms from six num h to two num days after completing the pour .
loosen or remove steel side forms as early as practical to prevent damaging the concrete .
the contractor may interrupt curing briefly for this purpose as long as the surrounding air temperature does not drop below num f. num workmanship the department will not reject work because of fine cracks on the surface of the member that do not extend to the plane of the nearest reinforcement unless they are numerous and extensive .
for members with diagonal cracks which indicate damage from torsion the department will perform a structural review before accepting .
repair cracks that extend into the plane of the reinforcing steel but are acceptable otherwise by sealing with an approved epoxy or other approved material .
repair defective areas or surfaces needing patching using approved methods .
do not plaster over defective areas .
unless otherwise noted provide finishes in accordance with section num class num ordinary surface finish or section num class num rubbed surface finish except for temporary structures which will require a class num finish .
provide a class num surface finish for visual surface defectspitting on structures other than temporary structures .
num lifting handling storing and shipping precast members avoid chipping cracking fracturing and excessive bending stresses when lifting handling storing and shipping members .
support members on firm blocks .
during handling and storage keep the members vertical and the long axis approximately level .
make the points of support and direction of reactions with respect to the member approximately the same as when the member is in its final position in the completed structure or application .
handle or support the items securely in an upright position .
use care during lifting handling hauling storing erecting and driving to prevent cracking spalling or other damage to the member .
replace members damaged by improper section num precast concrete structures page num handling methods .
verify lifting devices for capacity in lifting and handling products taking into account various positions during handling .
do not allow lifting devices to project above the surface of the member after placement unless the lifting devices will num .
be embedded in a subsequent concrete pour num .
have a concrete cover of at least two num inches and num .
not interfere with the placement of reinforcing steel or concrete .
stack members in storage only with approval of the project manager and the precast inspector .
keep members covered and protected until installed .
do not subject members to heavy loads until the members have attained the specified numday strength .
num installation install precast structures in accordance with the contract .
num method of measurement the department will measure precast concrete members in accordance with the applicable sections of the specifications .
num basis of payment the department will pay for precast concrete members in accordance with the applicable sections of the specifications .
section num prestressed concrete members page num section num prestressed concrete members num description this work consists of manufacturing and erecting prestressed concrete bridge piles girders or other prestressed concrete bridge members .
num pretensioning tensioning in which the prestressing reinforcement is stressed before the contractor places the concrete .
after the concrete attains the required strength the contractor releases the prestressing force from the external anchorages and transfers that force by bond into the concrete .
num materials num portland cement concrete provide an approved state materials bureau concrete mix in accordance with the requirements for special concrete as defined in section num portland cement concrete mix designs and specified compressive strength in accordance with the contract .
num fly ash provide pcc that contains fly ash in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num coarse aggregate provide coarse aggregate that consists of material no larger than onethird the size of the smallest clear space into which the contractor shall place this concrete .
num design and acceptability requirements for prestressed concrete members provide the concrete mix design in accordance with table num concrete classes for laboratory design of concrete mixtures .
obtain the state materials bureaus approval of the concrete mix designs before casting .
once the state materials bureau approves a concrete mix design the contractor may only make subsequent changes in the mix proportions in accordance with section num pcc mixture design and approval .
enter the actual batch weights used in each batch of concrete and the measured moisture contents for each of the aggregates contained within each batch into the field report form provided to the contractor at the same time the approved mix was provided .
insure that all test results for compressive strength and fresh concrete properties including slump air content and unit weight are also entered into the field report .
num testing requirements for release strength use the maturity method as required in section num or make additional field cured cylinders for inplace strength tests to determine application of prestressing forces .
make at least four num field cured cylinders from concrete placed on each casting bed .
the test results shall confirm the compliance with the release strength requirement shown in the plans .
num acceptance requirements compressive strength test shall confirm compliance with section num portland cement concrete .
a test is defined as the average of two num or more cylinders from the same sample section num prestressed concrete members page num broken at the same age .
make and cure at least two num cylinders per girder or pile from concrete placed in each member and in accordance with aashto t num .
break at least two num cylinders per girder or pile as selected by the departments inspector .
ensure the compressive strength is in accordance with the required numday compressive strength .
the department will not accept girders or piles with test results less than num of the numday required strength .
girders or piles greater than num and less than num of the num day required strength will be evaluated by the state bridge engineer for possible acceptance .
girders or piles will not be shipped until the required ultimate compressive strength is confirmed by maturity method or compressive strength tests .
num steel products num reinforcing steel provide steel reinforcement in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
reinforcing bars that project from the tops of girder and those within four num ft of girder ends shall be uncoated deformed lowcarbon chromium steel bars conforming to astm anum or uncoated deformed stainless steel bars conforming to astm anum .
num prestressing reinforcement prestressing reinforcement consists of high strength steel wire high strength sevenwire steel strands or uncoated high strength steel bars in accordance with the contract or as approved by the state bridge engineer .
provide prestressing reinforcement that is uncoated clean and free of dirt loose rust oil grease or other deleterious material when placed in the member .
num highstrength wire provide highstrength steel wire in accordance with aashto m num .
num highstrength multiplewire steel strand provide highstrength multiplewire steel strands in accordance with aashto m numm supplement snum lowrelaxation unless otherwise specified .
num uncoated highstrength steel bars provide uncoated highstrength steel bars in accordance with aashto m num .
if the department allows bars with a greater minimum ultimate strength produce and test them in accordance with aashto m num .
num identification of prestressing reinforcement assign prestressing reinforcement and anchorage assemblies with a lot number and tag for identification purposes .
the department will reject highstrength materials lacking identification .
num sampling of prestressing reinforcement provide samples for further testing if requested by the departments inspector .
provide certification with the samples that states the samples were taken from and are representative of the lot numbers provided .
section num prestressed concrete members page num provide load elongation curves and mechanical properties representative of the strands or bars to the departments inspector .
sample and test in accordance with aashto numm num .
if the department requests provide the following num .
enough wire to make up one num parallel lay strand at least eight num ft long consisting of the same number of wires required for the strand in which they are to be assembled .
cut wires requiring heading for anchoring to length and headed on both ends num .
at least eight num ft of wire strand of each diameter measured between near ends of fittings .
provide the sample with fittings attached num .
one completely fabricated prestressing tendon ten num ft long for each size tendon including anchorage assemblies num .
at least eight num ft of hightensile strength bars of each diameter measured between threads at ends of bars if furnished with threaded ends and nuts or between anchorage devices and num .
at least two num anchorage assemblies complete with distribution plates of each size or type unless such anchorage assemblies are attached to the samples of pre stressing reinforcement .
provide material samples for testing six num weeks in advance of the anticipated time for use to allow testing .
num protection of prestressing steel protect prestressing steel against physical damage rust or other results of corrosion from manufacture to grouting .
the department will reject prestressing steel that is physical damaged .
package prestressing steel in containers or other shipping forms to protect the steel against physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
place a corrosion inhibitor that prevents rust or other results of corrosion in the package or form or apply directly to the steel if the state bridge engineer allows .
ensure the corrosion inhibitor has no damaging effect on the steel or concrete or bond strength of steel to concrete .
immediately replace or restore damaged packaging or forms .
if using a corrosion inhibiting carriertype packaging material provide the material in accordance with military specification milpnum .
clearly mark the shipping package or form with the following num .
a statement that the package contains highstrength prestressing steel num .
the care in handling num .
the type kind and amount of corrosion inhibitor used including the date placed or applied num .
safety orders and num .
instructions for use .
if directed by the state bridge engineer or the departments inspector submit the following for the corrosion inhibitor num .
a sample a list of chemicals and their proportions and instruction for use num .
evidence that the prestressing steel will be protected from rust and other results of corrosion and num .
a certificate of compliance .
after the contractor installs the prestressing the department will not allow the contractor to weld or have ground welding equipment on the forms or on the steel in the member .
num structural steel section num prestressed concrete members page num provide structural steel items in accordance with section num steel structures .
straighten steel shoe plates prior to casting them in girders .
num debonding and camber control sleeves sleeves shall have such strength durability chemical resistance and other properties so that the sleeves will provide complete debonding between strands and concrete as called for on the drawings .
debonding and camber control sleeves product information shall be submitted for approval by the state bridge engineer .
num mortar provide nonshrink mortar used to grout keyways in precast box girders in accordance with section num nonshrink mortar with the additional requirement that the nonshrink mortar shall be a commercial preblended product from the departments approved product list .
num construction requirements num precast concrete institute certified plant all prestressed concrete structural members shall be manufactured in a plant certified by the precast concrete institute pci .
the manufacturer must have a bnum certification for prestressed deflectedstrand bridge member .
certifications must be maintained throughout the production of prestressed concrete structural members .
production will immediately stop if at any time the manufacturers certification is revoked regardless of the status of completion of contracted work .
production will not be allowed to restart until the necessary corrections are made and certification has been reestablished .
the department will not be responsible for time additional compensation or other project impacts due to lack of certification .
num approval of plants and equipment the state bridge engineer or the departments inspector must approve plants and equipment for manufacturing prestressed concrete members before the contractor starts the prestressed concrete work .
the state bridge engineer or the departments inspector may forbid unsatisfactory machinery equipment or appurtenances .
num fabrication num forms use forms that are smooth mortar tight and capable of withstanding the action of form vibrators .
accurately fabricate and secure the forms in position so that the cast member will present true smooth and even surfaces .
construct forms for interior cellular spaces with an approved material that is watertight resistant to breakage and deformation and as lightweight as possible .
anchor interior forms to resist flotation or displacement during concrete placement .
the design of interior and exterior forms shall not restrict the longitudinal movement of the member when the contractor transfers the prestressing force to the casting .
num placement of reinforcing bars and appurtenances place and secure reinforcing bars forms for cored holes and cellular spaces with methods approved by the state bridge engineer .
pay particular attention to concrete cover requirements over reinforcing bars near and at ends of girders .
section num prestressed concrete members page num num placement and consolidation of concrete place concrete in accordance with section num concrete structures and section num superstructure concrete .
do not place concrete until the inspector has inspected and approved the placement of the items to be embedded in the concrete .
place and secure shoe plates on girders in the exact position in accordance with the plans .
the department will allow the placement of concrete in the bottom flange of precast box girders before placement of the interior form and reinforcing bars in the upper portion of the members if concrete placement is continuous for longer than num min .
use external vibration for precast box girders or to eliminate internal honeycombing .
rigidly attach external vibrators to the forms in sufficient quantity so that the vibration extends throughout the entire length of the member .
do not use vibrating methods that cause segregation .
the department may reject members with voids in piles or in the bottoms of girders and girders or over bearing points or honeycombing sufficient to expose prestressing tendons or reinforcement .
the maximum allowable deviations from the dimensions and details shown in the contract including camber and sweep will be the dimensional tolerances listed in the manual for quality control for plants and production of precast and prestressed concrete products published by pci except as follows num .
the tolerance on tipping and flushness of shoe plates within num inch .
num .
the tolerance of steel diaphragms attachment holes shall be no greater than num inch .
num finishing concrete surfaces score top surfaces of girders transversely over the entire flange width to a minimum depth of num inch and a maximum of num inch .
clean the top surface of girders after initial set to remove laitance dirt and debris and to provide a rough surface .
finish the top surface of precast box girders and piles by over filling the forms vibrating and striking off with a metal plated strike board .
on the final forward movement of the strike board carry excess mortar ahead to completely fill the form .
after striking off the concrete finish the surface to a true plane .
ensure that surface irregularities do not exceed num inch per ten num ft .
unless otherwise shown in the contract give the top surface of the precast box girders a final broomed finish to produce transverse corrugations .
if the contract requires the contractor to embed the ends of prestressed concrete girders in concrete diaphragms the ends of the girders do not require hand finishing after removal of forms .
if the contract does not require the contractor to extend strands for field or shop bending to provide continuity reinforcement the contractor shall cut the strands three num inches or less beyond the girder ends .
finish girder ends that will not be embedded in concrete and other surfaces of pre stressed bridge members in accordance with section num finishing .
num curing steam cure or water cure precast prestressed members .
do not use a curing temperature greater than num of .
uniformly increase the temperature to the maximum temperature over a period not less than seven num hours .
additionally uniformly reduce the curing temperature such that at least seven num hours are required to reduce the temperature of the curing environment .
perform steam curing in accordance with section num precast concrete structures .
section num prestressed concrete members page num perform water curing in accordance with section num concrete structures .
num lifting handling storing and transporting precast members do not handle members until after applying the prestressing force .
at all times keep webs of prestressed girders vertical and keep the long axis approximately level .
keep the points of support and direction of reactions in accordance with approved shop drawings .
limit the camber growth to a value not to exceed the predicted camber at erection dimension by two num inches at the time of deck slab placement .
camber growth is to be limited by methods such as weighting fabrication scheduling or other acceptable means .
submit plan for review to the state bridge engineer prior to limiting camber growth .
the plan must be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of new mexico .
lift girders for handling transport and erection by means of devices designed or recommended by the fabricator and approved by the state bridge engineer prior to use .
do not crack spall or otherwise damage members during lifting handling hauling storing erecting or transporting .
replace members damaged by improper handling .
do not transport members to the job site until the required ultimate compressive concrete strength is attained .
num tensioning apply tension to prestressing steel with hydraulic jacks to produce forces in accordance with the approved working drawings .
during strand stressing the state bridge engineer or the inspector may accept individual wire failures if no more than one num wire in any strand is broken and the area of broken wires does not exceed two percent num of the total area of the prestressing steel in the member .
stress the members in a sequence that produces a minimum of eccentric forces .
num tensioning equipment apply stress to tendons using hydraulic jacks that can provide and sustain the necessary forces and have either a pressure gauge or a load cell for determining jacking stresses .
if necessary use a pressure gauge with at least a six num inch diameter dial accompanied with a certified calibration chart .
calibrate each jack and its gauge as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be at final jacking force .
if necessary calibrate a load cell and provide it with an indicator to determine the pre stressing force in the tendon .
use a load cell range that does not include the lower ten percent num of the fabricators rated capacity to determine the jacking stress .
use a testing laboratory approved by the state bridge engineer to calibrate the equipment .
ensure that the equipment has been calibrated within a year of the work .
the inspector may check certified calibration charts for the hydraulic jacks pressure gages or load cells used for tensioning prestressing steel before and during tensioning operations .
num measurement of stress provide a record of gauge pressures and tendon elongations for each tendon for review and approval by the departments inspector .
measure elongations to an accuracy of within num inch .
do not cut off stressing tails of tendons until the departments inspector approves the stressing records .
section num prestressed concrete members page num use the gauge or load cell readings to determine the stress in the tendons during tensioning and verify with the measured elongations .
use the modulus of elasticity to calculate anticipated elongations of and base calculations for the nominal area provided by the fabricator per lot of tensioned steel or as determined by a bench test of strands used in the work .
before starting elongation readings tension the tendons to a preliminary force to eliminate takeup in the tensioning system .
ensure this preliminary force is between five num and num of the final jacking force .
measure the initial force with a dynamometer or with other approved methods .
mark each strand before the final stressing to permit measurement of elongation and to ensure that anchor wedges are set properly .
address a discrepancy in indicated stress between jack gauge pressure and elongation .
if this occurs the load used as indicated by the gauge pressure will produce a slight overstress rather than understress .
check the entire operation to determine the source of errors if a discrepancy occurs between gauge pressure and elongation more than five percent num for tendons longer than num ft or seven percent num for tendons shorter than num ft .
correct errors before proceeding .
num tensioning pretensioned members the contractor may cast several members in a continuous line on the casting bed .
spools of prestressing strand are allowed two num splices within the entire spool .
do not use strands within each prestressed concrete member that have splices .
accurately locate and hold strands in positions in accordance with the plans for each individual member .
modify the strand if the state bridge engineer approves to ensure that the total prestressing force and location of its center of application is not changed .
the contractor may anchor straight pretensioning strands at one end of the casting bed and stress the other end with hydraulic jacks .
tension each individual strand to the required stress .
adopt a method for stressing draped strands that prevents significant stress loss between the jacking and anchor ends of the casting bed .
if required to avoid significant stress loss stress draped strands from both ends of the casting bed .
stress or check prestressed strands for required stress within num h before placing concrete in the member .
do not release or cut pretensioned strands until cylinder tests indicate that the concrete in the member has reached the initial unit compressive strength .
remove side forms before releasing the strands .
strands may be flame cut to release stress .
release or cut the strands in accordance with a previously approved sequence to avoid unbalanced forces in excess of that applied by one num strand .
trim strands in piles flush with the top and bottom of the piles .
num bracing for girders tie and brace the girders immediately after erection to prevent overturning .
leave ties and bracing in place until the girders are permanently secured for lateral stability .
if steel girder diaphragms are used install diaphragms during girder erection .
num grouting keyways in precast box girders the keyways between adjacent precast box girders shall be grouted per section num nonshrink mortar .
the nonshrink mortar shall be commercial preblended nonshrink mortar that the contractor only has to add water .
the nonshrink mortar shall be from the departments approved product list .
num quality control and quality assurance section num prestressed concrete members page num num working drawings the contractor shall furnish working drawings in conformity with subsection num plans and working drawings for all prestressed concrete members .
the working drawings that are submitted to the nmdot shall contain the endorsement seal of a professional engineer registered in the state of new mexico and with num years experience with prestressed concrete experience .
nmdot review of the working drawings does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the adequacy of the prestressed members .
the contractor shall submit supporting calculations for the working drawings .
the nmdot will review the initial submittal within num calendar days .
any resubmittals will be reviewed within num calendar days .
the working drawings shall include the following num all unit dimensions .
num location size and type of prestressing strands .
num initial and final jacking forces .
num location description and detail of structural reinforcing items .
num location of all holddown devices .
num location and shop drawings of all steel items .
shop drawings shall be per aashtonsba gnum shop drawing presentation guidelines .
num details for steel diaphragm connections .
num blockout and keyway dimensions if any .
num location and detail of debonded strands .
num rebar schedule per aci detailing manual spnum num framing plan with the fabricators mark numbers .
num embeds for overhang brackets and permanent steel deck forms .
num stresses in the top and bottom of the prestressed concrete members during detensioning of the strands .
num the predicted girder shortening camber at release and camber at num days .
num detail drawings written procedures and calculations for the special design such as camber control using prestressing top strands .
num handling storing and transportation details .
num notification of fabrication for prestressed concrete members a start of work .
prior to beginning the work the contractor shall provide written notice to the quality assurance qa representative as defined in subsection num so that qa services may be provided .
the written notice shall be received at least seven num days before fabrication begins .
the anticipated production schedule including the start of work phase work and shipment dates shall be submitted in writing to the qa representative before any work begins .
fabrication shall not be started until the working drawings submittal have been returned with the nmdot engineers review stamp indicating reviewed no exception taken or reviewed revise as noted and delivered to the contractors site of fabrication .
b production schedule changes .
accelerated changes to the proposed production schedule including start of work phase work and shipment dates shall require advance written notification be provided to the qa representative .
the written notice of change shall be received at least num hours before fabrication begins unless otherwise approved in writing by the qa representative .
c notice of shipment .
the qa representative shall be notified in writing at least num hours before shipment of prestressed members to the job site .
section num prestressed concrete members page num d notification .
failure to notify the designated qa representative as described in this section may be cause for rejection .
num inspection of prestressed concrete members a quality control and quality assurance .
quality control qc of prestressed concrete fabrication is the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall designate a qc manager who shall be responsible for product quality requirements as defined in the specifications and the contractors approved qc plan qcp .
the qc manager shall possess and maintain certification at level ii minimum from the prestressed concrete institute pci and shall have one num year minimum of construction related experience .
the qc manager shall not be supervised by the contractors production section .
quality assurance and product acceptance are the prerogatives of the nmdot .
the departments inspector will be the qa representative and acts for and in behalf of the nmdot on all matters within the scope of the contract documents .
qa administration will be performed to the extent necessary to assure contract compliance .
repeated out of tolerance work including dimensional nonconformance shall be considered as recurring deficiencies .
recurring deficiencies shall be considered as evidence that required qc is not being provided .
when the qa representative determines that fabrication operations are producing recurring defects that do not conform to the contract and the qcp requirements the contractor will be notified that the present work is unacceptable .
work shall not continue until the qc manager has submitted a written proposal addressing corrective procedures that the contractor will take to prevent recurrence of the nonconforming work .
fabrication shall not resume until the proposal has been reviewed and accepted in writing by the qa representative .
b quality control plan qcp .
the contractor shall submit a written qcp to the qa representative prior to the beginning of fabrication .
the qcp shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the contractors qc manager .
the qcp shall list all methods utilized by the contractor to ensure that the work conforms to contract requirements .
the qc section is responsible for establishing the qcp as well as conformance to the qcp .
fabrication shall not begin until the qcp has been reviewed and accepted in writing by the qa representative .
if work methods for a specific project or product are not listed in the original qcp the contractor shall submit written addenda addressing the proposed methods that are necessary to meet contract requirements .
fabrication shall not begin until the addenda have been reviewed and accepted in writing by the qa representative .
the qcp shall address the following num names and qualifications of the qc manager and personnel conducting inspection and testing .
this list shall be updated when changes in personnel occur .
copies of the training certificates of the personnel conducting inspection and testing shall be submitted to qa representative .
num list of material suppliers and certified testing laboratories used the list shall be updated when vendors change .
num materials sampling and testing schedule showing testing methods and frequencies .
num qc inspection methods and procedures for all stages of fabrication operations .
num methods for curing products and test specimens .
num method and sequence for tensioning strands including methods used for verifying equal distribution of jacking forces .
num method and sequence of detensioning strands .
num written report format for materials sampling testing and inspection for all phases of the work .
num copies of all concrete mix designs to be used including mix design section num prestressed concrete members page num computations and test data .
num provisions for fabrication operations during cold windy or hot weather conditions .
num procedures for patching small production holes and holes left by strand hold down devices .
num procedures for identifying evaluating and reporting defects including dimensional nonconformance discovered during qcqa inspections and testing .
num procedures for notifying the qa representative and the state bridge engineer of structural defects and submittal of written proposal for repairs .
c frequency .
qc inspection and testing at all intervals of forming tensioning steel and concrete placement curing and storage operations shall be performed in accordance with the accepted qcp and contract requirements .
the qcp shall contain provisions for increased frequencies of inspection and testing when operations or products do not conform to the contract .
d written records and reports .
the qc manager shall review and submit the following completed records and reports to the qa representative before the product receives acceptance by the qc section num prestressing steel tensioning reports for each setup showing the jacking force calculations initial and final jacking force used calculated and final net measured elongation applicable stressing corrections for seating slippage shortening rotation movement and temperature certified mill test reports for prestressing steel used .
num concrete a daily report of each mix design used showing the fresh concrete slump temperature unit weight and air content if specified .
the daily report shall also include the following data a date and time of casting b bed and setup location c ambient conditions d total cubic yards placed e girder mark and unique submark identifications f actual product curing temperature charts or graphs g actual curing enclosure humidity charts or graphs h average release strength in psi i date and time of release strength j copies of individual batch tickets when requested by the qa representative num prepour inspection records shall include the items to be checked as listed in the qcp .
num postpour inspection records shall include the items to be checked as listed in the qcp .
these records shall include all discovered variances from product dimensional tolerances .
num report of minor repairs made to each individual product .
num the following written records shall be submitted to the qa representative before product shipment a length measurement of girders within three num days prior to shipping .
b product camber measurement within seven num days prior to shipping .
num method of measurement reserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit section num prestressed concrete members page num prestressed concrete member type foot num work included in payment the following items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. prestressing steel reinforcing steel and embedded steel items for precast prestressed concrete bridge members .
b .
the quality control and quality assurance requirements .
c. shipping and erecting prestressed concrete members .
section num shotcrete page num section num shotcrete num description this work consists of constructing a pneumatically applied nonstructural shotcrete onto rock soil or structural shotcrete onto formed surfaces in accordance with the contract and as directed by the project manager .
these specifications refer to premixed cement and aggregate pneumatically applied by suitable equipment and competent operators .
num materials structural shotcrete shall have a design strength of num psi at num days .
if structural shotcrete is required use a shotcrete mix that has been designed and proportioned in accordance with section num and complies with the designated hardened properties for the class of concrete required in the specifications .
all mix constituents must comply with table num applicable specification sections .
determine all hardened properties in accordance with section num acceptance sampling and testing .
nonstructural shotcrete shall have a design strength of num psi at num days .
if the shotcrete is nonstructural the nonstructural shotcrete mix design may be developed in accordance with section num without using the special boxes required in section num .
all shotcrete mix designs must be reviewed and approved by the state concrete engineer before being used on nmdot projects .
use either wetmix or drymix shotcrete .
reinforce shotcrete in accordance with the contract .
provide materials and perform construction requirements in accordance with the specification sections listed in table num applicable specification sections .
table num applicable specification sections materialconstruction requirements section portland cement section num portland cement concrete mix designs fly ash section num portland cement concrete mix designs pozzolans section num portland cement concrete mix designs curing materials and admixtures section num portland cement concrete mix designs water section num portland cement concrete mix designs fine aggregate section num portland cement concrete mix designs coarse aggregate section num portland cement concrete mix designs neat cement grout section num nonshrink mortar bar reinforcement section num steel reinforcement welded wire fabric section num steel reinforcement surface evaporation section num superstructure concrete num water use water in the shotcrete mix that is free of elements that could stain the mix and in section num shotcrete page num accordance with section num water .
num anchor bars provide anchors of appropriate size to hold reinforcement in place .
the department will allow maximum anchor spacing of num inches on a grid pattern over the entire area for structural applications .
if using lshaped anchors use those that consist of no .
num reinforcement bars or larger bent into an l shape .
the short leg of the l will be at least six num inches long and the long leg at least two num feet long .
num welded wire mesh provide nongalvanized eight num gauge steel with a four num inch four num inch mesh num numwnum wnum in accordance with section num steel reinforcement for welded wire mesh .
for structural applications use welded wire mesh in accordance with the contract and as approved by the state bridge engineer .
ensure that all wire mesh has been rigidly fixed in place to prevent rebound when struck by the shotcrete .
num steel fiber reinforcement provide steel fiber reinforcement with the following characteristics num .
a length between num inch and num num inch num .
a lengthtodiameter ratio of less than num num .
blunt or hooked ends and num .
cold drawn carbon steel with a minimum tensile strength of num psi .
provide steel fibers manufactured specifically for use in concrete applications .
the department will not allow the steel fiber content to be less than num lb per cubic yard .
num prepackaged product for nonstructural shotcrete a premixed and prepackaged concrete product with or without steel fibers specifically manufactured as a shotcrete product for onsite mixed shotcrete may be used if approved by the state materials bureau .
num acceptance sampling and testing for structural and nonstructural shotcrete apply shotcrete to approved test panels .
orient the spray nozzle to the test panel in the same position as that used on the actual project .
provide test panels constructed in accordance with the requirements of astm c num .
use test panels with the following characteristics num .
minimum dimensions of num inch² eight num inch deep num .
constructed from wood and sealed plywood and num .
num sloped sides to allow rebound to escape .
use at least one num preconstruction trial to do the following num .
obtain test cores to confirm compliance with the hardened properties of section num portland cement concrete .
num .
prequalify the proposed nozzle operator and strikeoff persons .
the department will not allow nozzle operators and strikeoff persons who have not been pre qualified to apply shotcrete on the project .
each nozzle operator and strikeoff person shall shoot preconstruction test panels in the presence of the project manager or designated representative .
each nozzle operator shall have a minimum of the following qualifications num .
supervisor at least one num year of experience as a shotcrete nozzle operator and at least two num years of experience on shotcrete projects .
section num shotcrete page num num .
nozzle operator and delivery equipment operators at least one num year of apprenticeship on similar applications with the same type of equipment .
perform curing coring and testing of the shotcrete test panels and specimens at a private testing laboratory approved by the state materials bureau for concrete mix designs .
provide one half of the test panels with reinforcement and anchors representative of the same size and spacing required in the contract for the actual work .
provide the remaining panels with no reinforcement to allow for extraction of shotcrete test cores for compliance testing .
each nozzle operator proposed for use on the project will shoot at least one num test panel at each orientation .
obtain the required number of test cores in accordance with section num portland cement concrete from these test panels for testing at the designated ages for the specified performance parameters .
extract a minimum of three num four num inch diameter cores from locations of intersecting reinforcing steel and mesh to check the adequacy of consolidation of shotcrete around and behind the reinforcement .
take at least one num core at an anchor location .
the state materials bureau will evaluate the quality of the extracted cores and test panels .
if the department rejects a prequalification test panel have the nozzle operator shoot a second test panel .
if the department rejects the second test panel do not allow the nozzle operator to shoot on the project until the operator completes an appropriate training program and prepares an acceptable test panel .
transport test panels in the wooden forms with care to not crack or damage the specimens .
place the test panels in a moist room in the laboratory that is maintained at a temperature of num f num f and a relative humidity of num two percent num .
after num days remove the test panels from the wooden forms and return them to the moist room until testing time .
num production testing for structural shotcrete shoot two num construction test panels for each nozzle orientation and for each nozzle operator each day of shotcrete production in the presence of the project manager .
shoot one num set of panels for each nozzle operator in the morning and one num set of panels for each nozzle operator in the afternoon for a full days production .
produce test panels in accordance with astm c num a minimum num inch² eight num inch deep .
use test panels constructed of wood and sealed plywood with num sloped sides to permit escape of rebound .
provide construction test panels that contain no reinforcement or embedments .
store handle and cure construction test panels the same as specified for pre construction test panels .
prepare test specimens the same as specified for preconstruction test specimens .
use compressive strength test specimens that are four num inch eight num inch cores lengthdiameter ratio of num .
the mean compressive strength is acceptable if the average of three num cores tested at the specified age is equal to or greater than num of the specified strength with no individual strength test being less than num of the specified strength .
correct unacceptable shotcrete sections at no additional cost to the department .
num construction requirements section num shotcrete page num num equipment num shotcrete placing equipment apply wet mix shotcrete with one num of the following methods num the thickstream method which involves the use of a regular concrete pump with air addition at the discharge nozzle to pneumatically apply the shotcrete on the receiving surface .
the thickstream method usually uses a two num inch to num num inch internal diameter delivery hose .
num the thinstream method which normally involves the use of a pressurized chamber to pneumatically send the shotcrete down the delivery hose to the receiving surface .
the thinstream method normally uses a hose with a maximum num num inch internal diameter .
only use the thinstream method for nonstructural shotcrete if preconstruction testing confirms the capability to properly consolidate shotcrete fully encase reinforcing steel and produce a material that meets the required hardened properties .
use shotcrete delivery equipment in accordance with aci numr and that is capable of delivering a steady stream of uniformly mixed material to the discharge nozzle at the proper velocity and rate of discharge .
the preferred type of the wetmix shotcrete delivery system uses positive displacement pumps equipped with hydraulic or mechanically powered pistons similar to conventional concrete piston pumps surgereduction devices and compressed air added at the discharge nozzle .
the contractor may use pneumaticfeed guns rotarytype feed guns similar to dry mix guns and peristaltic squeezetype pumps if the contractor demonstrates that the guns can produce shotcrete in accordance with the performance requirements and the project manager approves .
carefully monitor the air ring at the nozzle for signs of blockage of individual air holes .
if nonuniform discharge of shotcrete becomes apparent stop shooting and clean the air ring or take other appropriate corrective actions .
thoroughly clean the delivery equipment at the end of each shift .
remove buildup of coatings in the delivery hose and nozzle liner .
regularly inspect the air ring and nozzle and replace as necessary .
num auxiliary shotcrete equipment supply a clean dry air supply capable of maintaining sufficient nozzle velocity and simultaneous operation of a blow pipe .
use an air supply system with a moisture and oil trap .
provide auxiliary shotcrete equipment such as air delivery hoses blow pipes couplings admixture dispensers and fiber feeders in accordance with the recommendations of aci numr .
num batching and mixing shotcrete num wet mix process batch mix and supply wet mix shotcrete using one num of the following systems num .
central mixing with transit delivery or num .
transit mixing and delivery .
num central mixing and supply section num shotcrete page num batch and mix ingredients in accordance with section num .
provide inspected transit mixers in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
the contractor may only retemper the shotcrete once with superplasticizer added directly to the transit mixer during the period of discharge to maintain workability slump of shotcrete .
mix the shotcrete for a minimum period of num min at the rated mixing speed after adding the superplasticizer to the transit mixer .
shoot shotcrete within num min of adding mix water to the batch .
use appropriate shotcrete batch sizes per load to meet this requirement .
num transit mixing and supply apply central mixing requirements to transit mixing except add ingredients directly to the transit mixer not the central mixer .
do not charge transit mixers to more than num of their rated capacity .
num dry mix process for nonstructural shotcrete batch the cement and aggregate by weight directly at the project site within the tolerances required in section num .
predampen the dry mix before flow into the main hopper and immediately after flow out of the packaging to ensure uniform shotcrete free of dry pockets .
do not use predampened cementaggregate mixtures that are more than num min old or that are unable to produce the specified hardened properties .
num batching and mixing steel fibers submit the procedure used for adding steel fibers to the shotcrete to the project manager for approval .
demonstrate the procedure in the field to the satisfaction of the project manager before starting production operations .
if fiber addition takes place at the nozzle uniformly distribute fibers throughout the mortar matrix without isolated concentrations clumping or balling .
if adding fibers to the dry or wet mix during the batching and mixing process use a screen with a mesh of from num num inch to num num inch to prevent fiber balls from entering the shotcrete line .
the department will not require batching through a screen if the contractor demonstrates that fiber balls are not forming .
do not add fibers to the dry or wet mix too quickly so they can be blended with the other ingredients without forming balls or clumps .
use a vibrating screen or sift to pass bulk fibers that have a tendency to stick into the mix as individual elements and not as clumps .
num preparation and hardware num subsurface preparation locate and remove loose spalled deteriorated and delaminated concrete stone or other substrate .
use hammer sounding to locate specific delaminated areas of concrete or rock .
do not damage areas of sound concrete or reinforcing steel during concrete removal operations .
remove concrete using one num or more of the following methods num .
chip with light duty pneumatic or electric chipping hammers not to exceed num lb num .
scarifiers scabblers or other suitable mechanical means num .
highpressure num psi to num psi water jetting .
if using water jetting do not allow water to collect so that surrounding areas are not contaminated or damaged .
section num shotcrete page num if the contractor exposes corroded reinforcing steel the contractor shall continue concrete removal until there is a minimum num inch clearance around the exposed corroded reinforcing bar .
do not damage the bond to adjacent nonexposed reinforcing steel during concrete removal .
taper the perimeter of removed concrete areas at approximately num angles .
sawcut the outer edges of chipped areas to a minimum depth of num inch to avoid feather edging .
use abrasive blast cleaning to remove fractured surface concrete and traces of unsound material or contaminants such as oil grease dirt slurry or materials that could interfere with the bond of the freshly placed shotcrete .
apply shotcrete to abrasive blast cleaned areas within num h or reblast them .
the project manager may waive the requirement for abrasive blast cleaning where the contractor performed concrete removal with highpressure water blasting and the prepared surface is free of residual slurry or other material detrimental to an acceptable shotcrete bond .
install reinforcement in slope blankets that do not contain steel reinforcement .
unless otherwise specified the reinforcement will consist of no .
num steel reinforcing bars placed with maximum spacing of num inch for vertical and horizontal bars .
rigidly attach this reinforcement to the underlying forms or concrete structure .
remove dust debris or laitance generated by this process in accordance with these abrasive blast cleaning procedures .
num repair or replacement of steel reinforcement if the contractor exposes corroded reinforcing steel during concrete removal remove corrosion using abrasive grit blasting .
remove and replace reinforcing steel displaying deep pitting or loss of more than num of crosssectional area as directed by the project manager .
if pitting is isolated reinforce the steel by adding appropriately placed reinforcing bars of suitable length the existing reinforcing steel need not be cut .
num steel reinforcement use a minimum lap splice length of reinforcing steel that is in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specification .
place these bars in accordance with aci numr sections num and num .
in particular do not bundle bars in lapped splices place them so the minimum spacing around each bar is three num times the maximum aggregate size to allow for proper shotcrete encapsulation .
tightly secure intersecting reinforcing steel bars to each other using num gauge or heavier tie wire and adequately support them to minimize vibration during shotcrete placement .
place welded wire mesh fabric in accordance with the contract .
lap sheets of adjoining mesh by at least two num spaces in both directions at intersections and securely fasten .
fasten mesh to preset or existing anchors and reinforce using num gauge or heavier tie wire on a grid not less than num inchnum .
avoid large knots of tie wire that could result in sand pockets and voids during shotcreting .
provide a minimum clearance of num inch behind installed reinforcing steel or mesh and existing concrete forms or bare rock .
num structural anchors unless otherwise specified in the contract place anchor bars for structural applications at a maximum spacing of num inches on a grid pattern over the entire area .
section num shotcrete page num provide the types of anchors in accordance with the contract and either mechanically set or grout as specified .
ensure anchors develop the minimum pullout force in accordance with the contract .
randomly test anchors at a frequency in accordance with the contract to verify pullout force .
the department will not accept a pull out force less than num lb .
if anchors fail to meet the minimum acceptable pullout value remove and replace immediately and take corrective action .
also test the anchors in the same relative location as those that failed .
the project manager will determine the area for corrective measures .
num nonstructural anchors for nonstructural applications slope blankets etc .
install anchor bars at ten num foot centers on a grid pattern over the entire area in one num inch diameter holes drilled into the rock or soil approximately num inches deep .
completely fill the drilled hole with neat cement grout using a grout tube extending to the bottom of the hole .
push the anchor bar into the groutfilled hole and center it such that the short leg of the lshaped bar points upward and parallel to the slope and is located approximately num num inches from the rock or soil surface .
num weep holes for slope blankets provide weep holes throughout the shotcrete mat on maximum ten num foot centers horizontally and vertically .
the weep hole drains will consist of two num inch diameter schedule num pvc slotted drainpipe two num feet in length placed within predrilled holes and sloped five percent num to drain .
the exposed end will extend from one num inch to three num inch outside the slope .
the department will not allow predrilled holes with diameters larger than three num inches .
install the slotted drainpipe before placing shotcrete .
during placement of shotcrete protect weep holes and drainpipes against contamination .
num alignment control and cover implement alignment control to establish control over line and grade and maintain the minimum specified shotcrete thickness and cover of reinforcing steel .
perform alignment control with shooting wires also called ground wires guide strips depth gauges or forms .
submit the proposed means of alignment control to the project manager for review and approval .
use shooting wires that are at least piano wiresized highstrength steel wire combined with a turnbuckle and spring coil .
remove shooting wires after completion of shotcreting and screeding operations .
do not let guide strips and forms impede the ability of the nozzle operator to produce uniform dense properly consolidated shotcrete .
do not use alignment control material that causes the formation of sandpockets and voids .
if using depth gauges for alignment control space no greater than four num ft in a grid pattern .
cut back metal depth gauges to num inch below the finished surface .
cover reinforcing steel in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num quality assurance and quality control testing section num shotcrete page num num quality assurance the department will implement a quality assurance program for the shotcrete work .
the program will include the following num. review of contractor submittals num. review of the approval of contractorproposed materials supply equipment and crew .
in particular evaluation in the preconstruction testing program of shotcrete nozzle operator and strikeoff person proposed for use on the project the department will allow only nozzle operators and strikeoff persons approved in writing by the state materials bureau to perform work num .
examination and approval before application of any shotcrete of areas prepared for shotcreting including installation of anchors reinforcement and alignment control devices num .
provision of inspectors to monitor shotcrete installation and authority to require removal and replacement of defective shotcrete while still plastic num .
regular monitoring of quality control testing results num .
implementation of a program for inplace evaluation and acceptance or rejection if test results indicate shotcrete is unacceptable and num .
implementation of a program of remedial work if the quality assurance program deems it necessary .
num quality control testing provide an independent testing laboratory to establish and maintain a quality control program for the shotcrete work to ensure compliance with section num shotcrete .
such a program will include but not be limited to the following num .
maintenance of test records for quality control operations num .
physical testing in accordance with section num production testing for the confirmation of compliance with the specified hardened shotcrete properties .
num safety and cleanup num preparation implement a safety program during preparation for shotcreting to do the following num .
protect the structural integrity of structural elements by shoring or other suitable means during concrete and reinforcing steel removal operations .
num .
protect personnel from falling debris blasting grit and highpressure water jets during concrete removal processes .
dispose of debris blasting grit and hydrodemolition and waterjetting slurry in accordance with section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public .
num shotcrete operations implement a safety program using hoarding shrouds screens or other appropriate measures to protect personnel and surrounding property from pneumatically applied shotcrete overspray and rebound materials during the shotcrete application process .
personnel working near the shotcreting operation including nozzle operator strikeoff persons nozzle operators helpers supervisors and inspectors shall wear appropriate protective equipment .
such equipment includes but is not limited to safety helmet safety boots gloves appropriate clothing safety glasses with side enclosures and dust masks .
nozzle operators helpers shall keep a supply of water cloth or towel and backup safety glasses available for the nozzle operator so satisfactory vision can be maintained during section num shotcrete page num shooting operations .
provide sufficient lighting so the nozzle operator has a clear view of the work .
provide readily available eyebaths and wash facilities in the immediate vicinity of the shotcrete application .
the shotcrete crew shall apply appropriate skin protection and adopt work hygiene to protect against cement or accelerator alkali burn .
install sufficient lighting and ventilation to provide the nozzle operator and helpers with clear unhindered view of the shooting area .
terminate work and adopt corrective measures if in the opinion of the project manager visibility is unsuitable for the safe application of quality shotcrete .
num shotcrete application and finishing num shotcrete application the project manager will review and approve areas prepared for shotcrete application before application of shotcrete .
flush surfaces with water at least one num hour before application of shotcrete .
allow flushed surfaces to dry back to saturated surfacedry condition before application of shotcrete .
if necessary use a blowpipe with oilfree compressed air to facilitate removal of surface water .
for very porous and dry substrates saturate the substrate the day before shotcreting and then rewet before shooting as described above .
the contractor shall apply shotcrete in accordance with aci numr except that if using silicafume modified shotcrete the contractor may apply the full thickness of shotcrete in a single layer .
use the minimum number of layers required to build up the full thickness of shotcrete without sagging separation or sloughing .
wherever possible apply shotcrete to the full thickness in a single layer .
if using multiplelayer shotcrete construction prepare the first layer with one num of the following methods before applying a subsequent layer num .
broom the stiffening layer with a stiff bristle broom to remove loose material rebound overspray or glaze before the shotcrete attains initial set .
num .
if the shotcrete has set delay surface preparation at least num h then prepare the surface by sandblasting or highpressure water blasting to remove loose material rebound hardened overspray glaze or other material detrimental to good bond .
when successive layers of shotcrete are necessary to build up full shotcrete thickness prevent the first layer from drying out with fogging or wetting .
only use curing compound with the approval of the project manager .
if using a curing compound remove it by abrasive blast cleaning or highpressure water blasting before application of the next layer of shotcrete .
clean the first layer of shotcrete of surface water and ensure it is in a saturated surfacedry condition when applying the next shotcrete layer .
exercise care to protect adjacent surfaces from buildup of rebound and overspray .
the department will not allow rebound and overspray on the completed work .
remove rebound and overspray from surfaces to receive shotcrete while the material is still plastic using blowpipes scrapers wire brushes or other suitable tools .
remove hardened rebound and overspray with abrasive blast cleaning chipping hammers highpressure water blasting or other suitable techniques before applying additional shotcrete .
provide scaffolding or other devices so the nozzle operator and helpers have free unhindered access to the work area .
apply shotcrete from the nozzle in accordance with aci numr .
do not apply shotcrete during periods of rain or high wind unless suitable protection is provided .
section num shotcrete page num apply shotcrete in accordance with the contract using shooting wires depth gauges guide strips forms or other suitable devices .
apply the minimum cover of shotcrete to reinforcing steel in accordance with the plans .
cut back metal depth gauges to within num inch of the shotcrete surface to prevent corrosion staining of the surface .
when applying a num inch maximum aggregate size shotcrete the department will allow a final flash coat layer ¼ inch to ¾ inch thick using ¼ inch aggregate shotcrete .
num shotcrete finishing leave shotcrete in the natural gun finish unless otherwise specified in the contract .
if the contract requires finishing cut back shotcrete to line and grade using cutting rods screeds or other suitable devices .
allow shotcrete to stiffen sufficiently before cutting and trimming to prevent the formation of tears cracks and delaminations .
remove shooting wires on completion of cutting and trimming .
apply one num or more of the following finishes if required num .
wood float finish either as a preliminary finish for other surface treatments or as a granular texture finish num .
rubber float finish applied to either a flash coat or wood float finish to produce a finer textured granular finish num .
brush finish a fine hairbrush float finish that leaves a finely textured sandy finish num .
steel trowel finish that leaves a dense smooth hard finish .
trim back shotcrete and overspray from adjacent nonprepared concrete surfaces .
provide the edges of shotcrete repairs with a minimum square sawcut edge num inch deep finish shotcrete up to this edge .
do not featheredge shotcrete including flash coats .
num curing and protection on completion of finishing immediately prevent shotcrete from drying out by fogging or wetting .
if the contract requires leaving shotcrete with a natural gun finish apply curing compounds at twice the application rate normally specified for smooth concrete finishes .
completely remove curing compounds by abrasive blasting or water blasting with a pressure of num psi before application of subsequent sealers .
once the shotcrete achieves its final set keep it continuously moist for at least seven num days .
perform moist curing using one num or both of the following procedures num .
wrap the elements in wet burlap presoaked in water for num h before installation wrap the wet burlap in plastic sheet to slow the drying rate of the burlap num .
install sprinklers soaker hoses or other devices that keep the shotcrete continuously wet .
do not use intermittent wetting procedures that allow the shotcrete to undergo cycles of wetting and drying during the curing period .
num hot and cold weather protection apply shotcrete during periods of hot and cold weather in accordance with aci numr and aci numr .
if it is anticipated that shotcrete will be placed when the ambient temperature will fall below num of a coldweather shotcrete plan must be prepared and submitted to the project manager at least num days before the intended application .
the cold weather shotcreting plan must be reviewed and approved by the state concrete engineer before shotcrete is permitted to be placed at temperatures below num of .
monitor the surface evaporation of the shotcrete in accordance with section num .
do not section num shotcrete page num proceed with shotcrete application if the average rate of surface evaporation of the shotcrete over any num minute period exceeds num lb per square foot per hour in accordance with section num superstructure concrete .
do not allow the prevailing ambient conditions relative humidity wind speed air temperature and direct exposure to sunlight to cause either plastic shrinkage or early drying shrinkage cracking .
all cracked structural shotcrete regardless of the cause shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
subsequent efforts to prevent further cracking problems shall include but not be limited to num .
rescheduling of the work to a time when more favorable ambient conditions prevail num .
adopt corrective measures such as installation of sunscreens windbreaks or fogging devices to protect the work or during periods of cold weather shotcreting may only proceed if the substrate to which the shotcrete is applied and the air temperature in contact with the shotcrete surfaces are both above num f. maintain the air temperature in contact with the shotcrete surfaces at num f or greater for at least num days after application of shotcrete .
submit the means of maintaining the air temperature to the project manager for approval .
do not use unvented heaters .
apply shotcrete at a temperature of between num f and num f. use cooler mix temperatures during hotweather shotcrete operations and warmer mix temperatures during coldweather shotcrete operations .
num inspection and remedial work sound the surface of the cured shotcrete with a hammer to locate unsound areas .
provide equipment hardware and means necessary to perform the inspection operations .
the inspection accommodations are subject to the approval of the project manager .
cut out and replace sags or other defects with another layer .
if welded wire mesh reinforcement is damaged or destroyed by such repairs repair the damaged area by overlapping and tying additional wire mesh in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num method of measurement the department will measure shotcrete using the dimensions shown in the contract or approved modifications .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit structural shotcrete square yard nonstructural shotcrete square yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for shotcrete and will not be measured or paid for separately reinforcement anchors perforated pipe ties test molds test samples submittals boring cores and grouting .
section num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members page num section num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members num description this work consists of providing and placing prepackaged nonshrink grout for bonding posttensioned prestressing reinforcement in prestressed concrete bridge members .
bond posttensioned steel to the concrete by filling the entire void space between the duct and the prestressing reinforcement with grout in accordance with section num prestressed concrete members .
num materials provide prepackaged nonshrink grout referred to as grout in this section that consists of portland cement water and a nonshrink admixture .
select the grout from the departments approved products list .
provide grout with expansion properties that will produce an expansion of the mortar not to exceed num in its fully cured state shrink will be num .
num portland cement provide type ii portland lowalkali cement in accordance with astm c num .
the contractor may use specialty cement if approved by the state materials bureau .
num water provide water that is free of oil salt vegetable matter or other deleterious material and has a ph value of from num to num in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the sulfate content as sulfur trioxide does not exceed num ppm .
for flushing ducts provide water with either quick lime calcium oxide or slaked lime calcium hydroxide in the amount of num lb per gallon .
num admixtures provide admixtures in accordance with section num admixtures .
num construction requirements num ducts num forming num formed ducts provide ducts formed by a sheath left in place that allow the entrances of grout .
use a sheath that will transfer bond stresses as required and will retain its shape under the weight of the concrete .
provide galvanized ferrous metal sheaths .
num cored ducts form cored ducts without constrictions that would block passage of the grout .
remove coring materials .
num grout opening or vents provide ducts with grout openings at both ends .
for draped cables provide high points with a grout vent except where cable curvature is small such as in continuous slabs .
the contractor shall provide grout vents or drain holes at low points if the contractor is to place stress and grout the tendon in freezing climate .
provide grout openings or vents with provisions for preventing grout leakage .
num duct size section num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members page num for tendons consisting of multiple wires bars or strands use duct with a crosssectional area at least twice that of the stressing steel .
for tendons consisting of a single wire bar or strand use ducts with a diameter at least num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the wire bar or strand .
num placement of ducts after placing the ducts and completing reinforcement and forming inspect the work for possible duct damage .
securely fasten ducts at close intervals to avoid displacement during concrete placement .
repair unintentional holes or openings in the duct before concrete placement .
securely anchor grout openings and vents to the duct and to the forms or reinforcing steel to prevent displacement during concrete placement .
num personnel certification grout tendon ducts under the direction of a person who has verifiable documentation of experience in performing grouting of posttension operations .
the person shall be certified by the american segmental bridge institutes grouting certification program or equivalent as approved by the state bridge engineer .
num grouting equipment use grouting equipment that includes a mixer capable of continuous mechanical mixing that produces grout free of lumps or undispersed cement .
use equipment that pumps the mixed grout in a manner that complies with provisions of this specification .
do not use commercially available plaster and concrete mixers for mixing grout .
use accessory equipment that provides accurate solid and liquid measures to batch materials .
use a positive displacement type pump that provides an outlet pressure of at least num psi .
use a pump with seals adequate to prevent the introduction of oil air or other foreign substance into the grout and to prevent the loss of grout or water .
place a pressure gauge that has a fullscale reading of num psi or less in the grout line between the pump outlet and the duct inlet .
make standby water flushing equipment available where difficult grouting conditions exist .
use this equipment in addition to the grouting equipment .
provide the standby water flushing equipment with a different power source than the grouting equipment .
use standby water flushing equipment that has sufficient capacity to flush out any partially grouted enclosures and is capable of developing a pressure of at least num psi .
use grouting equipment that contains a screen with maximum clear openings of num inch to filter the grout before its introduction into the grout pump .
if using a grout with a thixotropic additive a screen opening of num inch is satisfactory .
make this screen easily accessible for inspection and cleaning .
use grouting equipment that uses gravity feed to the pump inlet from a hopper attached to and directly above it .
keep enough material in the hopper during the pumping operation to prevent air from being drawn into the posttensioning duct .
under normal conditions use grouting equipment capable of continuously grouting the largest tendon on the project in num minutes or less .
num mixing of grout prepare the grout in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the project section num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members page num manager will determine the pumpability of the grout in accordance with astm c num .
ensure the outflow time of grout samples immediately after mixing reaches or exceeds num seconds .
num duct preparation conduct a pregrouting air pressure test of ducts and take measures to eliminate or reduce the consequences of identified leakage .
clean ducts of water and deleterious materials that would impair bonding of the grout or interfere with grouting procedures .
use oil free compressed air to blow out ducts .
the contractor may use water to flush metal ducts .
flush ducts with concrete walls cored ducts with water to ensure that the concrete is thoroughly wetted .
water for flushing ducts may contain slack lime calcium hydroxide or quicklime calcium oxide in the amount of num lb per gallon .
num grout injection requirements bond posttensioned steel to the concrete by filling the entire void space between the duct and the prestressing reinforcement with nonshrink grout in accordance with section num prestressed concrete members .
fit grout injection pipes with positive mechanical shutoff valves .
fit vents and ejection pipes with valves capable of withstanding the pumping pressures .
do not remove or open valves until the grout has set .
prevent leakage of grout through the anchorage assembly by positive mechanical means .
pump grout from the low point of the duct through the duct with vents provided at the high point of the duct when possible .
continuously waste grout at the outlet until no visible slugs water or air are ejected and until the efflux time of ejected grout is at least num seconds .
allow grout to flow from the first vent after the inlet pipe until residual flushing water or entrapped air disappears then cap or otherwise close the vent .
close the remaining vents in sequence in the same manner .
then close the outlet valve and hold the pumping pressure momentarily .
while maintaining this pressure close the inlet valve .
do not allow the pumping pressure at the tendon inlet to exceed num psi .
if the actual grouting pressure exceeds num psi the contractor may inject grout at any capped vent as long as the contractor maintains a oneway flow of grout .
if the contractor uses this procedure the contractor shall fit the vent at which it plans to inject with a positive shutoff .
num temperature considerations do not allow the temperature of the grout to exceed num f or fall below num f during mixing and pumping .
if necessary cool or heat the mixing water .
maintain the concrete at a temperature of num f or higher until sitecured mortar cubes reach a compressive strength of num psi .
num grouting inspection physically probe or visually inspect anchorages num hours after grouting until the project manager is assured that there is no bleed water or subsidence voids .
the project manager may require subsequent spot inspections of one num or more selected anchorages per span to verify the absence of voids .
immediately fill discovered voids with grout .
num finishing of anchorage zones the contractor shall thoroughly blast clean with abrasives the surfaces of concrete against which the contractor shall place concrete encasement over anchorage assemblies after completing grouting of the ducts .
num method of measurementreserved section num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members page num num basis of payment the department considers providing and placing nonshrink grout incidental to the completion of the work and will not pay for it separately .
section num nonshrink mortar page num section num nonshrink mortar num description this work consists of providing and placing nonshrink mortar for use in concrete structures .
uses of mortar include the following num .
filling under masonry plates keyways between precast members and voids in reinforced concrete bridge members num .
repairing surface defects num .
bonding reinforcing bars in preformed recesses and num .
other uses as required .
num materials provide nonshrink mortar that is a prepackaged commercial product listed on the departments approved products list .
provide nonshrink mortar that is a nonmetallic waterbased compound containing portland cement silica sand and other agents water reducers plasticizers nonshrink admixtures filters etc ..
the department will not allow chlorides fluorides sulfites nitrates or gasforming agents .
the numday compressive strength of sandcement nonshrink mortar cubes will be at least num psi when cured and tested in accordance with aashto t num except confining cover plates which are to be clamped on the molds immediately after filling and left on the molds for at least num hours .
ensure the numday compressive strength of preblended commercial mortars reaches at least num psi .
manufacturers certified strength tests for the prepackaged nonshrink mortars may be accepted instead of field tests or tests by the state materials bureau .
num portland cement provide type ii lowalkali portland cement in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num water provide water in accordance with section num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members .
num fine aggregate provide fine aggregate for sandcement nonshrink mortar in accordance with section num fine aggregate except that fine aggregate will be well graded from coarse to fine in accordance with table num fine aggregate gradation requirements .
table num fine aggregate gradation requirements sieve size passing minimum maximum num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num section num nonshrink mortar page num table num fine aggregate gradation requirements no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num note sand shall pass the no .
num sieve for mortar used to fill voids with width or depth less than num inch .
provide sand for use in mortar that does not exceed half the size of the recess hole or space to be filled .
num construction requirements use nonshrink mortar in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and instructions regarding proportioning mixing maximum water content application curing temperatures and curing conditions .
num placing finishing and curing clean concrete areas of loose or deleterious material that would prevent a bond between the mortar and the base concrete surfaces .
flush areas with water and let dry to a surface dry condition immediately before placing the mortar .
provide a mortartight seal at the following locations before placing mortar num .
keyways num .
spaces between structural members num .
holes num .
spaces under structural members and num .
other locations where mortar could escape .
tightly pack mortar and completely fill recesses and holes and place on surfaces under structural members and at other specified locations .
screed the material to the specified level and finish the surface to the specified texture .
num curing after placing cure surfaces of mortar by the water method or another approved method in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
if the manufacturer recommends no specific period cure for at least three num days .
num temperature requirements place mortar when the air temperature is at least num f but less than num f. do not allow the mortar temperature to rise above num f during mixing and placing .
maintain the temperature of the mortar and grout at or above num f during the curing period .
num elapsed time before loading do not allow loads on mortar that has been in place less than num hours or as recommended by the manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
num mortar defects remove and replace improperly cured or otherwise defective mortar .
num method of measurementreserved section num nonshrink mortar page num num basis of payment the department considers providing placing and curing of nonshrink mortar incidental to the completion of the work and will not measure or pay for it separately .
section num chemical adhesive anchors page num section num chemical adhesive anchors num description this work consists of providing chemical adhesive anchorage systems .
num materials use chemical adhesive anchorage for the installation of steel anchors in concrete structures .
num chemical adhesive anchor devices select chemical adhesive anchor devices from the departments approved products list .
notify the project manager of the selection at least num days before using the devices on a project .
provide devices in accordance with table num chemical adhesive anchor system ultimate tension load requirements .
use chemical adhesives of organic and inorganic compounds including epoxies polyurethanes methacrylates and vinyl esters to develop bond to concrete .
table num chemical adhesive anchor system ultimate tension load requirements anchorage bolt diameter inch or bar size minimum ultimate tension load pounds per astm enum one num inch num ⅞ inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num based on astm anum anchor grade num rebar and num psi concrete num hardware provide astm a num grade a threaded rod with nut astm a numa hex and washer astm f num or astm a num grade bnum threaded rod with nut astm a num grade numh and washer astm f num .
the thread rod nut and washer shall be zinc coated per aashto m num class num astm b num class num .
if stainless steel anchor is specified in the contract provide astm f num threaded rod with nut astm f num and washer astm a num .
provide grade num deformed steel bar reinforcements in accordance with aashto m num .
the department will not accept metal wedge expansiontype anchors as substitutes for chemical anchors .
num materials certification submit a sample of the concrete chemical anchor device along with the manufacturers installation instructions to the project manager .
submit independent certified test results for expansion anchors in accordance with astm e num to the project manager .
submit independent certified test results for adhesive section num chemical adhesive anchors page num bonded and other bonding compounds in accordance with astm e num to the project manager .
use astm a num grade a steel for anchor bolts rods grade num steel reinforcing bars and num psi concrete for these independent certified tests .
test chemical adhesive anchor device systems installed per manufacturers recommendations .
provide independent test results to certify that the average ultimate tension load strength and method of installation of the proposed concrete anchorage system are in accordance with table num chemical adhesive anchor system ultimate tension load requirements .
num construction requirements prepare holes and installation of the chemical adhesive anchors in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and instructions including weather and temperature limitations .
do not install chemical adhesive anchor systems before concrete attains its design strength .
num drilling of holes use drilling methods that do not cause concrete spalling or cracking or damage to the main reinforcing steel members .
drill the diameter and depth of the holes in accordance with the chemical adhesive anchor manufacturers instructions using drilling methods and drill bits specifically intended by the manufacturer for the particular anchorage .
repair spalled or damaged concrete as directed by the project manager .
do not drill with a lubricant water is not a lubricant .
maintain a distance of at least two num inches from the bottom of the structural slab to the bottom of drill holes .
only use anchor systems that can maintain this minimum surfacetodrill hole distance requirement and still meet certified strength requirements .
num hole preparation before installing the chemical adhesive anchors thoroughly clean holes by brushing with a metal or nylon brush and cleaning with water or air blasting .
ensure holes are dry before installing anchors .
diamond core drilling of the holes is not permitted .
num finishing after the contractor inserts the anchor into the full depth of the drilled hole the contractor shall strike flush the excess adhesive with the concrete surface .
after placing the anchors do not move anchors and do not load the anchors until adhesives are fully cured .
num field proof load tests submit the testing method to the state materials bureau before beginning the field pullout tests .
use an applied test load for the chemical adhesive anchors field pullout tests in accordance with table num chemical adhesive anchor design loads .
the contractor shall perform proof load tests only if the contract requires .
the nmdot may perform proof load tests at nmdot discretion .
if the contract requires proof load tests use nondestructive loading and stop the tests when the design tensile forces have been sustained for at least three num minutes without creep or deflection .
use anchor that attain the specified test loads without permanently displacing the anchor or damaging the concrete .
replace anchor devices that fail the load test .
test replaced anchors .
repair spalled or damaged concrete from load tests as directed by the project manager .
in section num chemical adhesive anchors page num the event that proof load tests fail to meet requirements the contractor shall submit a corrective action plan for deficiencies .
num acceptance the department will accept anchor if the specified test load is attained without permanently displacing the anchor or damaging the concrete .
num field test procedure if the contract requires proof load tests the project manager will designate a random portion of not less than five percent num of each lot of the installed concrete chemical anchors for load testing .
perform load tests in accordance with astm e num for static testing .
if any individual test fails test the entire lot for compliance with table num chemical adhesive anchor design loads .
num design loads ensure chemical adhesive anchor systems are in accordance with table num chemical adhesive anchor design loads .
table num chemical adhesive anchor design proof loads anchorage bolt diameter inch or bar size design load and tensile test load pounds per astm enum one num inch num ⅞ inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num num welding welding to postinstalled anchors is not permitted .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will make no separate payment for this work unless otherwise specified in the contract .
section num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors page num section num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors num description this work consists of providing and placing cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors for concrete structures .
num materials unless specified in the contract use chemical adhesive anchorage for the installation of steel anchors in concrete structures .
cementitious grouted dowels and anchors shall only be used when shown in the contract .
num mortar grout provide mortar grout in accordance with section num nonshrink mortar .
provide preblended mortar grout in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and instructions regarding proportioning mixing maximum water content application and curing temperatures and conditions .
num threaded rods or deformed anchor bars unless otherwise specified in the contract fabricate dowels and anchors from full length threaded steel rods in accordance with astm a num or better or deformed steel reinforcing bars in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
num construction requirements num design proof loads unless otherwise shown in the contract provide design tensile pullout loads for anchors or dowels fabricated from full length threaded steel bars or grade num reinforcing bars in accordance with table num cementitousgrouted dowels and anchors design proof loads .
table num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors design proof loads reinforcing bar size or threaded rod diameter design tensile load for cementitious mortar lb no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num one num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num num field proof load tests submit the testing method to the state materials bureau before beginning the field pullout tests .
use an applied test load for the anchors field pullout tests in accordance with table num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors design proof loads .
section num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors page num the contractor shall perform proof load tests only if the contract requires .
the nmdot may perform proof load tests at nmdot discretion .
if the contract requires proof load tests use nondestructive loading and stop the tests when the design tensile forces have been sustained for at least three num minutes without creep or deflection .
use anchor that attain the specified test loads without permanently displacing the anchor or damaging the concrete .
replace anchor devices that fail the load test .
test replaced anchors .
repair spalled or damaged concrete from load tests as directed by the project manager .
in the event that proof load tests fail to meet requirements the contractor shall submit a corrective action plan for deficiencies .
num embedment depth provided the required embedment depth as shown in the contract drawings .
maintain a distance of num num inch or greater from the bottom of structural deck slabs and two num inches or greater from the face of structures in other installations .
only use anchor systems that can maintain this minimum surface to drill hole distance requirement and still meet certified strength requirements .
num hole preparation use impact drills equipped with carbide tipped bits or core drill .
do not spall or damage concrete adjacent to the holes .
provide a drilled hole diameter num inch greater than the diameter of steel anchors and dowels .
diamond core drilling of the holes is not permitted .
clean holes of dust drilling debris and other deleterious materials saturate holes with water and remove free water before placing the dowels or anchors .
do not drill with a lubricant water is not a lubricant .
num placing of anchors and mortar grout use sufficient mortar grout so no voids remain between the anchors and the sides of the holes after the dowels or anchors are fully inserted .
during and after placing of the dowels and anchors maintain a tight bond between the mortar grout and hole and between the mortar grout and anchor or dowel .
num curing cure mortar grout for a period of at least three num days or until the dowels and anchors are encased in concrete whichever occurs first .
the contractor may use method num or method num to cure cementitious mortar grout in accordance with section num curing .
num temperature limitations place and cure mortar grout mixed and blended on site .
ensure substrate temperature is above num f. num damaged or unbonded dowels and anchors remove and replace dowels and anchors that fail to bond or are damaged before placing new concrete or completing the structure .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment section num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors page num the department considers the preparation of holes and grouting of dowels and anchors incidental to the completion of the work and will not make separate payment .
the department will pay for threaded rods as structural steel .
the department will pay for deformed reinforcing bars associated with the grouting as reinforcing bars grade num except that the department will pay for dowels and anchors for concrete barrier railing for bridges as barrier railings .
section num pier and abutment bearing modification page num section num pier and abutment bearing modification num description this work shall consist of raising superstructure members slightly and modifying bearing units in substantial compliance with the pertinent portions of the standard specifications and the details shown on the plans or as directed by the project manager .
num materials all materials incorporated permanently into the work shall meet the requirements as shown on the plans .
num construction requirements loadcarrying superstructure members shall be slightly raised and temporarily supported by methods approved by the bridge engineer to permit modifications to be made to the designated bearing units .
unless the existing concrete deck has been removed all beams or girders in a span shall be simultaneously raised and supported .
bearing modifications shall be performed in a manner that will not damage any members being retained in the structure .
the bridge engineer shall approve proposed steel cutting and weld removal methods .
when shown on the plans traffic will be permitted to operate on the bridge or bridges during these operations .
unless otherwise provided painted area damaged by the work shall be cleaned and repainted as provided in section num recoating structures and section num safety and environmental requirements for paint operations .
no payment will be made for recoating damaged areas .
the contractor will submit drawings design calculations and jacking procedures to the state bridge engineer for acceptance .
submit at least num calendar days before work is planned to begin .
the submittal package will need to be stamped by a nm licensed professional engineer .
num method of measurement pier and abutment bearing modifications shall be measured as a completed unit including incidental work any temporary support required submittal and any materials incorporated into the work unless noted otherwise on the plans .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit pier and abutment bearing modifications lump sum section num bridge deck and pccp preparation for repair page num section num bridge deck and pccp preparation for repair num description this work consists of preparation for repair of concrete bridge decks and portland cement concrete pavement pccp .
the work includes the following num .
scarifying the existing deck surface or pccp num .
removing loose and unsound concrete including concrete patching material num .
removing and replacing corroded reinforcing bars num .
other operations necessary to prepare deck or pccp for repair to the satisfaction of the project manager .
num materials num water provide water for cleaning and soaking the deck surface or pccp in accordance with section num water .
num construction requirements num equipment use equipment approved by the project manager as proposed by the contractor .
num surface preparation equipment use equipment that is mechanical or hydraulic in nature and that is able to remove surface concrete or unsound subsurface concrete without damage to sound material remaining part of the structure .
operate removal equipment in a manner satisfactory to the project manager .
num sawing equipment use sawing equipment capable of sawing concrete to the required depth .
num mechanical concrete removal equipment use mechanical equipment for scarification and removal of deteriorated concrete capable of uniformly scarifying or removing existing concrete to the required depth .
num sandblasting and shotblasting equipment use sandblasting or shotblasting equipment capable of removing rust and old concrete from exposed reinforcement .
the contractor may use highpressure water blasting if effective in removing unsound material .
num powerdriven hand tools use powerdriven hand tools for removal of concrete in conformance with the following limitations and having flat edged cutting points at least num inch wide .
use concrete chippers or breakers up to a nominal num lb class in full depth removal areas and for initial removal of deteriorated concrete located above the top mat of reinforcing steel .
if in the opinion of the project manager the use of such devices is detrimental to the integrity of the adjacent concrete deck slab discontinue their use and use removal devices up to a nominal num lb class .
section num bridge deck and pccp preparation for repair page num for chipping around reinforcement use removal devices up to a nominal num lb class .
use smaller chippers or breakers if the project manager believes the num pound tools are detrimental to the adjacent remaining material .
do not operate tools at an angle greater than num measured from the surface of the slab .
num hand tools use hand tools such as hammers and chisels as necessary for removal of final particles of unsound concrete .
num hydrodemolition hydrodemolition may be used for deck or pccp preparation upon approval by the state bridge engineer .
num preparation of surface num scarification uniformly scarify the top surfaces of existing decks or pccp as called for in the plans .
provide a scarified surface with a rough texture to promote bond to the concrete repair material .
scarify deck or pccp areas not accessible to the scarification machinery using approved chipping hammers or hand tools .
num deck sounding after scarification sound the deck or pccp under the direction of the project manager and mark areas of unacceptable concrete including full depth areas .
after removal of unsound concrete in accordance with section num resound and repeat process until all remaining concrete is sound .
blast clean only after the project manager approves the concrete deck area .
other methods of nondestructive evaluation may be proposed by the contractor for the sounding of the concrete .
proposed methods may only be used if approved by the state bridge engineer .
num deck preparation after scarification and deck sounding is complete remove unsound and deteriorated concrete in the marked areas in accordance with section num .
remove complete thickness of deck concrete at locations where less than num of the original deck or pccp thickness remain except in very isolated random locations as determined by the project manager .
remove unsound concrete to a depth that will provide a num inch minimum clearance around the reinforcing bars .
exercise care to prevent cutting stretching or otherwise damaging reinforcing bars and to prevent damage to sound concrete around reinforcement .
the department will not allow loads other than construction equipment on deck portions that have undergone concrete removal .
provide supports for the delivery trucks so the trucks do not drive directly on reinforcing bars in areas of partial or full depth repair .
securely fasten loose reinforcing bars to adjacent fixed bars with tie wire .
if the contractor uses hydrodemolition equipment the contractor shall take care to avoid the removal of sound concrete below the necessary depth .
num replacement of reinforcing bars replace existing reinforcing bars that are corroded or damaged to the extent that their structural integrity is in question .
section num bridge deck and pccp preparation for repair page num provide and install new bars of the same original size and remove the existing corroded or damaged bars .
blast clean corroded bars left in place to gray metal .
carefully flame cut or saw bars to be removed with minimal damage to adjacent material .
newly installed bars will have a num inch minimum clearance around their circumference .
lap reinforcing bars on each side of the damaged or removed area .
lap no .
num or smaller reinforcing bars at least num inch .
the project manager will determine the length of lap for larger reinforcing bars .
the contractor shall replace reinforcing bars damaged by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num cleaning of prepared deck and pccp surface clean deck and pccp surfaces to which the concrete is to bond using abrasive blasting or high pressure water blasting .
blast cleaning is sufficient to remove dirt oil concrete loosened by scarification and other deleterious material .
clean exposed reinforcing bars to gray metal and remove loose products of corrosion .
the contractor may leave tight flash rust occurring after blast cleaning .
clean surfaces with highpressure air blasting after blast cleaning .
wet deck surfaces and keep continuously wet but free of standing water for at least two num hours before and during placement of the overlay .
if it is necessary for the contractor to operate mechanized equipment on the cleaned surface before or during concrete placement the contractor shall temporarily cover the cleaned wetted deck surface with a layer of polyethylene film num mil or thicker .
num method of measurement the department will verify the measured quantities with the contractor daily .
deck preparation is measured after completion of deck scarification and deck sounding .
concrete used for repair will be paid for under the appropriate concrete pay item as specified in the plans .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit deck scarification square yard deck preparation square yard replacement reinforcing bars grade num pound num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. deck sounding b .
removal of unsound concrete c. disposal of old concrete and debris d. cleaning of prepared deck and pccp surfaces e. cleaning of existing steel reinforcement f. placement and removal of forms and g. removing old bars .
section num permanent antigraffiti protective coating page num section num permanent antigraffiti protective coating num description this work shall consist of furnishing and applying a permanent nonsacrificial anti graffiti protective coating to concrete and steel surfaces at the locations shown in the contract in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and as approved by the project manager .
num materials permanent antigraffiti protective coating shall be a product conforming to one num of the following num .
appears on the departments approved products listing num .
is designated in the contract or num .
approved by the project manager .
permanent antigraffiti protective coating shall be a transparent clear coating which will not alter the color of the underlying special surface finish for concrete surfaces or topcoat for steel surfaces.the protective coating shall act as a barrier to graffiti .
the protective coating shall be capable of being cleaned of graffiti by use of a high pressure water sprayer or by use of commercially available cleansers or solvents with common hand tools rags brushes etc .. num construction requirements permanent antigraffiti protective coating shall be applied to concrete and steel surfaces after completion of the special surface finish for concrete surfaces or topcoat for steel surfaces .
the contractor shall apply the protective coating in compliance with all manufacturers recommendations .
the type of protective coating and method of application must be approved by the project manager prior to use .
the contractor shall furnish all materials storage handling tools equipment labor and other appurtenances necessary to complete the work .
num method of measurement permanent antigraffiti protective coating will be measured by the square foot .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit permanent antigraffiti protective coating square foot section num penetrating water repellent treatment page num section num penetrating water repellent treatment num description this work consists of providing and applying a penetrating water repellent treatment to concrete surfaces .
num materials use a penetrating water repellent solution that is num solution by weight of silane or alkyltrialkoxy silane .
use a solution that does not stain discolor alter the texture of or form a coating on the concrete surface .
use a solution that is compatible with surface finishes applied in accordance with section num class num special surface finish .
use material that will dry in num min .
provide a treatment solution that is on the departments approved products list .
num physical requirements provide concrete samples treated with the penetrating water repellent solution in accordance with table num penetrating water repellent treatment requirements .
table num penetrating water repellent treatment requirements characteristic requirement test method reduction in absorption of water num minimum nchrp num series ii reduction in chloride ion content num minimum nchrp num series ii penetration num in minimum nm lnum a vapor permeability num nm lnum a athese tests are available from the state materials bureau .
num submittals submit a manufacturers certificate of compliance to the project manager for each material lot or shipment .
provide a one num pint sample from each lot in a glass container with a nonreactive plastic screwon lid .
do not allow the sample to contact any metal .
do not expose the sample to moisture .
the project manager may take samples of the materials from the shipping containers at the job site .
provide documentation showing the manufacturers recommended coverage rate and application instructions .
num construction requirements num surface preparation before applying the treatment solution remove curing compounds laitance dirt dust salt oil asphalt and other deleterious materials from the concrete surface .
obtain written approval for surface preparation equipment from the project manager .
ensure that the cleaning process section num penetrating water repellent treatment page num num .
does not damage the concrete surface num .
does not remove or substantially alter the existing surface finish num .
does not expose coarse aggregate in the existing concrete and num .
provides a reasonably uniform surface color and texture .
validation for surface preparation shall be performed by applying adhesive tape to the surface .
when the tape is removed there shall be no laitance or debris adhered to the tape .
apply the treatment solution only after obtaining written approval of the cleaned surfaces from the project manager .
num application of treatment solution num temperature and weather limitations apply the treatment solution only when the air and concrete surface temperatures are between num f and num f unless more restrictive temperature limits are recommended by the manufacturer .
do not apply the solution to concrete surfaces when the wind speed is greater than ten num mph .
num application equipment use equipment that can apply the solution to all surfaces until they are all saturated and no further solution can be absorbed .
obtain written approval of the equipment used from the project manager before starting application work .
num application do not treat new concrete until it attains the specified design strength .
the project manager will determine when concrete surfaces are dry enough for application of the treatment solution .
do not dilute or alter the treatment solution as supplied by the manufacturer .
follow the manufacturers recommended rate of coverage when applying the solution but not less than full saturation and no further solution can be absorbed .
lightly apply water to treated surfaces between num h and four num days after treatment to verify coverage where directed by the project manager .
if the contract specifies both a water repellent treatment and a special surface finish apply the penetrating water repellent first .
wait seven num days before applying the special surface finish .
num traffic limitations the project manager will determine when traffic is allowed on treated surfaces .
num method of measurement the department will measure penetrating water repellent treatment the contractor applies to concrete structures as indicated in the plans .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit penetrating water repellent treatment square yard section num concrete structure repair page num section num concrete structure repair num description this work consists of the following num .
removal of loose unsound and deteriorated concrete num .
removal and replacement of corroded reinforcing bars num .
furnishing placing finishing and curing concrete repair materials num .
applying penetrating water repellent treatment and a special surface finish over exposed surfaces and num .
other operations necessary to restore concrete and to satisfactorily complete the concrete work .
num materials num concrete use a prepackaged preblended concrete that is combined with water at the site .
select repair material from the departments approved products list .
num product data sheets submit manufacturers product data sheets at least num days before the start of concrete repair work that describe the products intended for use in structure repair to the project manager .
include mixing application and curing instructions .
num enriched mortar provide enriched mortar that consists of a blended patching material and water .
provide enriched mortar with physical properties in accordance with table num enriched mortar physical property requirements .
table num enriched mortar physical property requirements property astm test requirements compressive strength minimum cnum num day num psi seven num days num psi num days num psi bond strength minimum cnum num day num psi seven num days num psi num days num psi linear length change maximum cnum num days wet num a num days dry num coefficient of thermal expansion ininf cnum num x num num to num x num num freezethaw resistance num cycles minimum cnum num durability athe maximum allowable expansion is num if the locations where enriched mortar is used can tolerate such expansions without exceeding the elastic limit .
num enriched concrete provide enriched concrete consisting of enriched mortar extended with recommended amounts of coarse aggregate .
provide enriched concrete with physical properties in section num concrete structure repair page num accordance with table num enriched concrete physical property requirements .
table num enriched concrete physical property requirements property astm test requirements compressive strength minimum cnum num day num psi seven num days num psi num days num psi bond strength minimum cnum num day num psi seven num days num psi num days num psi linear length change maximum cnum num days wet num a num days dry num coefficient of thermal expansion ininf cnum num x num num to num x num num freezethaw resistance num cycles minimum cnum num durability athe maximum allowable expansion can be num as long as the locations where enriched concrete is used can tolerate such expansions without exceeding the elastic limit .
num aggregates unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer of the preblended patching material or bonding agent use fine aggregates in accordance with section num fine aggregate and coarse aggregate in accordance with table num coarse aggregate gradations .
table num coarse aggregate gradations sieve size passing minimum maximum num inch num num inch num num num inch num num no .
num num num num water provide water in accordance with section num water .
num test cylinders at least num days before the start of concrete structure repair prepare at least three num four num inch eight num inch concrete cylinders for testing in the presence of department personnel and submit to the project manager .
prepare cylinder concrete with the same materials mixed in the same proportions as the concrete proposed for the work .
use the proposed equipment to prepare the cylinder concrete .
use the maximum recommended water ratio .
the department will use the cylinders to determine if the repair material meets the seven num day and num day compressive strength requirements .
manufacturers certified strength tests for the preblended concrete may be accepted instead of field tests or tests by the state materials bureau .
num construction requirements section num concrete structure repair page num num preparation of repair areas the contract will specify approximate repair areas .
the contractor shall field verify locate and mark the precise areas of delamination and repair .
obtain project managers concurrence of work areas and establish pay quantities .
the contractor shall cut ¾ inch deep sawcuts around all repair areas prior to chipping andor other removal methods .
remove unsound material within the repair limits using chipping hammers or other approved handoperated devices .
num concrete removal saw cut all boundaries to num inch depth remove concrete with pavement breakers and chipping hammers .
use hand tools only for final removal of concrete from reinforcing bars and faces of remaining concrete .
use departmentapproved removal equipment .
the following restrictions apply to concrete removal tools num .
do not use pavement breakers heavier than the num lb class num .
do not use chipping hammers heavier than the num lb class num .
operate pavement breakers or mechanical chipping tools only at a num angle num .
use only handpowered tools such as hammers and chisels to remove the final concrete particles from reinforcing bars .
num concrete surface preparation and cleaning ensure the surface substrate is clean sound and dry .
remove substances that may prevent a bond between existing and new concrete .
if using acid etchers concrete cleaners or degreasers to clean the existing surface remove completely after cleaning .
mechanically roughen the existing surface using equipment such as chipping hammers .
remove loose and excess material from repair areas .
place a four num inch piece of duct tape every square yard to test for cleanliness .
the department will not allow more than num of the tape surface to show dust coverage .
before placing mortar or concrete clean repair areas with oilfree compressed air or pressurized water .
moisten the substrate and remove excess water .
num preparation of exposed reinforcing bars num bridge decks reinforced slabs on grade preserve existing reinforcing steel exposed during concrete removal chip at least num inch deep into the adjacent concrete around the entire bar in the removal area .
sandblast exposed reinforcing steel before placing new mortar or concrete .
strengthen corroded or damaged existing bars by splicing an equal sized bar at least two num ft longer than the corroded or damaged length .
the minimum splice length shall be one num ft on each end .
num other reinforced concrete repairs preserve existing reinforcing steel exposed during concrete removal .
if the bond between exposed bars and adjacent concrete breaks chip at least num inch deep into the adjacent concrete around the entire bar .
sandblast exposed reinforcing steel before placing new mortar or concrete .
section num concrete structure repair page num strengthen corroded or damaged existing bars by splicing an equal sized bar at least two num ft longer than the corroded or damaged length .
the minimum splice length shall be one num ft on each end .
num application of bonding agents use diluted bonding admixture or other manufacturerrecommended priming systems as bonding agents .
apply the bonding agents to the contact surfaces of the repair areas immediately before concrete or mortar placement .
num depth of repair use enriched mortar where the repair depth is less than one num inch and use enriched concrete where the repair depth is one num inch or greater .
if the repair depth is four num inches or greater use the appropriate class concrete or enriched concrete .
num forms for full depth repair provide forms to support concrete placed in the full depth repair areas .
the contractor may use wires from the reinforcing steel to suspend forms for areas up to five num ft num .
for larger areas the contractor may use the primary members of the superstructure to support the forms or shore them from below .
clean the concrete faces and reinforcing steel in areas of full depth repair as described previously .
num placing finishing and curing do not mix mortar and concrete in repair areas .
use forms if necessary .
num temperature and weather limitations make repairs when the air temperature is between num f and num f. maintain the temperature of the mortar and concrete at or above num f during the curing period .
use a set retardant if recommended by the manufacturer .
num placement place mortar or concrete in a continuous operation for each repair area .
for vertical surfaces start the work at the bottom of the patch and continue upwards and from one edge to the other to prevent the entrapment of air pockets .
if the repair area abuts or crosses a working joint place a temporary strip of waxed wood or premolded filler in the joint before placing repair material .
remove the strips before the concrete sets .
the contractor may also repair areas that occur on both sides of a joint by patching the entire cavity and restoring the joint by saw cutting immediately after the repair material has set instead of using a temporary vertical insert strip .
num curing cure in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if the manufacturer does not specify a cure method use method num or method num in accordance with section num curing .
num inspection the project manager will examine repaired areas after the curing period is completed to ensure soundness of the repairs and complete bonding with the existing members .
remove and replace unacceptable areas at no additional cost to the department .
section num concrete structure repair page num num penetrating water repellent treatment if the contract requires a penetrating water repellent treatment apply in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment solution and section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
num special surface finish finish exposed surfaces of piers abutments edges of decks and barrier railings and other locations to a class num finish in accordance with section num class num special surface finish after repairs and curing are complete .
num final operations clean remove and dispose of debris resulting from the concrete repair work as approved by the project manager .
num method of measurement if the repair depth does not exceed four num inches the department will measure the work by the square yard .
if the repair depth exceeds four num inches the department will negotiate a unit price with the contractor .
the department will measure exposed surfaces before the application of the special surface finish .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit repair of concrete structures square yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately sampling and submittals saw cutting operations and removal of debris .
section num epoxy injection page num section num epoxy injection num description this work consists of rebonding cracks or delaminations in existing concrete using an epoxy adhesive injection system .
num material num general use nonshrink epoxy materials num solid twocomponent moistureinsensitive adhesives in accordance with table num epoxy injection material requirements .
table num epoxy injection material requirements requirements property test type i type ii slant shear strength minimum a aashto t num num psi num psi set time num f maximum aashto t num num h b pot life num f minimum aashto t num num min num min viscosity num f num f poises c astm d num num num num specific gravity num f num num tensile strength minimum astm d num num psi num psi compressive strength minimum astm d num num psi num psi aif bonded to saturated surface dry samples cure for seven num days at num f and num to num relative humidity .
the department will use a joint width of num inch for type i and num inch for type ii for testing purposes .
badhere to the manufacturers specified set time for construction purposes on these wider cracks .
cbrookfield num spindle num rpm after mixing at slow speed for three num min .
use type i epoxy material for cracks less than num inch wide .
use type ii epoxy material for cracks num inch wide or wider .
obtain department approval of epoxy materials before use .
if the product provides unsatisfactory results the department may rescind the approval .
num product data and packaging label each container with the following num .
product name num .
component designation a and b num .
manufacturers name num .
batch number num .
ratio of component mixture num .
complete instructions for storing mixing and using and num .
safety requirements .
package components in separate containers .
num test reports provide ctrs for each batch of the epoxy system verifying that the mixed epoxy is in accordance with table num epoxy injection material requirements .
section num epoxy injection page num num injection port materials injection ports are tubes fittings pressure plates or other devices used as entry points for the epoxy adhesive .
use suitable methods to scale each port after injecting epoxy at that port .
num temporary surface sealant use a temporary surface sealant to retain the injected epoxy adhesive .
the department will also allow pressure plates or other methods for retaining the epoxy adhesive .
num construction requirements num general perform the epoxy injection process in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the department will mark cracks and delaminated areas for injection .
inject epoxy when concrete temperature is between num f and num f. inject epoxy continuously over the entire crack or area of delamination .
maintain low pumping pressures to prevent lifting the delamination .
num epoxy sampling during operations before starting injection work at hourly intervals during continuous injection work and when requested by the project manager take a numfluidounce sample of mixed epoxy from the injection device .
if the sample indicates improper proportioning or mixing of the epoxy the project manager will suspend injection work until the contractor corrects the problem .
num core sampling take core samples from injected cracks and delaminated areas and submit them to the project manager to verify penetration and bonding adequacy .
cut cores with a diameter of num num inch and to the full crack depth or six num inches whichever is smaller .
the project manager will specify core sample locations .
submit at least one num core sample for every num ft of injected crack or every num ftnum of injected delamination .
fill core holes with a departmentapproved epoxy mortar .
num equipment use positive displacing dispensing equipment that is capable of injecting epoxy at set pressures without pressure buildup .
where the contractor uses pressure plates to seal cracks the contractor shall use a special pressure fitting on the injection device to prevent leakage .
if the contractor drills out injection ports the contractor shall use drilling equipment with a vacuum system to remove and not compact drilling dust into cracks or delaminations .
num crack injection num crack preparation clean surface openings and crack interiors with oilfree compressed air to remove dirt dust silt and other materials .
if the department determines the result is inadequate use another cleaning method such as vacuuming pressure flushing routing or sawing .
if using section num epoxy injection page num pressure flushing blow water out with oilfree compressed air .
num injection ports unless the project manager approves other methods drill holes along the crack to insert the injection ports .
num temporary crack sealing temporarily seal surface openings of cracks between injection ports with material that can retain the epoxy adhesive during pressure injection and until the epoxy hardens .
num crack injection process when material travel is indicated the nozzle shall be moved to the port that shows epoxy and the pumped port sealed and this method continued until the crack is completely filled .
where vertical and horizontal cracks intersect inject the vertical crack below the intersection first .
on wide cracks where epoxy movement between ports will be rapid the contractor may pump two num or more ports simultaneously .
num rebonding delaminated areas by epoxy injection num injection ports use at least one num port for every square yard of delaminated areas .
num temporary sealing of delaminated openings temporarily seal the surface openings of cracks in the delaminated areas to prevent leakage of epoxy material .
num delamination injection process begin injection at one port near the perimeter of the delaminated area and continue until there is epoxy at an adjacent port .
then plug the port being pumped and continue the injection at the adjacent port showing epoxy .
continue this process until the entire delaminated area has been injected .
the contractor may pump two num or more ports simultaneously .
num finishing operations after curing is complete remove excess sealing material from the concrete surface without altering the concrete surface color or texture .
num loading restrictions do not allow traffic and other loads on the injected structures until the epoxy adhesive is solid .
num method of measurement the department will verify the measured quantities with the contractor daily .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit epoxy injection type gallon section num crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers page num section num crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers num description this work consists of crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers .
num materials num high molecular weight methacrylate provide low viscosity nonfuming hmwm resin selected from the departments approved products list and in accordance with table num hmwm property requirements .
table num hmwm property requirements property test requirements resin specifications viscosity centipoises a num specific gravity num flash point f minimum pinskymartens cc num tensile elongation minimum astm d num num performance properties of resin cure speed surface cure hours maximum num f application temperature num num gel time minutes application temperature num ml sample num abrookfield model lvt viscometer spindle i at num rpm .
num low viscosity low surface tension polymer use lowviscosity low surface tension polymer selected from the departments approved products list and in accordance with table num physical properties of lowviscosity low surface tension crack sealer .
table num physical properties of lowviscosity low surface tension crack sealer property value compressive strength psi astm d num minimum seven num days num tensile strength psi astm d num minimum seven num days num tensile elongation astm d num minimum seven num days num water absorption by weight astm d num maximum num h num shore d hardness num f minimum num gel time minutes num ounces num adhesion to concrete num failure in concrete surface tension maximum num dynescm percent solids num num certificates of compliance and product data sheets at least num days before using the sealer submit a notarized certificate of material compliance to the project manager .
list batch numbers and the manufacture date for all section num crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers page num components of each material in the certificate of compliance and on the material containers .
submit detailed msds for sealer components .
num fine aggregate provide fine aggregate for spreading over treated areas that is free from dirt clay asphalt and other deleterious materials and has moisture content of less than num when applied .
unless otherwise approved by the state materials bureau provide sand in accordance with table num fine aggregate gradation requirements .
table num fine aggregate gradation requirements sieve size passing minimum maximum no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num construction requirements num general seal individual cracks .
where closely spaced map cracking has occurred on concrete bridge decks seal by flooding the entire surface .
the project manager will direct which method to use .
num planning and demonstration at least num days before applying the sealer submit a written cracksealing plan to the project manager that includes the following num .
material descriptions num .
deck preparation and application methods num .
safety considerations for blasting and sealing personnel and num .
plans to protect other persons vehicles and property from injury or damage .
num sequence of operations seal cracks on new concrete bridge decks or approach slabs after num days of curing .
apply penetrating water repellent treatment prior to crack sealing if specified in the contract .
num surface preparation clean concrete surfaces from three num inches to five num inches on either side of individual cracks .
remove asphalt material oil dirt rubber curing compounds paint and other deleterious materials by flooding sandblasting or shot blasting .
air blast with oil free compressed air or vacuum all loose material from visible cracks .
apply sealer when concrete surfaces and cracks are dry .
num storage of sealer store the sealer or its components separately and within the manufacturer recommended temperature ranges .
num application of sealer surface temperature shall comply with the minimum manufacturers recommendations .
follow the manufacturers mixing and application recommendations .
apply one num gal per section num crack sealing using lowviscosity gravityfed sealers page num num ft for crack sealing and one num gal per num ft num for surface sealing .
the department may require two num or more applications of sealer for cracks num inch or larger .
the department may require application of a temporary surface sealer to wider full depth deck cracks on the deck underside .
prior to use on the project ensure that the curing period recommended by the manufacturer confirms proper curing of the material .
num excess sealer sweep away sealer that does not fill cracks is not absorbed by the concrete surface and fills or partially fills the grooves of a tined or grooved surface .
num sand application apply dry silica sand with coverage of eight num lb per square yard .
place sand before the sealer starts to gel .
remove excess sand after the curing period .
num limitation of operations prevent the sealer from leaking through cracks onto persons traffic and property .
if deck preparation procedures or the sealer deface the appearance of bridge components other than the crack sealed areas repair those components at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit crack sealing linear foot concrete surface treatment square yard section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay page num section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num description this work consists of providing and applying a polymer concrete bridge deck overlay .
num materials num epoxy provide a twopart epoxy or epoxy urethane resin base composed of a num solid thermosetting moistureinsensitive flexible highelongation compound in accordance with table num epoxy physical requirements or table num epoxy urethane physical requirements .
table num epoxy physical requirements property test method minimum maximum remarks viscosity astm d num brookfield rvt spindle num num rpm num poises num poises gel time astm c num paragraph num modified num min num min compressive strength num h astm c num modified with plastic inserts num psi mixed with aggregate compressive strength num h astm c num modified with plastic inserts num psi mixed with aggregate tensile strength neat seven num days astm d num num psi num psi elongation neat seven num days astm d num num num adhesive strength num h aci numr appendix a vtm num num psi mixed with aggregate with num failure in concrete permeability to chloride ion num days aashto t num num coulombs absorption neat num h astm d num one percent num thermal compatibility astm c num no delamination of overlay mixed with aggregate infrared spectrum aashto t num paragraphs num and num to be established for each component section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay page num table num epoxy urethane physical requirements property test method minimum maximum remarks viscosity astm d num brookfield rvt spindle num num rpm num poises num poises gel time astm c num paragraph num modified num min num min compressive strength num h astm c num modified with plastic inserts num psi mixed with aggregate compressive strength num h astm c num modified with plastic inserts num psi mixed with aggregate tensile strength neat seven num days astm d num num psi num psi elongation neat seven num days astm d num num num adhesive strength num h aci numr appendix a vtm num num psi mixed with aggregate with num failure in concrete permeability to chloride ion num days aashto t num num coulombs shore d hardness astm d num num num flexural creep total movement in seven num days california test method num num in flexural yield strength astm d num num psi absorption neat num h astm d num one percent num thermal compatibility astm c num no delamination of overlay mixed with aggregate infrared spectrum aashto t num paragraphs num and num to be established for each component num submittals submit the manufacturers recommendations for the proposed material to the project manager num days before use .
provide a certified report from a department approved laboratory and the manufacturer certification verifying the materials are in accordance with this specification .
include a fourier transform infrared spectrophotometry spectrum in transmittance mode and a bulk sample of each component tested in the manufacturers certification .
the department will maintain confidentiality of the data .
num certificates of compliance and product data sheets at least num days before using the polymer concrete bridge deck overlay submit a notarized certificate of material compliance to the project manager .
list batch numbers and the manufacture date for all components of each material in the certificate of compliance and on the material containers .
submit detailed msds for polymer concrete bridge deck overlay components .
section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay page num num testing the project manager will accept the materials based on the certified laboratory report .
num aggregate provide angular grained stone aggregate free of dirt clay and deleterious material in accordance with table num required aggregate properties and table num required aggregate gradation .
table num required aggregate properties property test method minimum maximum remarks soundness loss num cycles in magnesium sulfate aashto t num eight percent num microdeval aashto t num ten percent num aggregate must meet the gradation shown in table num required aggregate gradation mohs hardness num moisture content aashto t num num table num required aggregate gradation sieve size passing minimum maximum no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num acceptance of aggregate the department will base acceptance of aggregate on the state materials bureau recommendations and table num required aggregate properties .
num construction requirements num surface preparation num surface preparation prepare the concrete to produce a surface relief equal to the international concrete repair institute icri surface preparation csp num or astm e num pavement macrotexture depth of from num inch to num inch .
provide concrete surface profile chips to the project manager for inspection and acceptance of prepared surface .
icri concrete surface profile chips will become the property of the department .
num mechanical application equipment use an epoxy or epoxy urethane distribution system that completely mixes the epoxy or epoxy urethane resin with hardening agent and provides a uniform distribution of the section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay page num materials at the required application rate .
the use of hand held machine mixing equipment or hand mixing equipment is prohibited .
use a selfpropelled aggregate spreader that uniformly applies the dry aggregate at the manufacturers recommended application rate .
use an air compressor that produces oilfree and moisturefree compressed air to remove dust and loose material from the application surface before applying epoxy or epoxy urethane .
num hand application equipment use notched squeegees and brooms that spread the epoxy or epoxy urethane material in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
periodically inspect squeegees during application for wear of the notch depth replace any defective squeegees .
use hand tools as necessary for placing the overlay .
num vacuum trucks use vacuum trucks that are clean and do not drip engine fluids or install drip pans to protect the clean deck and overlay .
num power brooms use power brooms that are clean and do not drip engine fluids or install drip pans to protect the clean deck and overlay .
num preconstruction num deck preparation complete deck repairs for patches delamination and crack filling before applying the overlay per section num concrete structure repair and section num epoxy injection as specified in the contract .
identify moist areas by taping an num inch num inch plastic sheet to the deck for at least two num h in accordance with astm d num .
if moisture appears on the bottom of the plastic sheet do not proceed with the overlay process .
use compressed air to dry the deck surface .
close and protect deck drains and areas of curb or railing above the proposed surface to ensure epoxy or epoxy urethane and aggregate does not pass through the drains .
num cleaning obtain project managers approval of bridge deck cleaning and preparation before placing the first course .
before placing the overlay clean the deck surface to remove materials that may interfere with bonding or curing .
the department will consider cleaning acceptable when the color of the concrete and mortar changes and coarse aggregate particles are exposed .
cleaning shall open the pores of sound mortar .
the department will consider pavement markings clean when exposed aggregate shows through the markings .
use a vacuum cleaner or air compressor to remove dust and other loose material .
do not use brooms .
num safety provisions use personnel certified in the safe handling of materials in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
submit written documentation of material handlers training to section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay page num the project manager before applying the overlay .
num storage of materials store materials in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num temperature limitations follow the manufacturers deck temperature recommendations .
do not use artificial methods to raise the deck temperature .
follow the manufacturers temperature requirements for epoxy or epoxy urethane and aggregate components .
the contractor shall not apply epoxy or epoxy urethane for the following reasons num .
the contractor expects the air temperature to drop below the manufacturerrequired temperature within eight num h after application or num .
the epoxy or epoxy urethanes gel time is less than ten num min .
num usage limitations do not overlay bridges constructed with unventilated stayinplace forms unless forms are ventilated at a minimum rate of num square inch for every square foot or on pcc that is less than num days of age with polymer concrete overlay .
additionally manufacturers recommendations concerning moisture content must be followed .
num application materials shall be applied using mechanical metering mixing and distribution machinery as recommended by the manufacturer of the overlay system .
components a and b shall be applied within the temperature range recommended by the manufacturer .
broadcasting on concrete shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturers directions and the method approved by the project manager .
apply the overlay as two num separate applications with a total coverage of at least num gal per num ft² .
apply the first application of polymer at a rate of at least num gal per num ft² .
cover with a minimum of ten num pounds of aggregate per square yard or enough to completely cover the epoxy or epoxy urethane .
apply the second application of polymer at a rate of at least five num gal per num ft² .
cover with at least num pounds of aggregate per square yard or enough to completely cover the epoxy or epoxy urethane .
remove and replace first applications that do not receive enough aggregate before the polymer gels at no additional cost to the department .
the department will allow second applications not covered with enough aggregate to remain in place but the contractor must apply additional applications before opening to traffic at no additional cost to the department .
num curing no vehicular traffic or equipment shall be allowed on the overlay during the curing period .
cure each application of overlay polymer and aggregate free from vehicular traffic as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the project manager and until a vacuuming or broom does not tear or damage the surface .
after the first application cures remove loose aggregate with a vacuum or broom then apply the second application .
section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay page num num expansion joints place expansion joints with bond breakers in bridge deck expansion joints .
apply polymer over the expansion joints .
within num h after application and before opening to traffic remove the polymer over the expansion joints using the following procedure num .
remove the bond breakers num .
score the polymer before gelling or num .
saw cut after the cure .
num corrective work correct surface variations that exceed num inch per three num ft unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
repair the damaged overlay areas by saw cutting in rectangular sections to the top of the concrete deck surface and replacing the material at no additional cost to the department .
num warranty provide a five num year warranty for the overlay material and installation .
in addition to the requirements set forth in section num requirement of contract bonds provide a maintenance bond or warranty bond for the time frame indicated in this section .
the maintenance bond or warranty bond shall commence upon the departments acceptance of the work .
a department representative project manager or district designee will evaluate the overlay performance annually using a preestablished joint team consisting of a contractor and the department representative .
the evaluation will take place on the same date num days as the previous year for the life of the warranty .
no spalling scaling cracking or delamination is acceptable during the warranty period as defined by the following num .
spalling .
broken or missing pieces of concrete overlay num .
scaling .
the bridge deck overlay surface has a visible exposed rough surface texture resulting from a loss of aggregate or mortar num .
delamination .
there is visible or audible debonding of the concrete bridge deck overlay from the existing bridge deck surface num .
cracking .
any visible crack .
at the end of each yearly evaluation period the department will provide the contractor with a report that describes occurrences of spalling scaling cracking or delamination .
the department will perform an annual skid in accordance with aashto t num .
for the warranty period an average skid number of num or higher is acceptable .
if the overlay is not acceptable the department will direct the contractor in writing to perform corrective work within num days at no additional cost to the department .
corrective work application and method shall be approved by the department prior to the execution of the corrective work .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit section num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay page num epoxy polymer concrete bridge deck overlay square yard epoxy urethane polymer concrete bridge deck overlay square yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
concrete surface profile chips section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay page num section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay num description this work consists of providing and applying polyester concrete overlay for bridge deck approach slab transition slab and pccp repairs andor grade corrections .
num materials num prime coat the prime coat used with the polymer concrete shall be a wax free high molecular weight methacrylate resin conforming to the requirements in table num prime coat physical requirements table num prime coat physical requirements property test method minimum maximum remarks viscosity astm d num num poise specific gravity astm dnum num min flash point astm dnum num f the promoterinitiator system for the methacrylate resin shall consist of a metal drier and peroxide .
if supplied separately from the resin at no time shall the metal drier be mixed with or allowed to contact the peroxide directly .
do not store the containers in a manner that will allow leakage or spillage from one num material to contact the container or material of the other .
num polyester resin binder polymer concrete shall consist of polyester resin binder .
the resin shall be an unsaturated isophthalic polyesterstyrene copolymer and shall conform to the requirements in table num polyester resin physical requirements table num polyester resin binder physical requirements property test method minimum maximum remarks viscosity astm d num num poise num poise test before addition of initiator specific gravity astm d num num num test before addition of initiator tensile strength neat num days astm d num num psi num psi elongation neat num days astm d num num num section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay page num table num polyester resin binder physical requirements property test method minimum maximum remarks adhesive strength num h aci numr appendix a vtm num num psi mixed with aggregate with num failure in concrete absorption neat num h astm d num one percent num styrene content astm d num num num mass as volatiles before addition of initiator infrared spectrum aashto t num paragraphs num and num to be established for each component the silane coupler shall be an organosilane ester gammamethacryloxy propyltrimethoxysilane .
the promoter shall be compatible with suitable methyl ethyl ketone peroxide mekp and cumene hydroperoxide chp initiators .
num aggregate aggregate for polyester concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num aggregate of the standard specifications except the gradation shall meet the following table num polyester concrete aggregate gradation combined aggregate sieve size percentage passing num inch max .
no .
num max .
num inch num num num inch num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num aggregate retained on the num sieve shall have a maximum of num percent crushed particles when tested in accordance with aashto test method t num .
fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand only .
aggregate absorption shall not exceed one num percent as determined by aashto test methods t num and t num .
at the time of mixing with the resin the moisture content of the aggregate as determined by aashto test method t num shall not exceed one half of the aggregate absorption .
num submittals section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay page num submit the manufacturers recommendations for the proposed material to the project manager num days before use .
provide a certified report from a department approved laboratory and the manufacturer certification verifying the materials are in accordance with this specification .
submit a list of at least three num previous projects in which the polyester concrete system from the proposed supplier has been used and satisfactory performance has been achieved .
the previous projects must have been completed within the last five num years and have been open to traffic for not less than one num year .
include in the submittal location of bridge state route and bridge identifier name of polyester concrete system supplier approximate date of project opening to traffic owner and contact person with phone number .
num confirmation testing the supplier shall test the polyester resin binder and prime coat materials the contractor proposes to use and will provide results to the project manager within num days before use .
the project manager will accept the materials based on the certified laboratory report .
num construction requirements num equipment num concrete cleaning equipment prepare the concrete to produce a surface relief equal to the international concrete repair institute icri surface preparation csp num or astm e num pavement macrotexture depth from num inch to num inch .
use of scabblers milling machines or sandblasting will be at the discretion of the project manager .
provide icri concrete surface profile chips to the project manager for inspection and acceptance of prepared surface .
icri concrete surface profile chips will become the property of the department .
the use of air compressors andor vacuum trucks is permitted .
use an air compressor that produces oilfree and moisturefree compressed air to remove dust and loose material from the application surface before applying the prime coat .
use vacuum trucks that are clean and do not drip engine fluids or install drip pans to protect the clean concrete surfaces and overlay .
num placing and finishing equipment a continuous mixer employing an auger screwchute device will be approved for use by the project manager contingent on a demonstration that the device can consistently produce a satisfactory product .
the continuous mixer shall num be equipped with a metering device that automatically measures and records the aggregate volumes and the corresponding resin volumes and num have a readout gage visible to the project manager at all times that displays the volumes being recorded .
the volumes shall be recorded at no greater than five num minute intervals along with the time and date of each recording .
a printout of the recording shall be furnished to the project manager at the end of each work shift .
furnish slipform finishing equipment with an automatic grade control device to strike off the overlay to the established grade and cross section .
finishing machines shall be self propelled and capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control .
finishing machines shall be operated normal to the longitudinal bridge or roadway centerline .
equipment shall be fitted with suitable traps filters drip pans or other devices as necessary to prevent oil or other deleterious material from being deposited onto the existing concrete surfaces .
num preconstruction num material suppliers section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay page num the polyester concrete overlay system supplier shall make available a technical representative for a minimum of three num days to make recommendations to facilitate overlay installation .
this shall include but not be limited to trial batch preparation trial overlay placement surface preparation overlay application and overlay cure .
the system supplier shall also provide health and safety training for personnel who are to handle the materials .
num trial batches and trial overlay mix one num or more trial batches of polyester concrete for various percentages of resin binder according to manufacturers recommendations .
the approximate percentage of polyester resin binder to use will be determined from the trial batches .
the materials methods and equipment used in the trial batches shall be the same as those intended for use in the trial overlay .
if at any time different materials methods or equipment are to be used new trial batches will be required .
place one num or more trial overlays on a previously constructed concrete base to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed mixing placing and finishing equipment .
each trial overlay shall be num ft wide at least six num ft long and the same thickness as the overlay to be constructed .
the trial overlay area shall be within the project limits and at a location approved by the project manager .
remove and dispose of all materials used in the trial batches including the concrete base .
num concrete repairs complete concrete repairs for patches delamination and crack filling per section num concrete structure repair as specified in the contract before applying the overlay .
use polyester concrete as a patching material .
apply patch material at least one num hour before placing the overlay or place the patch material and overlay monolithically .
after repairs are complete clean concrete surfaces by shotblasting .
num cleaning and preparation before placing the overlay clean the concrete surface to remove materials that may interfere with bonding or curing .
the department will consider cleaning acceptable when the color of the concrete and mortar changes and coarse aggregate particles are exposed .
cleaning shall open the pores of sound mortar .
the department will consider pavement markings clean when exposed aggregate shows through the markings .
use a vacuum truck or air compressor to remove dust and other loose material .
do not use brooms .
close and protect bridge deck drains and areas of curb or railing above the proposed surface to ensure that the prime coat polyester concrete and aggregate do not contaminate these areas .
adequately isolate expansion joints and weakened plane joints before overlaying or saw them by approved methods within num hours after overlay placement .
obtain project managers approval of concrete cleaning and preparation before placing the prime coat .
num safety provisions use personnel certified in the safe handling of materials in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
provide a soap and water wash station for the workers at the section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay page num job site .
submit written documentation of material handlers training to the project manager before applying the overlay .
num storage of materials store materials in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num usage limitations do not overlay bridges constructed with unventilated stayinplace forms unless forms are ventilated at a minimum rate of ½ in num per square foot or on portland cement concrete that is less than num days of age with polymer concrete overlay .
always follow manufacturers recommendations concerning moisture content .
submit proposed locations of the longitudinal and transverse joints for approval .
do not locate the longitudinal joints in wheel lines .
num application before applying the prime coat the concrete area to receive the prime coat shall be dry when tested according to astm d num .
the concrete surface temperature shall be between num degrees f and num degrees f during application of the prime coat .
follow the manufacturers deck temperature recommendations .
do not use artificial methods to raise the deck temperature .
follow the manufacturers temperature requirements for polyester resin and aggregate components .
the contractor shall not apply polyester resin if either of the following conditions exists num .
the air temperature is expected to drop below the manufacturerrequired temperature within num h after application or num .
the polyester resin gel time is less than ten num min .
the prime coat shall be uniformly applied to completely cover the surface to receive the polyester concrete .
apply the prime coat at an approximate rate of num to num galydnum prior to placement of polymer concrete .
flood concrete surfaces with the prime coat allowing penetration into the concrete and filling of all cracks .
redistribute the applied prime coat in cracks by squeegees or brooms .
the quantity of initiated promoted resin shall be no more than what is needed to apply a prime coat .
a noticeable increase in viscosity prior to placement will be cause for rejection .
if the primed surface becomes contaminated or if there is a failure of the material clean the contaminated or failed area by abrasive blasting and re prime .
immediately after the prime coat has been applied the polyester concrete overlay shall be placed in accordance with manufacturers guidelines .
mix polyester concrete in mechanically operated mixers .
use a sufficient amount of initiator in the polyester concrete to produce set times between num and num minutes after placement .
accelerators or inhibitors may be required to achieve proper set times and shall be used as recommended by the resin supplier .
place and finish polyester concrete before gelling or within num minutes following addition of the initiator whichever occurs first .
discard polyester concrete not placed within this time .
use finishing equipment that strikes off the polyester concrete to the established grade cross section and nominal depth .
fit finishing equipment with vibrators or other means of consolidating the overlay material .
construct longitudinal joints parallel to the roadway alignment at the approved locations .
construct vertical joints perpendicular to the deck surface .
section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay page num the smoothness of the polyester concrete surface will be tested with a straightedge .
the surface shall not vary by more than num feet from the lower edge of a num foot num feet long straightedge placed in any direction .
any surface that fails to conform to the above tolerance shall be ground to meet this requirement .
apply abrasive sand finish to polyester concrete surfaces .
the sand shall be commercial quality blast sand conforming to the absorption capacity and moisture content requirements of polymer concrete aggregate of this specification .
provide sand such that num shall pass the no .
num sieve and num shall be retained on the no .
num sieve .
apply the sand finish by mechanical means immediately after overlay strikeoff .
broadcast sand uniformly onto the surface before gelling occurs at a minimum rate of num lbyd num .
after application of the sand finish and before gelling occurs texture the overlay by grooving with a steeltined rake with tines num inch wide and spaced from ¾ inch to num½ inch apart .
groove to a depth of num to num inch .
the surface texture of the overlay shall be uniform and shall have a coefficient of friction of not less than num .
if the coefficient of friction is less than num grind or groove parallel to the centerline those portions of surfaces until the coefficient of friction requirement is met .
num curing protect the finished overlay from moisture equipment and public traffic until the overlay achieves an average schmidt hammer reading of num .
the schmidt hammer test shall consist of the average of ten num readings strikes all taken in an area approximately num inches in diameter .
perform one num such test per num sq ft of overlay .
traffic may be allowed on the overlay when the reading of num is achieved .
do not contaminate concrete surfaces during cleanup of tools and equipment .
do not dump or spill polyester concrete materials or cleaning solvents in areas that will cause environmental or fire hazards .
num testing provide the necessary equipment and supplies for conducting adhesion tests on the completed overlay .
perform adhesion tests according to aci numr appendix a of the aci manual of concrete practice .
adhesion tests shall obtain a num psi minimum pulloff or cohesive failure within existing concrete .
perform tests at a frequency of one num test per every num sq ft of deck surface in a random location .
prime and patch test holes with polyester concrete immediately after testing .
num corrective work correct surface variations that exceed num ft per num ft unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
repair damaged overlay areas by saw cutting in rectangular sections to the top of the concrete surface and replacing the material at no additional cost to the department .
in the event that the testing performed under num does not meet minimum pulloff the material shall be removed and replaced in the areas in which low adhesion is determined from additional testing .
any additional testing required shall be incidental to the work .
num warranty in addition to the requirements of section num guarantees and warranties provide a five numyear warranty for the overlay material and installation .
the department will evaluate the work and photographically document the overlay performance annually using a preestablished joint team consisting of a contractor and a department representative .
the evaluation will take place on the same date num days as section num polyester concrete bridge deck overlay page num the previous year for the life of the warranty .
no spalling scaling cracking or delamination is acceptable during the warranty period as defined by the following num .
spalling broken or missing pieces of concrete overlay due to material degradation .
num .
scaling the concrete overlay surface has a visible exposed rough surface texture resulting from a loss of aggregate or resin .
num .
delamination visible or audible debonding of the polyester concrete bridge deck overlay at the bond line with the existing concrete surface .
num .
cracking any visible crack not reflected from a crack in the existing concrete .
at the end of each yearly evaluation period the department will provide the contractor with a report that describes occurrences of spalling scaling cracking or delamination .
the department will perform an annual skid test in accordance with aashto t num .
for the warranty period an average skid test number of num or higher is acceptable .
if the overlay is not acceptable the department will direct the contractor in writing to perform corrective work within num days at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement polyester concrete will be measured by the cubic yard .
the volume to be paid for will be determined from calculations based on the quantity of resin binder used the percent by weight of resin binder in the polyester concrete and a unit weight of num pcf .
the contractor shall furnish suitable measuring devices to assure correct proportioning of materials and accurate measurement for calculating payment quantities .
the payment quantity shall be the calculated quantity of polyester concrete used in the work exclusive of material used in trial overlay and any wasted or unused material .
payment quantity will include patches .
the contract price paid per cubic yard for polyester concrete shall include full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in placing polyester concrete including furnishing methacrylate resin prime coat and furnishing materials for trail overlays removal of unsound concrete and preparation of repair areas when polyester concrete is used as the patching material and as shown on the plans as specified in the standard specifications and as directed by the project manager .
removal of loose concrete and preparation of repair areas for patching material other than polyester concrete will be measured by the square yard in accordance with section num concrete structure repair .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price per unit of measurement for the pay items listed below that are shown in the proposal .
payment will be full compensation for the work described in this section .
pay item pay unit polyester concrete bridge deck overlay cubic yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for polyester concrete and will not be measured or paid for separately a. icri concrete surface profile chips and b .
removal of unsound concrete and preparation of repair areas when polyester concrete is used as the patching material .
section num steel reinforcement page num section num steel reinforcement num description this work consists of providing and placing steel reinforcement .
num materials num bar reinforcement provide deformed bars in accordance with aashto m num grade num or astm anum grade num at the nominal dimensions in accordance with table num nominal dimensions of reinforcement .
table num nominal dimensions of reinforcement bar size nominal weight lbft diameter inch no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num welded wire fabric provide welded wire fabric in accordance with aashto m num .
num spiral reinforcement provide spiral reinforcement fabricated from steel bars in accordance with aashto m num or from cold drawn steel wire in accordance with the aashto m num .
num reinforcing wire provide reinforcing wire in accordance with aashto m num .
num corrosionresistant and coated reinforcing bars the contractor may use one num of the following corrosionresistant or coated reinforcement systems for bridge decks and other concrete components exposed to weather and road salts num .
epoxycoated reinforcement in accordance with aashto m num and m num and from plants certified by the concrete reinforcing steel institute crsi for the coating and fabrication process num .
deformed stainless steel bars in accordance with astm a num num .
stainless steel clad deformed steel bars in accordance with aashto mp num num .
uncoated lowcarbon chromium steel bars in accordance with aashto mp num astm a num or section num steel reinforcement page num num .
hotdipped galvanized reinforcement in accordance with astm a num .
num coating and patching materials num .
provide a fusionbonded powdered epoxy resin coating material that meets the requirements of aashto m num .
num .
provide a liquid twopart epoxy patching material formulated to be compatible with the fusionbonded epoxy powder coating to repair damaged or uncoated areas .
num .
provide zincrich paint with a minimum num zinc content in accordance with astm a num for patching damaged and uncoated areas of hotdip galvanizing .
num accessories provide plasticcoated reinforcing tie wire for tying epoxycoated reinforcing bars for deformed stainless steel bars for stainless steel clad deformed steel bars and for uncoated lowcarbon chromium steel deformed bars .
provide galvanized annealed wire tires for galvanized reinforcing bars .
provide one num of the following types of chairs supports and clips num .
steel fully coated with plastic or fusionbonded epoxy .
num .
galvanized steel with the cradle and the upper two num inches of the chair support or clip coated with fusionbonded epoxy or plastic .
num .
galvanized metal chairs or other metal supports for reinforcement that contacts the exposed concrete surfaces .
num .
galvanized painted or epoxycoated metal chairs or other metal supports for regular reinforcement .
num .
epoxy coated metal chairs or other metal supports for epoxycoated reinforcement .
num .
galvanized sand chairs or other metal supports placed directly on the ground or num .
concrete blocks in place of sand chairs or other metal supports placed directly on the ground .
use continuous chairs or supports with preformed metal forms .
do not use uncoated black ferrous steel ties chairs supports or clips in direct contact with stainless or galvanized reinforcing .
num certificates of compliance provide certificates of compliance to the project manager with each reinforcing steel shipment .
show the project number the shipping invoice number name of the manufacturer pounds shipped heat numbers laboratory test reports and grade of steel on the certificates of compliance .
this requirement is the same for each of the coatingcladding systems and the corrosionresistant systems .
num epoxycoated reinforcing bar certificates of compliance provide the departments inspector three num copies of a certificate of compliance for each shipment of coated bars .
state on the certificate that the samples of the coated bars were tested and that the test results were in accordance with aashto m num and this specification .
show epoxy resin batch numbers on the certificate .
provide coating test results to the department for inclusion in final inspection reports .
num epoxycoated reinforcing coating num epoxy coating thickness section num steel reinforcement page num the thickness of the epoxy coating after curing shall be between seven num mils and num mils .
for acceptance at least num percent of all recorded film thickness measurements shall be in this range .
num continuity of epoxy coating ensure that the coating is free from holes voids contamination cracks and damaged areas .
use a numvolt holiday detector in the production line to continuously check the coated bar for holidays .
ensure that there are no more than an average of one num holiday per linear foot of coated bar .
num hotdip galvanized reinforcing bars provide hotdip galvanized reinforcing bars in accordance with astm a num .
galvanize bar after cutting and bending .
num galvanizing material provide galvanizing zinc in accordance with astm bnum .
num construction requirements num general measure dimensions from centerline of bar to centerline of bar .
store all reinforcing bars above ground on platform skids or other supports .
reinforcing shall be kept free from dirt grease and other foreign matter .
reinforcing shall be kept free of corrosion as far as practicable .
num bar lists and bending diagram when the contract documents do not include detail bar lists and bending diagrams the contractor shall provide such list and diagrams to the state bridge engineer for review and approval .
the approval of bar lists and bending diagrams shall in no way relieve the contractor of responsibility for correctness .
the bar lists and bending diagrams shall meet the requirements of the current edition of the concrete reinforcing steel institutes csri publication reinforcing bar detailing .
the contractor shall allow num days for review of the submittal .
num bundling and tagging tag and mark reinforcement bar shipments in accordance with csris code of standard practice .
num bar bending the department will allow cold bending around a pin .
do not field bend grade num bars epoxycoated bars or hotdip galvanized bars .
unless otherwise directed ensure the bend diameter is in accordance with table num .
that table specifies minimum pin diameters for uncoated and coated bars .
section num steel reinforcement page num table num minimum diameter of bends minimum pin diameter bar diameters type of reinforcement coated bars size uncoated bars coated bars stirrups and ties num num num num main reinforcement num num num num all types num num num num all types num num num num all types num num num num num splicing splice bars only in accordance with the plans unless otherwise approved by the state bridge engineer .
place and tie bars in lapped splices to maintain minimum reinforcing cover .
splice spiral reinforcement by lapping .
ensure that laps are at least num bar or wire diameters but not less than numft with num hooks around longitudinal bars at ends .
the department will allow mechanical couplers for aashto m num grade num and astm anum grade num deformed bar if the splice strength verified by tests is greater than or equal to num of the yield strength of the spliced reinforcing bars and develops the specified tensile strength of the bars .
aci num type num mechanical couplers meet the above splice strength requirements .
submit documentation to the state bridge engineer showing where mechanical couplers are proposed to be used what type of coupler manufacturer and model number will be used and certified test results from an approved testing service showing that the couplers meet these requirements .
show splice locations and coupler clearance dimensions in the request and submit before fabricating the reinforcing bars that will be coupled .
allow at least two num weeks for review and approval .
unless otherwise specified ensure that welded wire fabric and barmat reinforcement overlap is at least one num spacing of cross wires plus two num inches when measured between the outermost cross wires of each sheet .
num field cutting bars may be cut to length in the field by shearing or sawing .
flame cutting will not be permitted .
the ends of coated or clad bars cut in the field shall be patched with suitable patching material .
num reinforcing bar placement place reinforcing bars as shown in the contract drawings securely tied in position with wire not smaller than num gauge .
carefully place support and tie reinforcing and place and consolidate concrete around reinforcing with care to avoid any displacement and damage to the coatings .
tie all intersections where bar spacing is greater than or equal to one num ft in either direction .
tie alternate intersections where bar spacing is less than one num ft in either direction .
use metal spacers chairs hangers and other approved devices to hold the reinforcing bars in position .
when using concrete blocks to support the bottom mat of reinforcement in slabs that are cast on ground use dense rectangular concrete blocks that section num steel reinforcement page num num .
have compressive strength and density equal to or greater than the concrete to be placed num .
occupy a small area and num .
contain embedded plastic or epoxycoated tie wires for attachment of reinforcement .
do not use wooden spacers or supports .
tie reinforcing bar mats in bridge deck and concrete box culvert slabs to beams and forms to prevent upward movement during concrete placement .
ensure that the space between ties does not exceed ten num ft. num reinforcing bar placement tolerances ensure that the space between adjacent bars does not vary more than the greater of ½ inch or num num of the spacing dimension shown on the plans .
except for slabs cast on the ground ensure that the clear cover of reinforcement shall not vary more than the greater of either num inch or num of the dimension shown on the plans .
ensure that the reinforcement clear cover in slabs cast on the ground does not vary more than minus num inch from the position shown on the plans .
num cleaning reinforcing bars before placing concrete clean the reinforcing bars of materials that would reduce or destroy the bond .
num welding of reinforcing steel weld reinforcing steel only if the contract requires it or if the state bridge engineer authorizes it in writing .
weld in accordance with aws specification dnum reinforcing steel welding code .
welding of bars other than astm anum is allowed only upon approval of qualified welding procedures for those bars that comply with aws dnum .
submit a welding procedure specification stamped by an aws certified welding inspector for each procedure .
welding to other added contractor steel for stiffening cage alignment lifting handling and other contractor needs shall not be welded to reinforcing steel called for in the plans .
num concrete cover requirements concrete cover is the distance from the surface of concrete to the edge of the bar nearest to that surface .
if cover dimensions are not specified in the contract use the concrete cover dimensions in accordance with table num concrete cover requirements .
table num concrete cover requirements location minimum cover inch concrete cast against and permanently exposed to the ground num concrete exposed to the ground or weather principal reinforcement num stirrups ties and spirals num num concrete bridge slabs top reinforcement num bottom reinforcement num concrete not exposed to weather or in contact with ground principal reinforcement num ½ section num steel reinforcement page num table num concrete cover requirements stirrups ties and spirals num bar bundles num a aor equal to the diameter of a single bar of equivalent area whichever is greater .
num final inspection do not place concrete until the department inspects the reinforcing steel in place .
acceptance of the reinforcing steel does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the cover and position control of the steel .
num requirements for epoxycoated reinforcing bars num storage and handling of epoxy coated reinforcing bars transport and store epoxycoated reinforcing steel on wooden or padded supports .
use devices with padded contact areas to handle epoxycoated reinforcement bars and prevent bartobar abrasion .
do not drop or drag bars or bundles .
use spreader beams and multiple pick points when hoisting bar bundles to prevent sagging .
do not store epoxycoated reinforcing bars in sunlight for more than num days .
use only nonmetallic sleeved heads with immersiontype vibrators when placing concrete around epoxycoated reinforcing .
num repair of damaged epoxycoating repair visible damage before shipping .
ensure the total surface area of patched coating material is not more than one percent num of the total coated area in any one num foot section .
the department will reject bars shipped to the project that show more than one percent num patched coating material .
patch sheared ends cuts and exposed areas promptly before detrimental oxidation occurs .
keep exposed areas free of contaminants before patching .
patch coating damage before placing concrete .
ensure that the total patched surface area does not exceed two percent num of the coated area in any one num foot section .
the department will reject any installed bars with more than two percent num patching .
apply the patching material in strict compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
allow adequate time for the patch to cure before placing concrete over the bars .
num requirements for galvanized reinforcing bars num galvanizing bent bars where galvanized bars are detailed to be bent or have other types of coldforming the bars must be bent before galvanizing .
num surface preparations prepare bar surfaces by removing dirt and grease with a hot alkaline solution .
use a diluted solution of sulfuric acid to pickle .
use a solution of zinc ammonium chloride to flux .
ensure that the resulting surface condition is about equal to sspcsp num as described by the sspc .
num thickness of galvanizing ensure that the galvanizing after drying with air steam or wiping is from three num mils to num mils thick .
determine the thickness with a magnetic thickness gage .
section num steel reinforcement page num num chromating treat the galvanized coating with chromate .
this prevents a reaction between the bars and fresh portland cement paste .
the department will allow proprietary chromating treatment solutions of equivalent strength instead of the generic chemical treatment in accordance with astm a num section num .
quenching of bent bars or bars to be bent is not allowed .
such bars must be chromated at ambient temperature .
num finish and adherence of coating ensure that the zinc coating is free of bare spots blisters flux spots or inclusions dross and acid or black spots .
the department will reject bars that stick together after galvanizing .
a matte gray finish appearance is not by itself a cause for rejection .
ensure that the coating can not be removed through normal handling .
num installation of galvanized reinforcing bars transport and store galvanized bars in a manner to prevent damage to the galvanized coating .
all systems for handling galvanized coated bars shall have padded contact areas .
all bundles of bars shall be lifted using spreader beams and multiple pick points or a platform bridge to prevent bartobar abrasion from sagging in the bar bundle .
the bars and bundles shall not be dropped or dragged on the ground platforms or other bars .
galvanized reinforcing bars shall not be tied with black steel or left in contact with black steel .
galvanized reinforcing bars shall be left in contact only with galvanized plasticcoated or epoxycoated surfaces .
num repair of damaged galvanizing patch sheared ends cuts and exposed areas using a zincrich paint .
prepare the surface to be patched so that it is clean dry and free of oil grease and corrosion products .
blastclean the surface to nearwhite metal in accordance with sspcspnum .
spray or brushapply the paint containing the zinc dust as recommended by the manufacturer in one num application of as many passes as required to achieve a dry film thickness of four num mils as determined using a magnetic or electromagnetic gage .
num repair of stainless steel clad deformed steel bars the stainless steel clad deformed steel bars shall be shop bent as shown on the contract documents .
all ends of the bars where mild steel core is exposed shall be capped by one num of the following methods num .
heat shrink cap applied in accordance with the cap manufacturers instructions .
num .
neoprene cap adhered with silicone or epoxy sealant .
num .
stainless steel cap epoxied in place .
num .
stainless steel seal weld .
no field cutting or bending of stainless steel clad deformed steel bars will be allowed .
num method of measurement the department will measure reinforcing bar weight in accordance with table num nominal dimensions of reinforcement whether it is black steel epoxycoated galvanized stainless steel stainless steel clad or lowcarbon chrome steel .
the computed weights of reinforcing bars will be based on the nominal weights of the bars before application of the epoxycoating or galvanizing of the bars .
when splice overlaps are unscheduled or are made for the convenience of the contractor and are approved by the state bridge engineer at locations not shown in the contract the extra steel required for splice overlaps will not be included in computing the weight of the bars for payment .
section num steel reinforcement page num num basis of payment pay item pay unit reinforcing bars grade ____ pound epoxycoated reinforcing bars grade ____ pound galvanized bars grade ____ pound uncoated corrosion resistant reinforcing bars grade ____ pound stainless steel reinforcing bars grade ____ pound stainless steel clad reinforcing bars grade ____ pound num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
clips supports wire and other material used for fastening reinforcement and b .
samples and submittals c. welded wire fabric shall be considered as included in the cost for concrete and d. mechanical reinforcing bar splices .
section num steel structures page num section num steel structures num description this work consists of fabricating providing erecting and coating structural steel .
structural steel includes forged or cast steel bolts tie rods other ferrous or nonferrous materials and miscellaneous steel .
the term miscellaneous steel refers to items such as num .
drop inlet grates and frames num .
safety grates num .
pedestrian rail and num .
cattle guard grates .
num materials num structural steel provide structural steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num unless otherwise designated in the contract .
provide steel for anchor bolts sole plates minor bridge components inlet grates and cattle guards in accordance with astm a num .
num impact testing requirements for nonfracturecritical structures for materials requiring impact testing do not weld repair the base metal at the producing mill .
the department will consider structures to be nonfracturecritical unless otherwise designated in the contract .
fabricate the following in accordance with aashto m num table num when subject to tensile stresses num .
wide flange beams used as main load carrying members num .
flanges and web plates used in plate girders num .
flange cover plates num .
flange and web splice plates and num .
other components designated in the contract .
conduct charpy vnotch cvn impact h or p frequency testing in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure that structural steel meets requirements for minimum service temperatures as described for zone num of the aashtos standard specifications for highway bridges num f num f. conduct platefrequency testing instead of hatlot testing for plate material thicker than num num inch .
num impact testing requirements for fracturecritical bridge components the contract will specify the cvn requirements for fracturecritical bridge components .
num shear connector studs provide shear connector studs fabricated from colddrawn bars grades num num or num either semikilled or fullykilled in accordance with aashto m num .
if using fluxretaining caps use the low carbon grade steel for the caps that is suitable for welding and in accordance with astm a num .
produce the finish by cold drawing cold rolling section num steel structures page num or machining .
ensure stud tensile properties are in accordance with table num tensile properties of shear connector studs as determined by tests of bar stock after drawing or finished studs in accordance with astm a num .
table num tensile properties of shear connector studs property minimum requirement tensile strength num psi yield strength num offset num psi elongation in two num inch num reduction of area num num bearing pads obtain department approval for impregnated fabric pads used beneath bridge bearings .
num aluminum provide aluminum and aluminum alloy materials in accordance with astm aluminum alloy designation and in accordance with the plans .
num bolts provide highstrength bolts in accordance with section num highstrength bolts .
provide other bolts in accordance with astm a num grade a .
num unfinished bolts provide unfinished astm a num bolts .
thread bolts so that not more than two num threads are within the grip of the connected parts .
use bolts that will extend beyond the nut at least two num threads but not more than num inch .
num structural steel coating provide coated structural steel in accordance with table num coating of structural steel .
table num coating of structural steel item coating requirement structural steel for steel bridges section num protective coating of new structural steel structural steel for concrete bridges section num protective coating of new structural steel or section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel structural steel for miscellaneous structures section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel metal bridge railing section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel new exposed steel bridge piling and similar applications section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel recoating bridges section num recoating structures if the contract requires a galvanized coating coat steel after fabrication in accordance with aashto m num .
section num steel structures page num num construction requirements num applicable codes and documents fabricate and erect steel structures in accordance with the current edition of the following codes and documents num .
aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code num .
aashtoaws dnum structural welding code num .
aws dnum reinforcing steel code num .
the following aashtonsba steel collaboration documents num .
s num steel bridge fabrication guide specification num .
s num steel bridge fabrication qcqa guide specification num .
s num steel bridge erection guide specification num .
g num shop drawing review approval guidelines num .
g num shop detail drawing presentation guidelines num .
g num guidelines for design for constructability although the aashtoaws steel collaboration documents are titled guidelines or guide specifications consider them to have the same importance and standing as a code or a specification .
if the content of the collaboration documents appears permissive with words such as should could may etc .
consider the content to be a requirement unless otherwise approved by the department .
in the event of a conflict between a referenced code and this specification this specification will take precedence .
num quality control and quality assurance conduct qc and qa operations in accordance with aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration s num .
for shops fabricating miscellaneous steel items the department may waive the requirement that the qc inspector be a certified welding inspector .
num submittals to the qa inspector the departments shop inspectors will prepare inspection reports covering the structural steel fabrication .
provide six num copies of the following items for inclusion in the inspection report num .
structural steel mtrs num .
certificates of compliance and other documentation for the protective coating num .
the manufacturers certificate of compliance for welding consumables num .
weld procedures num .
qc inspection reports and num .
a general certificate of compliance for the fabricated product .
submit certificates of compliance instead of mtrs for materials subjected to minimal stress levels such as sole plates shoe plates anchor bolts and fill plates .
num shop and erection drawings prepare shop drawings in accordance with aashtonsba g num shop drawing presentation guidelines .
the department will review shop drawings for acceptance in accordance with aashtonsba g num shop drawing review approval guidelines .
submit num complete sets of shop and erection drawings for preliminary review to the project manager .
retain two num additional complete sets .
section num steel structures page num num approval of initial submittal the department will review the preliminary drawings .
the department will return three num sets of drawings stamped accepted except as noted to the contractor .
num errors and changes requiring resubmittal if numerous drawing changes and corrections are needed the department will return three num sets of markedup drawings to the contractor with a letter requesting corrections and resubmittal .
make changes and corrections as noted on the markedup drawings and resubmit nine num sets of corrected drawings retain two num additional sets .
do not fabricate materials before receiving drawings stamped accepted or accepted as noted .
mark nonaccepted drawings void .
allow at least num days for review and acceptance of final shop plans and an additional num days for resubmitted shop drawings .
num shop drawings for structural steel items detailed on standard drawings the contractor may submit standardized shop drawings instead of projectspecific drawings for structural steel items such as cattle guard grills and drop inlet grates .
include the fabricators name and address drawing title drawing number drawing date revision dates and standard serial number on shop drawings .
the department will retain an accepted set of shop drawings in a permanent file .
do not make any changes to accepted shop drawings .
if changes are made resubmit the drawings for acceptance .
before fabrication submit a letter of intent to fabricate to the project manager containing the following information num .
names of the fabricator num .
project number num .
drawing number num .
number of pieces to be fabricated num .
expected date of manufacture .
submit a detailed billofmaterial in accordance with aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration g num with the letter of intent to fabricate to supplement the standardized drawings .
submit one num copy of each standard drawing to the project manager and the state bridge engineer at least num days before starting work .
notify the state bridge engineer at least num days before starting work .
for steel items unique to a project prepare and submit shop drawings .
num rolled girders and plate girders provide girders to the full length shown in the plans .
bolted or welded girder splices will not be permitted unless noted otherwise in the plans .
num fabrication ensure shop drawings fabricating bridges overhead sign supports and other major steel section num steel structures page num structures are certified in accordance with aashtonsba steel collaboration s num steel bridge fabrication guide specification .
the department will not require certification for shops fabricating miscellaneous steel items but the department must inspect and approve these shops before fabrication .
steel will be fabricated in the shop unless otherwise approved by the department .
num attachment and fit of gussets and stiffeners where welding of gusset plates stiffeners or other secondary attachments to main structural members would otherwise result in intersections of welds clip back the corners of the attachments num num inch minimum from the corner in each direction to avoid such intersections .
terminate welds attaching secondary components to main members num inch short of the end of the attachments .
if the plans require bearing stiffeners finished to bear mill or grind the ends and obtain an even bearing against the flange the stiffeners will bear on .
if the plans require tight fit stiffeners fit the stiffeners tight against the flange to exclude water after being coated .
num straightening of flanges at pier bearings abutment bearings and splices straighten girder or beam flanges perpendicular to the webs .
at bearings straighten flanges before fitting stiffeners .
at splices straighten flanges before coating and shipment .
do not cold bend .
num bearing plates pins and rollers num sole masonry and shoe plates flatten the top and bottom surfaces of sole masonry and shoe plates to within num inch .
machine sole plate surfaces that will contact elastomeric bearing pads perpendicular to the direction of expansion .
machine other expansion surfaces in the direction of expansion .
num pins and rollers accurately turn pins and rollers to dimensions and ensure that they are smooth straight and free of flaws .
num pin holes bore a two num inch diameter hole longitudinally through the center of pins with an eight num inch diameter or larger .
bore pinholes true to the specified diameter smooth and straight at right angles to the axis of the member and parallel with each other unless otherwise required .
produce the final surface with a finishing cut .
do not vary the outside to outside distance of end holes in tension members and inside to inside distance of end holes in compression members by more than num inch .
bore holes in builtup members after shop assembly .
num threads section num steel structures page num ensure that bolt and pin threads are in accordance with unified standard series unc ansi bnum class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads .
thread pin ends with a diameter of num num inch or greater with six num threads per inch .
num surface finish finish the surfaces of bearings base plates pins rollers and other bearing steel that will come into contact with each other or with concrete in accordance with ansi bnum surface roughness waviness and lay .
num connections num welding num welder qualifications use annually certified welders or those who provide documentation demonstrating continuing experience in the process .
welder must be qualified for the position the weld is performed in .
num testing of complete penetration welds conduct nondestructive qc radiographic testing on complete penetration welds in accordance with aws dnum or dnum as applicable .
the department may allow ultrasonic testing as a substitute for radiography .
submit an ultrasonic testing plan for approval at least num days before the start of fabrication .
provide detailed information about the fabricators previous experience with ultrasonic testing and resumes showing the training and experience of persons performing the testing .
do not use ultrasonic testing for cases described in section num of the bridge welding code .
num bolted connections bolt with high strength bolts in accordance with section num highstrength bolts .
make bolt holes num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the connector unless otherwise specified .
num gaps between ends of abutting members where the contract requires abutting milled joints ensure there are no gaps .
face the ends to provide a full and even bearing when assembled .
where the contract requires close joints do not exceed num inch between the ends of abutting members .
do not exceed num inch between abutting ends of girders at splices .
num camber verification verify girder camber during the laydown operation .
unless assembling girders in the horizontal position meet the total camber dimensions less the deflections produced by the weight of the girder .
num erection requirements erect the structure in accordance with aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration s num steel bridge erection guide specification .
num acceptance mark the department will stamp fabricated members at the fabrication facility upon acceptance .
do not use any piece that does not bear the acceptance stamp .
section num steel structures page num num placement of bearings ensure that column bases and bearing devices bear fully and uniformly on substructures .
do not place bearings on pier or abutment bridge seat areas that are improperly finished or irregular .
grout to achieve uniform bearing only when the contract allows grouting .
place masonry plates and beam and girder span pedestals on impregnated fabric pads approved by the project manager at least num inch thick .
num anchor bolt holes core drill anchor boltholes in accordance with table num required nominal anchor bolt hole diameters .
table num required nominal anchor bolt hole diameters bolt diameter inch hole diameter inch num num num num num num num num num set anchor bolts using nonshrink grout from the departments approved products list .
remove excess mortar after the grout has set .
ensure that anchor bolt washers and nuts bear evenly against the steelbearing surface .
ensure anchor bolts at the expansion ends of spans allow the free movement of the span .
num field bolting install high strength bolts in accordance with section num highstrength bolts .
block main structural members to the desired camber before torquing the bolted splice connections .
for skewed steel bridges with diaphragms perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline finger tighten diaphragm attachment bolts before deck placement .
fully torque bolts after the deck slab is in place .
following completion of the superstructure and after priming fill open holes in exterior beams and girders with button head bolts before final acceptance .
num field welding employ a qc inspector to monitor field welding certified in accordance with aashto nsba steel bridge collaboration snum .
provide qc reports certifying that welds meet specification requirements following each welding operation .
include the following in the report num .
welder qualification num .
weld procedure num .
electrode storage num .
preheat requirements and num .
acceptability of completed welds .
num pilot and driving nuts use pilot and driving nuts in driving pins .
show details on the shop plans .
furnish one num pilot and one num driving nut for each size pin .
section num steel structures page num num removal of leadpaint coated steel items dispose of lead paint debris in accordance with section num safety and environmental requirements for painting operations .
num disposal of steel structures reinforcing steel steel debris or steel waste do not reuse salvaged steel items from existing structures unless directed otherwise in the plans .
salvaged steel shall be disposed of by contractor as approved by the project manager .
num method of measurement if structural members are specified by a nominal unit weight the department will calculate weight based on the nominal weights and dimensions .
when structural members are not designated by a nominal unit weight the department will calculate weight using the unit weights listed in table num metal unit weights for measurement .
the department will deduct the weight of copes cuts bevels and open holes from the gross weight .
the department will not make deductions for bolt holes .
table num metal unit weights for measurement material unit weight lbftnum steel num cast iron num bronze num num bolts the department will pay the weight of fasteners as indicated on the accepted shop drawings .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit structural steel for concrete bridges pound structural steel for steel bridges pound structural steel for miscellaneous structures pound num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. submittals nondestructive testing protective coatings and b .
additional weight of heavier sections provided solely for the contractors convenience c. all incidentals necessary for the completion of the work and d. weld material weight .
section num highstrength bolts page num section num highstrength bolts num description this work consists of providing and installing highstrength bolts .
num materials when the contract requires galvanized fasteners mechanically galvanize in accordance with aashto m num class num astm b num class num .
mark bolts nuts and washers in accordance with the applicable aashto or astm specifications .
num bolts provide bolts in accordance with aashto m num astm a num .
ensure that bolt dimensions are in accordance with ansi b num and nut dimensions are in accordance with ansi b num .
these dimensions are tabulated in table num dimensions of high strength bolts .
for dimension labels refer to figure num aastho m num astm a num bolts .
ensure that hardness for bolts with diameters from num inch to one num inch is in accordance with table num bolt hardness requirements .
figure num aashto m num astm a num bolts section num highstrength bolts page num table num dimensions of highstrength bolts heavy hex structural bolts heavy hex nuts nominal bolt size d width across flats f height h thread length width across flats w height h num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note all dimensions in inches table num bolt hardness requirements bolt diameter hardness number brinnell rockwell c minimum maximum minimum maximum num inchnum inch num num num num use table num bolt lengths to determine bolt lengths by adding the values shown to the grip .
grip is the total thickness of all connected material exclusive of washers .
table num bolt lengths bolt size length to be added to grip num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ¼ note all dimensions in inches these values are based on using one num hardened flat washer and one num direct tension indicator .
when using beveled washers subtract the thickness of a flat washer and add num inch for the beveled washer .
adjust the length in accordance with table num bolt lengths to the next longer num inch .
num nuts provide nuts in accordance with aashto m num astm a num with dimensions in accordance with ansi b num and table num dimensions of highstrength bolts .
section num highstrength bolts page num ensure plain ungalvanized nuts are of grades num c d or cnum with a minimum rockwell b hardness of num or brinell hardness of num or heattreated grades numh dh or dhnum .
provide heattreated galvanized nuts graded numh dh or dhnum .
provide mechanically galvanized nuts in accordance with aashto m num class num .
overtap nuts before galvanizing .
overtap so the nut will assemble freely on the coated bolt in accordance with aashto m num astm a num .
lubricate galvanized nuts with a dyed lubricant of a color that contrasts with the galvanizing color .
num washers provide washers in accordance with aashto m num astm f num .
use flat circular hardened washers in accordance with table num circular washer dimensions and table num washer tolerances .
use square or rectangular beveled washers that taper in thickness in accordance with table num square or rectangular beveled washers for american standard beams and channels and table num washer tolerances .
where necessary to provide a proper fit clip washers on one num side no closer than ⅞ of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer .
table num circular washer dimensions bolt size d nominal outside diameter nominal diameter of hole thickness maximum minimum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num a num a num num num num num num a num a over num to num incl .
numdnum dnum num b num b note all dimensions in inches .
a num inch nominal .
b num inch nominal .
table num square or rectangular beveled washers for american standard beams and channels bolt size in minimum side dimension in mean thickness in slope or taper in thickness num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section num highstrength bolts page num table num square or rectangular beveled washers for american standard beams and channels bolt size in minimum side dimension in mean thickness in slope or taper in thickness num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note hole tolerances are the same as for circular washers .
table num washer tolerances dimension num num inch nominal size inclusive num num inch nominal size nominal diameter of hole num num num num nominal outside dimensions num num num num flatness maximum deviation from straightedge placed on cut side shall not exceed num inch num inch burr shall not project above immediately adjacent washer face more than num inch num inch num direct tension indicators use direct tension indicators in accordance with astm f num .
provide test reports for each production lot of a shipment in accordance with astm f num paragraph num .
table num dimensions of direct tension indicators type a num bolt size in outside diameter in no .
of protrusions equally spaced thickness in inside diameter in min .
max .
without protrusions minimum with protrusions maximum min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num testing and test reports num testing of bolts conduct proof load tests in accordance with astm f num method num .
section num highstrength bolts page num conduct wedge tests on full size bolts in accordance with astm f num paragraph num .
perform tests on galvanized bolts after galvanizing .
ensure that the minimum testing frequency is in accordance with aashto m num paragraph num astm a num .
measure zinc coating thickness on galvanized bolts on the wrench flats or bolt head tops .
num testing of nuts proof load test in accordance with astm f num paragraph num .
ensure that the minimum testing frequency is in accordance with aashto m num paragraph num astm a num .
test galvanized nuts after overtapping galvanizing and lubricating .
num testing of washers test galvanized washers for hardness after galvanizing .
remove the coating before conducting the hardness tests .
num testing of assemblies provide the manufacturers or distributors rotational capacity test results on bolt nut and washer assemblies .
use washers in the test even if washers are not used in the assembly on the project .
test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
unless required by the installation procedures do not include washers in the lot identification .
assign a rotational capacity lot number to each lot combination tested .
the minimum testing frequency is two num assemblies per rotational capacity lot .
num procedure for rotational capacity tests for long bolts test bolts long enough to test in a tension calibrator in accordance with the following procedures num .
mark the calibrator face plate with lines at vertical and at num num and num num of a turn clockwise from vertical num .
use a calibrated torque wrench num .
use spacers with a hole size no larger than num inch larger than the bolt to be tested num .
mount the bolt calibrator on a steel frame or section such as a flange or a cross frame .
num .
put the nut on the bolt .
measure from the end of the threaded shank to the underside of the bolt head when there are num to num full threads of the bolt between the bearing face of the nut and the bolt head num .
put the bolt in the tension calibrator and install the required number of shim plates and washers needed to produce the measurement from step num always install one num washer under the nut num .
snug tighten the bolt with a hand wrench to the tension listed in table num snug tight tension do not exceed two num kips more than that value section num highstrength bolts page num table num snug tight tension bolt diameter in installation tension minimum kip num num num num num num ⅞ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
match mark the nut to the vertical line on the bolt calibrator faceplate num .
using the calibrated manual torque wrench tighten the bolt to at least the tension listed in table num installation tension .
measure and record the torque and the tension generated simultaneously with that torque .
measure torque with the nut in motion table num installation tension bolt diameter in snug tension minimum kip num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
calculate the torque in accordance with the following equation num d t v num where v is the calculated torque value t is the measured tension in pounds d is the bolt diameter in feet record the calculated value .
the measured torque values must equal or be less than the calculated torque .
assemblies with measured torque values exceeding this calculated value fail the test .
num .
for assemblies passing step num further tighten the bolt to the rotation listed in table num required rotation .
measure the rotation from the vertical line to the initial match marking in step num .
record the bolt tension .
table num required rotation bolt length l measured in step num required rotation turns section num highstrength bolts page num table num required rotation bolt length l measured in step num required rotation turns l numd num numd l numd num l numd num num note d bolt diameter .
assemblies that fail before completing the required rotation by stripping or fracture fail the test .
bolt tension measured at the required rotation must equal or exceed the values in table num minimum tension requirements .
assemblies that do not meet this tension fail .
table num minimum tension requirements bolt diameter in tension minimum kip num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
loosen and remove nut and examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
assemblies showing evidence of thread shear failure stripping or torsion failure fail .
num procedure for rotational capacity test for short bolts test bolts that are too short for a tension calibrator in accordance with these procedures equipment requirements num .
a calibrated torque wrench and a spud wrench num .
spacers with a hole size no larger than num inch greater than the tested bolt num .
a steel section with a normal size hole to install bolt .
any available splice hole with plate thicknesses that will provide the number of threads under the nut required in step num of the following procedures is acceptable .
the procedure is as follows num mark the steel section with lines at vertical and at num num and num num of a turn clockwise from vertical num put the nut on the bolt .
measure the bolt length and the distance from the end of the threaded shank to the underside of the bolt head when there are three num to five num full threads of the bolt between the bearing face of the nut and the bolt head .
num .
put the bolt in the hole and install the required number of shim plates to produce the thread stickout measured in step num .
always install one num washer under the nut .
num .
snug using a hand wrench .
do not exceed num of the torque determined in step num of this procedure .
section num highstrength bolts page num num .
match mark the nut to the vertical line on the steel section .
num .
tighten the bolt using the torque wrench by turning the nut to the rotation listed in table num initial required rotation .
use a second wrench to prevent bolt head rotation during tightening .
record the torque required to reach this rotation .
measure torque with the nut in motion .
table num initial required rotation bolt length l measured in step num required rotation turns l numd num numd l numd num l numd num note d bolt diameter .
assemblies that exceed the torque values listed in table num torque requirements fail .
table num torque requirements bolt diameter in torque footpounds maximum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
for assemblies that pass step num further tighten the bolt to the rotation required in table num final rotation requirements .
measure the rotation from the vertical line to the initial match marking in step num .
table num final rotation requirements bolt length l measured in step num required rotation turns l numd num numd l numd num l numd num num note d bolt diameter .
num .
loosen and remove nut and examine the threads on the nut and the bolt .
assemblies showing evidence of thread shear failure stripping or torsional failure fail the test .
num reporting provide notarized manufacturer and distributor ctr and mtr for mill steel used to manufacture bolts nuts and washers .
indicate the steel melting and manufacture location in the mtr .
section num highstrength bolts page num show test results including zinc coating thicknesses in the ctr .
show test performance locations and test dates in the ctr .
num manufacturer ctr provide ctrs from the bolt nut and washer manufacturers that include the following num .
lot numbers of each item tested num .
rotational capacity test results rotational capacity lot numbers and individual lot numbers of the items tested if performed by the manufacturer num .
results of all other required tests and num .
locations where the bolt assembly components were manufactured .
num distributor ctr provide ctr from the bolt nut and washer distributors that include num .
documentation required in section num manufacturer ctr num .
rotational capacity test results rotational capacity lot number and individual lot numbers of the items tested if performed by the distributor num .
a statement that the manufacturers ctr represents the same items .
num sampling and testing by the department before installation the project manager will select two num bolt nut and hardened washer assemblies from each rotational capacity lot and at least three num directtension indicators with accompanying bolts nuts and hardened washers for each diameter and grade of fastener for testing by the state materials bureau .
num shipping ship bolts nuts and washers from each rotational capacity lot in the same container .
if there is only one num production lot number for each size of nut washer and direct tension indicator the contractor may ship the nuts washers and direct tension indicators in separate containers .
permanently mark each container with the rotational capacity lot number .
num construction requirements the contractor shall fabricate materials it shall connect with highstrength bolts in accordance with section num steel structures .
blast clean steel faying surfaces in accordance with sspcsp num .
ensure that the bolted part surfaces adjacent to the bolt head and nut are parallel within the num degrees for parallel surface rolled steel members .
use beveled washers on surfaces with more than a num slope for proper seating .
use bolted parts that fit solidly together when assembled .
do not use gaskets or other flexible material .
erect joints and splices with cylindrical erection pins and bolts in accordance with section num steel structures .
use highstrength bolts instead of erection bolts if necessary .
these can be left in place provided they are not loosened and retightened .
num installation of bolts ensure that bolt nut and washer combinations are from the same rotational capacity lot .
section num highstrength bolts page num num lubrication ensure that black bolts are oily to the touch when delivered and installed .
clean and relubricate weathered or rusted bolts and nuts before installation .
retest recleaned or relubricated bolt nut and washer assemblies .
before installing galvanized nuts inspect the nuts to ensure the threads are properly lubricated .
if lubricant is not visible or if tensioning indicates that thread friction is too high apply an approved lubricant to the remaining threads before installation .
num method of installation install bolts in accordance with figure num installation details .
in general use method i .
use method num and method num as approved by the department where bolt entry wrench clearances or inspection procedures make method i impossible .
prevent the stationary element from turning .
for oversized or slotted holes place additional hardened washers between the bolted material and the fastener .
wherever practical place the nut where it is not visible from the traveled way .
when one end of a bolted assembly is embedded in concrete place the assembly so the nut end is in the concrete .
when tightening connections involving several bolts draw together plies of the steel by snugging the bolts before starting the tightening operations .
on connections involving a large number of bolts or thick materials tighten the bolts to the point where the directtension indicators are partially compressed .
in some cases proper tensioning of the bolts may require more than a single cycle of systematic partial tightening before final tightening to deform the directtension indicators to the specified gap .
ensure that the final gap between the bolt head and the directtension indicator is less than or equal to num in for method i and less than or equal to num in for method num or method num .
section num highstrength bolts page num figure num installation details ensure that galvanized bolt assembly direct tension indicator gap for all three num methods is less than or equal to num inch .
use method num or method num for galvanized bolt assemblies only after receiving department approval .
num inspection the department will visually inspect every bolt for gaps .
the department will also check at least ten percent num of the bolts but not less than two num bolts in each connection using feeler gauges as described in the direct tension indicator manufacturers instructions and in astm f num .
if the inspections indicate improper installation the project manager may reject the assemblies .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will pay for high strength bolts as a part of structural steel tonnage in accordance with section num steel structures .
section num metal railing page num section num metal railing num description this work consists of providing and placing metal railing .
num materials num steel railings unless otherwise shown in the contract provide railing in accordance with astm a num or aashto m num grade num .
provide square or rectangular tube steel in accordance with astm a num grade b or astm a num .
provide black seamless steel pipe in accordance with astm a num .
hydrostatic testing is not required .
num bolts num anchor bolts provide anchor bolts in accordance with aashto m num astm a num astm a num astm f num or fabricate alternatively from aisi cnum or aisi cnum steel bar .
hot dip galvanized anchor bolts in accordance with aashto m num or mechanically galvanize in accordance with aashto m num class num .
provide heavy hex nuts in accordance with astm a num grade dh .
provide washers in accordance with astm f num .
num connection bolts .
provide connection bolts in accordance with astm a num grade a connection nuts in accordance with astm a num grade a connection washers in accordance with astm f num unless otherwise noted on the plans or standard drawings .
ensure that bolt dimensions are in accordance with ansi b num and nut dimensions are in accordance with ansi b num .
ensure washer dimensions and tolerances are in accordance with section num .
num caulking compound use a caulking that is a single component cold applied nonsagging compound with a silicone or a synthetic chemically curing type rubber base in accordance with federal specifications ttsnum a or ttsnum c. num construction requirements fabricate weld and erect railing in accordance with section num steel structures .
for purposes of impact testing the department considers steel bridge railings and posts as main members .
submit railing shop drawings and erection plans in accordance with section num shop and erection drawings .
num erection tolerances for a bridge on a tangent ensure the railing is visually straight .
in general ensure that the railing does not deviate more than num inch within num horizontal feet .
for a bridge on a curve do not deviate more than num inch from the curve within num horizontal feet .
section num metal railing page num ensure the rail posts are plumb within num inch over the full height .
num protective coating when the contract specifies the railing to be colored powder coat the railing in accordance with section num protective coatings of miscellaneous structural steel unless otherwise specified in the contract .
when the contract specifies railing to be galvanized galvanize in accordance with aashto m num .
num cutting rail posts bevel cut posts to compensate for roadway grade crown and superelevation .
if the roadway grade is less than or equal to one percent num fabricate rail posts perpendicular to the grade line but bevel cut crown and superelevation where necessary .
num caulking rail post base plates before placing rail posts into position on a bridge deck apply a full circle bead of caulking compound on the deck surface around each of the anchor bolts .
after erecting and coating the bridge railing apply a bead of caulking compound around the perimeter of each railpost base plate .
clean the deck surface and the surface of the railpost anchor plates before applying the caulking compound .
num method of measurement the department will measure in place metal railing from end to end .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit metal railing foot num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. submittals nondestructive testing protective coatings b .
additional weight of heavier sections provided solely for the contractors convenience and c. all incidentals necessary for the completion of the work .
section num protective coating of new structural steel page num section num protective coating of new structural steel num description this work consists of applying steel coating materials .
refer to section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel for powder coating .
num materials num coating system select a complete system from the .
north east protective coating nepcoat qualified products list provide a three num coat system for all new structural steel .
if the contract does not specify a color use a light gray or aluminum color .
num submittals provide a submittal for the proposed coating option and manufacturer to the project manager at least num days before coating operations .
if the color varies from the specified color the contractor may submit color samples on boards at least eight num inches by ten num inches for review and approval .
the department may take random coating materials samples during the work for testing .
num certification after the department approves the coating material submit notarized manufacturers certificates of compliance stating that the materials are the same as those described in the manufacturers product data sheets .
submit two num notarized certificates of compliance to the department .
num product data sheets provide manufacturers product data sheets and msds with each material certificate of compliance that shows the following num .
mixing and thinning directions num .
recommended spray nozzles and pressures num .
minimum drying time for shop or field applied coats and num .
manufacturer recommended application procedures .
num zinc coatings mechanically galvanize position dowels and anchor bolts in accordance with astm b num class num or hotdip galvanize in accordance with aashto m num .
galvanize bearing parts not welded to structural members in accordance with aashto m num .
blast clean fabricated bearing components before galvanizing .
after steel erection coat galvanized hardware with an epoxy topcoat and a protective coat .
num construction requirements during the coating operations protect structures from blast cleaning operations paint splatter splashes and smirches with protective covering or other methods approved by the project manager .
when the protective devices or procedures are ineffective the project manager may suspend the work until corrections take place .
section num protective coating of new structural steel page num remove blasting and coating debris before reopening the area to traffic .
num surface preparation for priming remove oil grease and other contaminants with methods specified in sspcsp i or other departmentapproved methods .
blastclean the surfaces in preparation for coating in accordance with sspcsp num .
ensure to clean corners pockets reentrant angles splice plates and bolted or riveted connection plates .
remove fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges found during the blast cleaning operation .
grind and reblast the area to achieve a num mil to num mil surface profile .
use only scaling hammers to remove heavy scale .
do not use chipping hammers that excessively scar the metal .
use blastcleaning abrasives such as dry sand steel shot mineral grit or manufactured grit .
ensure that the abrasives produce a uniform profile from num mil to num mil with an angular pattern as measured in accordance with astm dnum standard test method for pulloff strength of coatings using portable adhesion testers .
use of testex replica tape is common .
remove abrasive and paint residue from steel surfaces with vacuum cleaner equipped with a brushtype cleaning tool or by double blowing .
when using the doubleblowing method vacuum the top surfaces of structural steel after completing the doubleblowing operations .
keep the steel dust free and prime within num h after blast cleaning .
use a wire brush on blast damaged or rusted surfaces and reblast in accordance with sspcsp num .
num coating preparation num mixing coatings mix coatings using a high shear mixer .
do not use paddle mixers or paint shakers .
mix the coatings as much as possible in the original containers .
strain coatings through a no .
num sieve in accordance with aashto m num .
agitate mixed primers continuously from straining to application .
num thinning coatings do not thin the coating material without department approval .
num temperature and weather limitations apply the coating when the air and surface temperatures are above num f and at least num f above the dew point .
apply the coatings when the relative humidity is num or lower .
apply inorganic zinc primers when the relative humidity is num or higher unless otherwise specified by the coating manufacturer .
num coating applications do not apply coatings until the department approves the surface preparation .
the department may waive this approval .
section num protective coating of new structural steel page num have a coating manufacturer representative present to provide technical assistance at the start of each coating operation .
apply the more stringent requirements between those of the coating manufacturer and those in this specification .
vacuum the steel after priming or top coating before applying subsequent coats .
scrub with a mild detergent solution and rinse with water before applying the coating if any of the following conditions exist num .
vacuuming is ineffective num .
more than three num weeks have elapsed since priming the steel or num .
the surface is unfit for further coating .
if more than num days pass between coats completely blast clean the surfaces in accordance with sspcsp num before coating at no additional cost to the department .
num required coatings coat new structural steel components with a zinc rich primer an epoxy topcoat and a urethane protective coat .
apply a urethane protective coat on the following num .
surfaces exposed to sunlight num .
the bottom and outside surfaces of fascia girders including the bottom of the outside top flange num .
the outside surface of the web num .
the top of the outside bottom flange num .
the outside edge of the bottom flange num .
the bottom of the bottom flange and num .
exterior stiffeners .
coat bridge railings in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
num coating options use one num of the following coating options num .
apply the primer topcoat and protective coat in the shop or num .
apply the prime coat in the shop and the topcoat and the protective coat in the field .
num spray equipment apply coatings with spray nozzles at pressures recommended by the coating system manufacturer .
use conventional or airless spray systems to apply the coatings .
when applying field coating of bolted connections use conventional spray equipment .
num film thickness requirements the department will reject the coating if the tooke or banana gauge shows less than the specified minimum thickness for any coating .
provide coating thicknesses in accordance with table num required film thicknesses .
section num protective coating of new structural steel page num table num required film thicknesses coating dry film thickness range mils primer num to num topcoat num to num urethane protective coat num to num determine the dry film thickness using magnetic film thickness gauges .
calibrate the gauges on blasted steel with plastic shims approximately the same thickness as the minimum dry film thickness .
the contractor may use a tooke film thickness gauge to verify coating thickness with the departments approval .
num primer application do not apply primers over blasted steel that has begun to rust or bloom .
apply primer in a smooth wet continuous film .
adjust the spray equipment to apply an even wet coat with minimal overspray .
hold the spray gun at right angles to the surface making even parallel passes with about a num overlap .
apply the primer in two num or more wet coats avoiding heavy coats .
remove dry overspray with light sanding .
prespray edges welds bends and other areas that will likely fail to meet the minimum thickness .
repair deficiently primed areas in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the inspector .
prime coat structural steel surfaces except as noted in section num bolted and welded connections .
give steel bridge sole plates one num coat of zinc rich primer .
maskoff strips where sole plates will be welded to beam flanges and surfaces that will be in contact with elastomeric bearing pads .
after welding apply a primer touchup to the welded areas .
num bolted and welded connections blast clean faying contact surfaces in accordance with sspcsp num and leave uncoated for bolting .
make uncoated areas slightly larger than the contact areas to ensure that the bolted connections clamp down only on the blastcleaned material and not on painted surfaces .
mask off faying areas to protect them from rust during hauling and storage .
apply a rust prohibitor to the faying surfaces or coat the faying areas with a class b primer slip coefficient equal to or greater than num .
the department will approve the rust prohibitor or class b primer .
before bolting remove the rust prohibitor .
do not remove class b primers before bolting unless required .
immediately before bolting ensure the exposed connection areas are in accordance with sspcsp num .
apply the complete coating system to these surfaces after erection .
maskoff coating systems at connections to leave neat lines between the connections and previously coated areas .
after blast cleaning maskoff field weld areas before applying the primer and topcoats .
after field welding clean the welded areas in accordance with sspcsp num and apply the coating system .
section num protective coating of new structural steel page num apply the topcoats on bolted field connections after placing the deck .
num topcoat application after cleaning and before applying the coating system mask opposite sides of the diaphragms and stiffeners over areas that the direct tension indicators will bear on .
do not coat these areas until after erection and bolt tightening .
before applying the topcoat tie coat the galvanized components using manufacturers recommended tie coat material .
apply with a brush .
the project manager will inspect the primed surfaces before the contractor applies the topcoat .
do not apply the topcoat to the following structural steel surfaces num .
faying surfaces of bolted connections section num bolted and welded connections num .
the top flange top surfaces of beams girders or diaphragms to be embedded in concrete num .
bearing surfaces resting on concrete substructures or are subject to sliding and rotational movement and num .
bearing surfaces in contact with elastomeric bearing pads .
spray the topcoat with multiple spray gun passes .
apply a mist coat on the primer .
pre spray edges welds bends and other areas likely to be under the minimum thickness requirements .
apply full wet cross coats separated by a few minutes if necessary to achieve the desired film build with minimal surface bubbling .
on weld seams bolt heads and flange joints it may be necessary to brush thinnedout material to avoid bridging and to fill cracks and crevasses .
num urethane protective coat application apply the urethane protective coat after the topcoat has cured .
apply urethane protective coat in accordance with section num required coatings .
num handling steel protect uncoated faying surfaces to minimize corrosion during shipping and storage .
store structural steel on pallets so it does not rest on dirt .
store beams and girders in an upright as erected position .
use softeners to insulate steel from chains .
pad hooks and stings for hoisting steel .
space parts during shipment so that no rubbing occurs .
use rubber rollers soft support pads or other protective devices on equipment support members or fasteners resting on or attached to newly coated surfaces .
num inspection notify the department at least num days before coating to allow adequate time to plan inspection activities .
after completing erection the project manager will inspect the surfaces to be embedded in concrete .
repair damaged or rusted surfaces before placing decks .
section num protective coating of new structural steel page num after placing the deck and at an agreed upon time the project manager will inspect the entire steel structure for coating system damage .
the project manager will mark damaged areas for repair and will reinspect after repairs are complete .
num final operations num final cleaning clean the steel structure bearings and bridge seat tops after completing coating activities .
num stenciling at the completion of coating operations stencil in four num inch high black letters on the inside of the fascia girders at two num locations designated by the project manager num .
the completion month and year num .
the term section num and num .
the coating manufacturer .
make the markings with the same material used for the urethane protective coats .
example numsection num excel coatings num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will pay for the coating system as incidental to structural steel in accordance with section num steel structures .
section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel page num section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel num description this work consists of coating new steel bridge railing drop inlet grates cattle guards field coating of new steel piling and other miscellaneous structural steel .
num coating options apply the primer and topcoat in the shop .
new metal bridge railing and pedestrian railing shall be powder coated or galvanized .
num terminology and standards use terminology in accordance with the definitions in volume num systems and specifications of sspcs steel structures painting manual .
use the sspcsp designation when referring to standards specified in the society for protective coatings specifications sspcsp .
num materials num coating system obtain primer and topcoat from one num manufacturer .
select a coating system from the north east protective coating nepcoat qualified products list . .
provide a numcoat system for all miscellaneous structural steel .
use aluminum or light gray for the topcoat color unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num submittals certification and sampling see section num submittals section num certification and section num product data sheets .
num zinc coatings mechanically galvanize position dowels and anchor bolts for bridge railing and bearings in accordance with astm b num class num or hotdip galvanize these items in accordance with aashto m num .
galvanize the portions of bearings not welded to structural members and parts requiring zinc coats in accordance with aashto m num .
num powder coatings obtain primer and topcoat from one num manufacturer .
select a coating system from the departments approved products list .
use light gray for the topcoat color unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num primer use a primer that is zinc rich and a specially formulated thermoset epoxy powder coating designed for use over ferrous metal substrates corvel zinc rich gray num or and approved equal .
num topcoat use a topcoat that is a polyester powder coating designed to provide for maximum uv exposure protection corvel tgic polyester ansi num gray or and approved equal .
num submittals certification and sampling section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel page num see section num submittals section num certification and section num product data sheets .
num construction requirements num surface preparation remove contaminants in accordance with sspcsp i or other methods approved by the project manager .
blast clean in accordance with sspcsp num commercial blast cleaning .
remove cleaning residue from steel surfaces with a commercial grade vacuum cleaner or by double blowing .
when double blowing vacuum the top surfaces of structural steel after finishing .
ensure the interiors of rail tubes are free of blasting debris .
maintain the steel dust free and primed for eight num h after blast cleaning .
reclean rusted or contaminated surfaces at no additional cost to the department .
mask areas that require field welding before coating .
after priming the steel clean again before applying the topcoat .
num mixing the coating mix the coating with a high shear mixer to a smooth and lumpfree consistency in accordance with the coating manufacturers specifications .
mix the coating as much as possible in the original containers and continue mixing until the metallic powder or pigment is in suspension .
keep mixed primers continuously agitated before and during application .
num thinning the coating do not thin the coatings without the approval of the project manager .
if it is necessary to thin the coatings thin the material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num temperature and weather limitations only apply the coatings when the ambient air temperature and surface temperature of the steel are both above num f and at least five num f above the dew point .
do not apply the coatings when there is condensation or frost on the metal surfaces .
do not apply the coatings when the relative humidity is higher than num percent .
num coating applications do not apply coating until the department approves the surface preparation .
the department may waive this inspection .
coat in accordance with sspcpa num .
prespray areas that are likely to not achieve the minimum coating thickness when the larger areas are sprayed .
repair coated areas where the primer or topcoat runs sags or cracks .
section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel page num do not apply the topcoat until the primer has fully cured .
allow the manufacturers minimum recommended cure time to lapse between coats .
if more than num days elapse between the primer application and the topcoat application contact the coating system manufacturer for surface preparation recommendations before applying the topcoat .
apply the more stringent requirements between those of the coating manufacturer and those in this specification .
the department may accept minor cosmetic defects in ground level miscellaneous structural steel components not in public view if the defects will not affect durability .
num required coating of components apply the primer and topcoat to steel surfaces except those that will contact elastomeric bearing pads or are subject to sliding and rotational movements .
coat new steel piling from the bottoms of the pier caps to two num ft below the finished grade or streambed elevations .
num coating of sole plates for concrete bridges deliver sole plates to the project with one num coat of primer applied to all surfaces except maskedoff strips where the sole plates will be welded to the shoe plates and surfaces that will contact elastomeric bearing pads .
before installation clean surfaces that will contact pads in accordance with sspcsp num .
clean off all rust on sole plates prior to installing and welding .
after installing the pads and welding the sole plates to the shoe plates touch up the primer and apply topcoat to exposed surfaces .
num coating of galvanized components apply tie coats to galvanized components in accordance with the coating manufacturers recommendations .
brush the tie coats if necessary .
after erecting the steel topcoat the galvanized hardware .
num spray equipment apply the coatings with spray nozzles at the manufacturerrecommended pressures .
num film thickness requirements apply coatings in accordance with table num required film thicknesses .
table num required film thicknesses coating dry film thickness range mils primer num topcoat num use a magnetic film thickness gage or an electronic film thickness detector to determine dry film thickness .
num coating of powder coated components section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel page num prepare the surfaces in accordance with section num surface preparation and additionally an iron or zinc phosphate wash shall be included to provide longterm corrosion protection .
num primer application apply the zinc rich epoxy primer to a minimum of num mils dry film thickness and leave in the oven long enough for the powder to melt flow out and gel but not to cure .
num topcoat application apply the polyester topcoat to a minimum of num mils dry film thickness before the primer has cured .
num fixturing suspend the materials by suitable metal hooks or fixtures to provide a sufficient electrical grounding path for the materials .
affix the materials with a minimum of direct contact area with the fixture device .
num curing place the powdercoated material in a suitable oven and cure per the manufacturers recommended cure cycle .
remove the material from the oven and allow to cool .
visually inspect the material to ensure a smooth continuous uniform finish free from runs sags or defects .
num touchup painting touchup areas of the material that were not powder coated with a liquid paint using a brush or aerosol of the same color as the original powder coating .
touchup epoxy powder coating with an epoxy liquid paint meeting military specification milcnum .
touchup polyester powder coating with a urethane liquid paint meeting military specification milc num .
num handling steel handle or load newly coated structural steel only with a cured coating .
store on pallets or in other approved ways so that the steel does not rest on dirt .
insulate steel from binding chains with approved softeners .
hoist with padded hooks and slings .
space parts during shipment to ensure that no rubbing occurs .
num provisions for inspection notify the department at least num working days before coating to allow time to plan an inspection .
num field repair field repair coated areas that are rusted or damaged .
clean the surface with methods approved by the project manager .
blast clean large areas in accordance with sspcsp num .
use power tools with abrasive disks to clean small areas .
apply both coats on areas that rusted or experienced fullthickness damage .
prime large areas using spray equipment brush or roller .
prime small areas with a brush .
spray or brush the topcoat .
section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel page num two num or more coats may be necessary to build up the required film thickness .
apply topcoat only to areas where the topcoat is damaged .
requirements of section num apply to field repairs .
num protection of the work and public protect structures during coating operations with a protective covering or with other methods approved by the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will pay for the coating system as incidental to structural steel in accordance with section num steel structures .
section num recoating structures page num section num recoating structures num description this work consists of cleaning and recoating exposed structural steel .
num materials num coating system provide a coat system from a single manufacturer .
select an approved system from the north east protective coating nepcoat qualified products list m which will become the departments approved products list for recoating structures .
use aluminum or light gray as the topcoat color unless otherwise specified in the contract .
if another color is specified in the contract select an approved system that is also available in the specified color .
num submittals and certification notify the department of the chosen coating system at least num days before coating .
include color samples on eight num inches by ten num inches panels in this notification .
submit notarized certificates of compliance from the coating manufacturer verifying the materials described in the departments approved products list and the manufacturers data sheets .
submit one num notarized certificate of compliance to the project manager and one num to the state bridge engineer .
submit certificates on the departments form sheets .
num product data sheets manufacturers product data sheets and msds will accompany each material certificate of compliance .
the product data sheets will indicate the mixing and thinning directions the recommended spray nozzles and pressures and the minimum drying time .
num certification after the department approves the coating material submit notarized manufacturers certificates of compliance stating that the materials are the same as those described in the departments approved products list and the manufacturers product data sheets .
submit two num notarized certificates of compliance to the department .
num construction requirements num surface preparation of existing bridges and structures num solvent sspcsp num and handtool sspcspnum cleaning clean exposed areas in accordance with sspcsp num .
the project manager may approve scrubbing with water and a mild detergent to supplement solvent cleaning .
clean small areas showing minor damage or deterioration with handtools in accordance with sspcsp num or with powertools in accordance with sspcsp num .
contain and remove cleaning debris .
num powertool cleaning to bare metal sspcsp num clean large corroded areas and areas that show moderate to severe corrosion in accordance with sspcsp num powertool cleaning to bare metal .
the project manager will mark additional areas for cleaning in accordance with sspcsp num .
clean at least two num inches beyond the damaged areas in all directions .
section num recoating structures page num feather the exposed edges of the cleaned areas in accordance with sspcsp num .
do not leave ragged edges of intact paint .
during and after powertool cleaning use a high efficiency vacuum to remove the residue .
the department will accept these surfaces by visually comparing them to a prepared standard on the project .
prepare a project standard by powertool cleaning an area designated for recoating .
before cleaning ensure that the prepared standard is in accordance with sspcvis num visual standard for power and handtool cleaned steel pictorial standard e sp num f sp num and g sp num and obtain department approval .
prepare at least one num standard for each structure .
more than one num standard may be necessary if the cleaned steel differs significantly from the photographic standards .
for recoating bridges make the standard at least one num ft one num ft. for recoating bridge railing or minor structures the standard may be smaller .
protect the project standard from corrosion and contamination by applying a clear polyurethane coat .
upon completing the cleaning work reclean and coat the standard .
if the standard becomes deteriorated or ineffective reestablish it at no additional cost to the department .
when replacing a concrete bridge deck do not clean or coat the top surfaces of top flanges of beams and girders and shear connectors .
num powertool sspcsp num cleaning remove poorly adhering topcoats .
roughen the primer surface with powertools in accordance with sspcsp num .
the department will accept results in accordance with sspc sp num brushoff blast cleaning .
clean large areas of the structure with a powertool sspcsp num to remove topcoats that adhere poorly in accordance with the plans or as directed by the project manager .
ensure the final prepared surface is free of poorly adhering paint oil grease dust loose mill scale and loose rust .
tightly adhering paint mill scale and rust may remain .
use powertools with attached vacuum systems capable of containing the resulting dust .
maintain airborne dusts and leadcontaining residues below the osha action level .
num coating num mixing the coatings mix the coatings with a highshear mixer in accordance with the coating manufacturers directions until the material is smooth and lumpfree .
do not use paddle mixers or paint shakers .
mix the material as far as possible in its original container and continue mixing until the metallic powder or pigment is in suspension .
thoroughly disperse the coating solids that may have settled to the bottom of the container .
continuously agitate mixed coatings until application .
num thinning the coating do not thin the coatings without the approval of the project manager .
if it is necessary to thin the coatings thin the material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num coating application apply the primer and topcoat with a brush roller or by spraying preferred .
use nozzles and pressures in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
prespray or prebrush corners edges bolt and rivet heads and nuts to ensure adequate film thickness .
section num recoating structures page num perform coating in accordance with sspcpa num .
num temperature and weather limitations num temperature apply the coating when the air and surface temperatures are above num f and at least num f above the dew point .
do not apply coatings on metal surfaces with condensation or frost .
num humidity do not apply the coatings when the relative humidity is above num .
if the relative humidity is below num follow the manufacturers coating directions to ensure proper curing .
num priming before priming use a commercial grade vacuum equipped with a brushtype cleaning tool to remove deleterious material .
do not double blow .
the department will approve areas cleaned in accordance with sspcsp num sspcsp num sspcsp num or sspcsp num before application of the primer or topcoat .
prime coat all surfaces .
apply primer the same day as cleaning unless otherwise authorized by the project manager .
reclean surfaces that develop rust or are contaminated with deleterious material before coating at no additional cost to the department .
num topcoat vacuum the surface before applying the topcoat .
if vacuuming is ineffective or if in the project manager determines the surface is unfit for top coating scrub with a mild detergent and rinse with water before top coating .
ensure the primer is cured and dry before applying the topcoat .
allow the manufacturers recommended maximum time to lapse between coats .
num thickness of coatings refer to the nepcoat qualified products list m for the required thicknesses of the coatings .
determine dry film thicknesses with magnetic or electronic film thickness gauges .
num protection of the work and public during surface preparation and coating operations protect structures with protective covering or other methods approved by the project manager .
if the protective devices or procedures are ineffective the project manager may suspend work until corrections are complete .
num final operations recaulk railing post base plate perimeters with silicon or synthetic rubber caulking compounds in accordance with federal specifications ttsnuma or ttsnumc .
num method of measurement the project manager will measure cleaned areas in accordance with sspcsp num and section num recoating structures page num sspcsp num before the application of the prime coat .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit recoating structures lump sum sp num power tool cleaning and priming square foot sp num power tool cleaning and priming square foot num work included in payment the following items will be considered as included in the payment for recoating structures and will not be measured and paid for separately a .
cleaning all exposed areas of existing steel members in accordance with sspcsp num and sspcsp num b .
spot priming of small areas cleaned by handtool or at the option of the contractor powertool methods c. sspcsp num powertool cleaning and priming of those areas designated in the contract to be so included in the lump sum price .
d. sspcsp num powertool cleaning and priming of those areas designated in the contract to be so included in the lump sum price e. furnishing and applying the primer and topcoat to all exposed steel surfaces of the structure f. final cleanup of the structure and the immediate area and g. recaulking the perimeters of all railing post base plates .
section num safety and environmental requirements for painting operations page num section num safety and environmental requirements for painting operations num description this work consists of providing safety and environmental precautions for paint removal and painting operations .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num general safety and protection requirements follow the guidelines recommended in sspcpa guide num a guide to safety in paint application .
comply with the following general requirements from num cfr part num the new mexico hazardous waste management regulations num nmac num hazardous waste management and the sspcpa guide num .
these general requirements include but are not limited to the following num .
safety nets numincluding safety nets beneath the immediate work areas that are more than num ft above the ground or water surfaces num .
life lines numb and num num .
rigging sspcpa guide num section num num .
ladders and scaffolding num and num num .
guardrails handrails and covers num num .
sanitation num num and num num .
medical services and first aid num num .
eye and face protection num and num num .
noise protection num num .
personal protective equipment numg and sspcpa guide num section num num .
tools equipment num num num num num num .
respirators num num and num num .
compressed air num and num .
protection of workers from lead num .
num verification of compliance comply with the requirements of num cfr num and maintain records that verify compliance .
providing documentation to the department does not relieve the contractor of safety obligations .
the department will not assume responsibility for contractor noncompliance .
to assist compliance verification submit the following to the project manager num .
a copy of the written compliance program as required by num cfr numenum at least two num weeks before beginning surface preparation num .
a description of the exposure assessment process including identification of monitoring methods and documentation establishing the accuracy of those methods num .
a report on the results of the assessment program and summary of measures to protect the workers num .
the name of the person who will make job site inspections with documentation establishing that persons competency num .
medical surveillance data on workers who will be exposed to lead levels above the action level .
include results of initial testing or such historical data that establishes section num safety and environmental requirements for painting operations page num the persons suitability for the assigned task .
define the required schedule for additional testing .
also submit additional testing conducted during the duration of the operation that requires it num .
a certification stating that the employee training required by num cfr num was conducted .
submit the certification before commencement of paint removal and surface preparation operations and identify the trained workers .
if additional workers are later assigned these tasks submit certification for each additional worker before participation in the work .
num provisions for department employees provide respirators protective clothing and equipment and medical surveillance required by num cfr num for two num department employees to inspect the paint removal and surface preparation operations .
num environmental requirements contain waste material generated from paint removal and surface preparation operations within the work area .
num waste containment ensure that levels of air pollution and soil and water contamination resulting from surface preparations for coating in accordance with section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibilities to the public .
provide containment structures in accordance with sspc guide num .
estimate debris containment efficiency by using the weigh in weigh out method described in sspc guide num section num .
num collection collect paint removal and surface preparation debris and remove it from the project in accordance with sspc guide num .
num disposal dispose of paint removal and surface preparation debris in accordance with num nmac num hazardous waste management and sspc guide num which is the primary reference document for waste disposal .
if there is a conflict between num nmac num hazardous waste management and sspc guide num num nmac num hazardous waste management takes precedence .
num air quality and soil contamination if required by the contract monitor air quality and soil conditions at representative locations before blast cleaning or preparing the surface in accordance with section num of sspc guide num .
use the results to determine background air quality and lead contamination in the soil surrounding the construction site during and after coating operations .
num submittals and certification at least num days before beginning paint removal operations submit a complete description of the methods to the project manager for compliance with the environmental requirements including comprehensive plans for containment structures .
submit a certificate to the project manager stating the material was disposed of in accordance with section num disposal within num days of removal .
upon request provide the project manager with documentation verifying compliance .
include information on traceability storage sampling testing shipping or treatment .
section num safety and environmental requirements for painting operations page num num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit safety and environmental requirements lump sum num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately labor tools equipment materials loading hauling monitoring testing means for disposal of debris and other appurtenances necessary to comply with these safety and environmental requirements .
section num treated timber page num section num treated timber num description this work consists of constructing timber structures and the timber portions of composite structures .
num materials num sawn lumber and timber provide sawn lumber and timber in accordance with aashto m num and the national forest products associations national design specification for wood construction .
meet grading rules and design values in accordance with supplement to the national design specifications for wood construction .
num preservatives and treatment methods treat timber with preservatives in accordance with aashto m num .
unless otherwise specified in the contract use pentachlorophenol type c preservative treatment in accordance with awpa pnum and pnum .
num fasteners provide bolts nuts and washers in accordance with astm a num .
provide bolts that have standard square or hex heads and coarse threads with class num tolerances in accordance with ansis standard specifications for bolted connections .
provide washers that bear on timber surfaces in accordance with table num washer dimensions .
table num washer dimensions bolt diameter hole diameter washer diameter washer thickness num num num num num num num num num num num num num num provide shear plates and split ring connectors in accordance with the contract .
the department will not accept connector plates with punchedthrough spikes or nailer plates .
provide shear plates split ring connectors and accompanying washers made of pressed steel or malleable iron in accordance with aitcs timber construction manual .
use nails cut from round wire of standard form .
use cut or wire spikes .
use galvanized metal fasteners in accordance with aashto m num .
tap galvanized nuts oversize after galvanizing in accordance with section num of aashto m numm and section num of aashto m numm .
provide steel plates in accordance with astm anum galvanize in accordance with aashto m num or m num .
num timber and lumber certification provide timber and lumber certified by an american lumber standards committee certified agency .
section num treated timber page num num preservative treatment certification provide a certificate from the treatment facility or an independent inspection agency containing the following num .
preservative type and composition num .
quantity retained in pounds per cubic foot assay method num .
confirmation that specification requirements were met and num .
copies of inspection reports .
num construction requirements num drawings and written procedures submit three num sets of shop and erection drawings to the department .
the department will return one num set with notations .
provide up to eight num sets as required of corrected shop drawings for final approval .
do not begin fabrication before receiving written approval .
ensure the drawings contain a minimum of the following num .
complete details of the structure timber components including the following num .
dimensions num .
details num .
cut bevel and notch locations num .
hole sizes .
num .
hardware details and parts lists for items such as connector plates shear plates splitring connectors lag screws bolts nuts and washers including protective coating requirements num .
timber grade and species num .
preservative treatment type composition and percent retention num .
an erection diagram showing piece marks locations orientations and attachment methods for structure components or pieces and num .
special instructions required regarding structure fabrication or erection .
num fabrication cut and frame lumber and timber so that the joints have an even bearing over the entire contact surfaces .
tag prefabricated members with erection marks for identification and reference them in the erection drawings .
unless otherwise specified fabricate as far ahead of treatment as possible .
num bolt holes unless otherwise specified in the contract bore holes perpendicular to the faces of the members they penetrate .
bore connection holes for one num or two num bolts at the same diameter as the finished bolt except bolt holes which are part of a shear plate or splitring assembly .
bore holes num inch larger than the bolt diameter for bolted connections using more than two num bolts and for bolt holes which are part of a shear plate or splitring assembly .
section num treated timber page num drill holes in connector plates num inch larger than the bolt diameter .
num holes for lag screws for lag screws bore holes with a bit no larger than the minor diameter of the lag screw thread .
to prevent splitting or stripping the threads bore shank holes in the side of the joint containing the thread to the same diameter and to the same depth as the shank .
ensure that holes for the shank in connected parts wood or metal are from num inch to num inch greater than the diameter of the shank .
make the hole depths approximately one num inch less than the length under the head .
num recesses and countersinking countersink when the contract requires a smooth or flush surface .
treat recesses in treated timber formed for shear plates splitring connectors or countersinking in accordance with section num preservative treatment .
num stringers size stringers at bearings and place so that knots near edges are in the top portions of the stringers .
the contractor may construct outside stringers butt joints with the ends dapped or cut on a taper .
unless otherwise specified in the contract overlap interior stringers at each end to take the bearing over the full floor beam or cap width .
num cross bridging toenail wood cross bridging between stringers with at least two num nails in each end .
ensure the cross bridging members have full bearing at each end against the stringer sides .
use metal cross bridging members in accordance with the contract or as approved by the department .
num trusses ensure the following num .
completed trusses show no line irregularities num .
chords are straight and true from end to end in horizontal projection and num .
chords show a smooth curve through panel points in vertical projection .
the department will reject pieces with uneven or rough cuts at the bearing points .
num bolts and washers install washers under bolt heads and nuts unless using a steel plate or strap in conjunction with shear plates .
if necessary use washers to extend the bolt length to prevent metal connection plates from bearing on the threaded portion of the bolt .
num nailing unless otherwise specified drive nails and spikes perpendicular to the surface of the timber with just enough force to set the heads flush with the surface of the wood .
the department may reject surfaces with deep hammer marks considered evidence of poor workmanship .
num preservative treatment section num treated timber page num apply preservative treatment in accordance with awpa unum and tnum .
num marking ensure that each piece of treated timber has a legible brand mark or tag indicating the treatment facility name and the specification symbol or specification requirements identifying the treatment used .
place the brands or marks so that they are not visible after the structure is erected .
num inspection at the treatment plant the contractor is responsible for inspection of materials and preservative treatment .
ensure that inspections are conducted in accordance with aashto m num wpa standards .
the department and the american wood preservers bureau must approve the inspection agencies .
the department may conduct surveillance inspections at any time .
num inspection at the job site the department may retest the materials after delivery to the project .
the department will accept timber within five percent num of specified moisture content and preservative retention .
num handling handle treated timber with web slings .
do not use devices that mar wood surfaces such as cant hooks peaveys and pikes .
if using metal bands to bundle members provide comer protectors to prevent damage to the treated timber .
num storage of material store lumber and timber on the project in orderly stacks .
stack material on supports at least num inches above the ground surface .
keep the ground in the vicinity of the timber cleared of weeds and rubbish .
do not allow water to collect under or near the stored timber .
if required by the project manager provide protection from the weather with a covering .
num erection treat cuts abrasions and recesses that occur after treatment with two num liberal applications of a compatible preservative in accordance with awpa mnum .
treat holes bored after treatment by filling the holes with the preservative used for field treatment .
use preservative treated plugs to plug holes not permanently filled with bolts or screws .
tighten bolts securely but not enough to crush the wood beneath the plates or washers .
the department will reject members that will not assemble after application of reasonable amounts of force .
num method of measurement num treated timber the department will use standard nominal dimensions and actual member lengths in accordance with the contract or approved modifications to measure treated timber .
section num treated timber page num num metal components the department will pay for metal components exclusive of nails and spikes in accordance with section num steel structures .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit treated timber thousand board feet num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for treated timber and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
inspection costs b .
coating of timber structures and c. nails and spikes .
section num elastomeric bearing pads page num section num elastomeric bearing pads num description this work consists of providing assembling and installing elastomeric bridge bearing pads .
num materials num general provide bearing pad material and testing in accordance with the contract and aashtos lrfd bridge construction specification section num .
provide plain or laminated bearing pads reinforced with steel or fabric laminates .
reinforce bearing pads over num inch thick with laminates spaced no greater than num inch apart through the entire thickness .
provide shim thicknesses not less than num inch .
num certification furnish certified laboratory test results on the elastomer properties of compound for both plain and laminated bearings .
the required tests are per aashto m num table num .
for bridges north of inum and including inum the elastomer compound shall be grade num .
for bridges south of inum the elastomer compound shall be grade num .
test shall be done on an annual basis or when the material supplier changes .
provide copies of certified mill test reports for laminated bearing steel and any required steel components .
num marking using indelible ink or paint that will remain intact after pad deformation mark each laminated bearing pad on a face that is visible after bridge erection with the following information num .
order number num .
lot number num .
bearing identification number num .
elastomer type and num .
grade number .
num acceptance criteria the following tests shall be performed on the actual bearing pads .
one num bearing pad per lot shall be tested .
the bearing pad shall be tested per aashto m num section num .
the average compressive load shall be num psi for laminated bearing pads and num psi for plain bearing pads .
the bearing pad shall be tested per aashto m num section num .
where the bearing strain exceeds ten percent num the lot shall be rejected .
if the bearing pad design loads are not shown on the contract drawings the test will not be required .
testing is to be performed by the manufacturer laboratory with the certified test results submitted to nmdot .
num fabrication cast bearing pads with steel laminates as a unit in a mold bonded and vulcanized under heat and pressure .
provide molds with a standard mold finish .
sandblast internal steel laminates to remove surface coating rust and mill scale before bonding .
provide internal steel laminates free of sharp edges and burrs with a minimum edge cover of num inch .
section num elastomeric bearing pads page num manufacture as a single unit bearing pads designed to act as a single unit with a given shape .
the contractor may provide molded or extruded plain bearing pads or fabric reinforced bearings pads vulcanized in large sheets and cut to size .
cut without heating the materials and to produce a smooth finish in accordance with ansi num with no fabric separation from the elastomer .
provide single ply fabric reinforcement at the top and bottom of the reinforced bearings and double ply for internal reinforcement layers .
provide fabric free of folds and ripples and parallel to the top and bottom surfaces .
provide flash tolerances finishes and appearances are in accordance with the current rubber handbook published by the rubber manufacturers association inc. rma fnum and t.num for molded bearings and rma fnum for extruded bearings .
num tolerances build plain and laminated bearing pads in accordance with table num bearing pad tolerances .
table num bearing pad tolerances parameter description tolerance requirements overall vertical thickness num num inch or less over num num inch num inch to num inch num inch to num inch overall horizontal dimensions num inch and less over num inch num inch to num inch num inch to num inch individual layer thickness a num of design value but no more than num inch variations from a plane parallel to the theoretical surface b top c sides num radians num radians position of exposed connection members num inch embedded steel plates edge cover or connection members num in to num inch hole slot or insert sizes num inch hole slot or insert positions num inch aelastomerlaminated bearing pads only .
bas determined by measurements at the bearing edges .
cslope relative to the bottom .
num construction requirements num general ensure bearing pads in the completed structure exhibit a compressive strain of no more than ten percent num .
place bearing pads on level surfaces .
correct misalignments in the support to form a level surface .
do not weld steel girders or base plates to the bearing pad sole plates unless there is section num elastomeric bearing pads page num more than num num inch of steel between the weld and the elastomer .
do not expose the elastomer or elastomer bond to temperatures greater than num f. num method of measurement reserved num basis of payment the furnishing and installing of elastomeric bearing pads will be considered incidental to the completion of the work and no measurement or direct payment will be made therefore .
section num elastomeric compression joint seals page num section num elastomeric compression joint seals num description this work consists of providing and placing elastomeric compression joint seals for bridge decks .
num materials num general provide joint seals that prevent debris and water intrusion through the joint system .
provide preformed open cell seals manufactured with elastomeric polychloroprene material in accordance with aashto m num .
mark the top surface of joint seals .
num dimensional tolerance provide seals in accordance with the contract and manufacturers tolerances .
num splicing provide seals in one continuous strip for each joint .
num lubricant adhesive provide lubricant adhesives in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num submittals provide a submittal to the project manager with the manufacturer name seal type and supplier name within one num month after the contract is awarded .
at least num days before installation submit to the project manager a copy of the manufacturers seal installation recommendations .
num construction requirements num preparing joint recesses install joint seals in prefabricated steel recesses or in recesses saw cut in the concrete .
for saw cut recesses cut the joints narrower than required for the preformed seal material .
before installing compression seals saw cut a groove to receive the seal material along the top of the joint .
simultaneously cut both sides of a groove .
control alignment with a rigid guide .
the department will specify the groove width based on the temperature and age of the concrete .
bevel saw cut lips to prevent subsequent spalling .
repair spalls cracks and protrusions in the joint surface before installing seals .
set prefabricated steel recesses before placing the deck slab .
ensure joint surfaces are free of paint oil scale rust and dust before applying the lubricant adhesive .
num oversized joint openings the contractor may use larger seals for oversized joint openings at no additional cost to the department .
num installation section num elastomeric compression joint seals page num apply the lubricant adhesive to both joint faces before installing the seal .
compress the seal to the thickness required in the contract or as specified by the state bridge engineer for the rated opening and temperature conditions .
the department will not allow loose fits or open points between the seal and the deck concrete or metal armoring .
num replacing joint seals in existing decks if replacing seals in existing bridge decks completely remove the old seals and clean the side surfaces of the openings of all dirt rust and any other deleterious material .
if required modify existing joint components or deck slab openings before installing the replacement seals .
num acceptance after installation test joint seals for leakage by water flooding the joint .
perform testing in the presence of the project manager .
ensure the top edges of the seal are in continuous contact with the sides of the joint opening over the entire range of joint movement or the department may reject the seal .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit elastomeric compression joint seal replacement foot section num bridge joint strip seals page num section num bridge joint strip seals num description this work consists of providing assembling and installing bridge joint strip seal assemblies per the standard drawings for bridge joint strip seals .
num materials num general provide bridge joint strip seals of elastomeric material and metal components to allow expansion and contraction of the bridge superstructure and to seal the deck surface .
anchor bridge joint strip seal assemblies either directly in pcc with type a anchorage or in elastomeric concrete headers or end dams with type b anchorage .
unless noted on the plans type a anchorage should be used .
num elastomer provide num virgin polychloroprene neoprene elastomeric sealing element in accordance with table num elastomer physical property requirements .
table num elastomer physical property requirements property astm test requirement tensile strength minimum d num num psi elongation at break minimum d num num hardness durometer neoprene d num num num compression set maximum a d num num brittleness num f d num not brittle property deterioration b d num tensile strength loss maximum num elongation loss maximum num hardness point change type a c d num num to num ozone resistance d d num no cracks oil swell e d num weight increase maximum num resistance to salt f d num variation of volume num to num aafter num h at num f using method b modified .
bafter num h at num f. cdurometer a. dat num elongation and num pphm in air at num f. eusing astm oil num after num h at num f. fafter num h at num f in calcium chloride solution .
num metal components provide steel retaining bars in accordance with astm a num .
provide anchoring materials in accordance with aashto m num grade num for structural steel and aashto m num grade num for reinforcing steel .
num elastomeric concrete section num bridge joint strip seals page num provide elastomeric concrete composed of an elastomeric binder and precision blended aggregates specifically formulated for use as an energy absorbing header material for bridge deck expansion joints .
select material from the departments approved products list .
provide a manufacturers materials certification .
num construction requirements num shop drawings and submittals submit three num sets of complete shop drawings to the state bridge engineer for preliminary review include two num copies of the product literature for elastomeric concrete and joint seals containing complete materials data and installation instructions .
include the following information num .
detailed dimensions and sizes of component parts of the joint num .
details of miscellaneous parts num .
field splice details and locations num .
material specifications num .
weld symbols and num .
welding electrode specifications .
upon receipt of the reviewed drawings return one num set to the manufacturer or supplier with notations .
after making the required corrections submit eight num sets of final shop drawings to the department .
do not perform work and do not change the drawing before obtaining department approval .
num fabrication of steel components fabricate steel components in accordance with section num steel structures .
stamp manufacturers name and model number at a visible location on each end of the steel extrusion .
num protective coating unless otherwise specified in the contract coat or galvanize the surfaces of steel components in accordance with section num protective coatings of miscellaneous structural steel .
num manufacturers technical support representative ensure an elastomeric concrete manufacturers technical support representative is at the site during installation to num .
advise and ensure adherence to the correct installation method num .
train assigned personnel in the correct methods of installation and num .
certify to the project manager that the contractor installed the material in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
both the representative and the contractor shall sign and date written certifications for the project manager .
num temperature and weather limitations do not place elastomeric concrete when the air or material temperatures are below num f. do not place elastomeric concrete during rain or snow .
num placement temperatures preheat the ingredients of the elastomeric concrete in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and maintain the preheat temperatures within the specified section num bridge joint strip seals page num tolerances .
num surface preparation immediately before placing the elastomeric concrete sandblast the surfaces of steel concrete and asphalt that will contact elastomeric concrete .
completely remove dirt rust grease oil and other deleterious material .
after blasting remove loose dirt sand and debris by vacuuming or blowing with dry oilfree compressed air .
ensure surfaces are completely dry before placing the elastomeric concrete .
num priming before placing elastomeric concrete prime the steel concrete and asphalt surfaces that will contact elastomeric concrete material in accordance with the elastomeric concrete manufacturers recommendations .
num placement of the steel extrusions place steel extrusions num num inch below and parallel to the final deck elevations .
remove and replace joints with extrusions that protrude above final deck elevations at no additional cost to the department .
unless otherwise specified in the contract install block outs that have at least a num inch clearance between the steel extrusions and the blockout bottoms if using elastomeric headers .
the contractor may field splice steel retaining bars by welding at the crown point of the roadway and at approximately num foot intervals in the remaining length of the seal .
the department will not allow any other field splicing .
num mixing and placing of the elastomeric concrete install elastomeric concrete headers in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
if there is a conflict between this specification and the manufacturers printed instructions use the more stringent requirements .
during mixing and placement operations do not spill or spread elastomeric concrete on deck surfaces or steel extrusion parts that are not part of header construction .
perform mixing off the bridge deck .
use plywood sheets and plastic sheeting to protect the bridge deck for longer bridges where this is not practical .
place forms along the void edges beneath the steel extrusions .
place and compact elastomeric concrete the entire length of the header to eliminate voids and leakage .
the project manager may reject the installation if the elastomeric concrete has any of the following characteristics num .
contains voids or honeycombs beneath steel extrusions num .
creates a poor finish num .
sets before being fully placed and consolidated num .
is not properly bonded to the steel and the concrete substrate or num .
shows signs of delamination .
num placement of elastomeric concrete in vertical recesses at curb sidewalk or barrier joint upturns follow procedures for placement of the elastomeric concrete into the vertical recesses without voids or honeycombs .
num heat vulcanizing heat vulcanize the concrete after placement if specified in the manufacturers instructions .
section num bridge joint strip seals page num num placement of elastomeric sealing element provide and install the sealing element in one continuous piece and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
do not field splice the sealing element .
num acceptance provide an installed seal that is undamaged and prevents moisture and other contaminants on the deck surface from leaking through the joints .
after installation test the bridge joint strip seals for leaks by flooding with water .
perform testing in the presence of the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit bridge joint strip seal linear foot num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for bridge joint strip seals and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
steel components of the bridge joint strip seal b. elastomeric concrete headers c. leak testing including water for leak test d. providing manufacturers representatives and installation certification e. protective coating of steel components .
section num polymer bridge joint seals page num section num polymer bridge joint seals num description this work consists of providing and installing polymer bridge joint seals consisting of a rapidcuring silicone or polyurethane sealing element .
num materials num general select sealing material from the departments approved products list for polymer bridge joint seals .
num silicone sealing element if using a silicone sealing element provide a twopart rapidcuring selfleveling cold applied silicone polymer material that cures to a lowmodulus rubberlike material upon exposure to moisture in accordance with table num silicone sealant requirements .
deliver each sealing compound lot or batch to the project in the original sealed container .
indicate the manufacturers name batch and lot number on each container .
table num silicone sealant requirements property requirement tackfree time num f num min nonvolatile content minimum num tensile strength and num h extension test initial numday cure num f num psi after water immersion num psi after heat aging num psi after cycling num f num num cycles num psi num h extension all specimens a pass aafter num h no evidence of cracks separation or other opening that at any point is over num in deep in the sealant or between the sealant and backup blocks .
num polyurethane sealing element if using a polyurethane sealing element provide a twopart joint sealant that cures quickly at ambient temperatures to form a flexible resilient tearresistant rubber .
provide polyurethane sealant in accordance with table num polyurethane sealing requirements .
deliver each sealing material lot or batch to the project in the original sealed container .
indicate the manufacturers name and batch and lot number on each container .
table num polyurethane sealing requirements property astm requirement bond num f num extension num inch nonimmersed d num pass num cycles waterimmersed d num pass num cycles tensile adhesion minimum d num num penetration num f d num num inch section num polymer bridge joint seals page num table num polyurethane sealing requirements property astm requirement num f d num num inch flow num h num f d num num num backer rods provide backer rods in accordance with the sealant manufacturers recommendations .
num certificate of compliance provide the project manager with a manufacturers certificate of compliance .
indicate the project number batch numbers and material manufacture date on the certificate of compliance .
num construction requirements num technical representative have the manufacturers technical representative on site for the initial joint installation to advise the construction personnel and ensure a satisfactory joint installation .
if the contractor can show proof of satisfactory past experience installing at least ten num joints or num ft of joints of same material whichever is larger the project manager may waive this requirement .
num manufacturers instructions provide a complete set of written joint installation instructions to the project manager at least num days before installing the joints .
num joint preparation allow concrete in new bridge joints to cure for at least seven num days before installing sealing material .
clean bridge joints in new or existing concrete with a sandblaster before placing the sealant materials .
obtain the project managers approval to use other cleaning methods .
before priming the joints remove loose debris with a vacuum or blower .
use oil and moisturefree compressed air for sandblasting or blowing debris .
dry joints before applying primers and sealants .
num inspection before installation inspect joints for proper depth width alignment and preparation and obtain project manager approval before installing the sealant material .
num application of sealing element install a backer rod at least num larger in diameter than the joint opening or a diameter specified by the manufacturer to the specified depth .
before applying sealant prime the substrate surfaces in accordance with the sealant manufacturer specifications .
place sealant when the air and substrate temperatures are from num f to num f and maintain at or above num f for at least num h. apply sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations using an approved applicator .
num traffic section num polymer bridge joint seals page num do not allow traffic on newly installed silicone or polyurethane sealing elements without project manager approval .
silicone or polyurethane sealants are normally ready for traffic upon removal of the traffic control devices .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit polymer bridge joint seals foot section num preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals page num section num preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals num description this work consists of providing and installing ultraviolet resistant evazote or equivalent joint seal systems in accordance with the manufactures recommendations and as approved by the project manager .
num materials num general select sealing material and the nosing element from the departments approved products list for preformed closed cell foam bridge joints .
provide sealing bonding and nosing elements from the same manufacturer .
num closed cell foam joint seal use a joint seal that a. is an impermeable closedcell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate low density polyethylene copolymer nitrogen blown foam material b. has a minimum working range of num compression and num tension c. meets or exceeds the requirements listed in table num below d. has num inch deep by num inch wide grooves spaced at ¼ inch to ½ inch along both sides of the joint and running the entire length of the joint to increase bond surface area e. is resistant to degradation due to ultraviolet radiation f. is self extinguishing g. is resistant to abrasion oxidation oils gasoline road salts and other petroleum products that may be spilled on the surface .
table num minimum requirements for preformed joint sealer property requirement service range num num degrees f tensile strength num psi min elongation at break num min tear resistance astm dnum num lbinch min water absorption astm num suffix l num psf max density num num psf weathering astm gnum num hrs no chalking flaking blistering checking and cracking recovery astm dnum num min compression deflection num deflection of original width num deflection of original width num psi num psi num bonder use a bonder that is a two num component num solid epoxy adhesive designed to bond joint material to steel cured concrete or wood and is approved by the manufacturer .
num elastomeric concrete section num preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals page num use an elastomeric concrete that is mixed and applied according to the manufactures published recommendations and meets or exceeds the requirements listed in table num below .
table num minimum requirements for elastomeric concrete property reference requirement compressive strength astm d num num psi tensile strength astm d num num psi elongation at break num hardness shore d astm d num num water absorption astm d num one percent num density num lbgal slant shear bond strength concrete steel num psi min num psi min resilience num deflection astm d num num min num certificate of compliance provide the project manager with a manufacturers certificate of compliance .
indicate the project number batch numbers and material manufacture date on the certificate of compliance .
num construction requirements num general install the joint sealant with a width num greater than the width of the joint opening at a near neutral condition num degrees f according to the manufacturers recommendations .
use the heat welding method for all directional changes in the joint sealant .
allow concrete to cure for num days before installing the sealing material .
have all joint systems pre approved by the project manager prior to placement .
use a performance and installation enhancement p.i.e .
bevel cut when the joint opening is greater than three num inches .
num technical representative have the manufacturers technical representative on site for the initial joint installation to assist and advise the construction personnel and ensure a satisfactory joint installation .
num manufacturers instructions provide a complete set of written joint installation instructions to the project manager at least num calendar days before installing the joints .
num priming prime all concrete or asphaltic surfaces prior to the placement of elastomeric concrete .
num existing or new concrete to concrete joints clean surfaces of joint and remove debris .
sand blasting andor mechanical abrasion of substrate may be required to remove debris .
place bonder and joint material against new or sound existing concrete .
num existing concrete to concrete or concrete to asphalt joints section num preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals page num remove unsound concrete or asphalt with a neat saw cut to a minimum size of two num inch depth and four num inches wide .
clean surfaces of joint and remove debris .
prime all surfaces with a primer acceptable to the manufacture and place elastomeric concrete .
place bonder and joint material against elastomeric nosing after it has cured to num of its final strength .
num protection of joints provide protection of the joint from construction traffic .
num warranty in addition to the requirements of section num guarantees and warranties provide a minimum five numyear warranty for the joint seals .
provide a warranty surety bond on a departmentapproved form for the total bid item amount for preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals .
use a surety authorized to transact business in new mexico and approved in the federal circular num published by the united states treasury department .
provide all certifications required by the manufacturer necessary to sustain the manufacturers warranty of the product to the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit preformed closed cell foam bridge joint seals foot num work included in payment evazote or equivalent joint systems including material labor certifications and all other costs associated with providing and installing of the joint systems shall be included and no separate payment will be made therefor .
section num pipe culverts page num section num pipe culverts num description this work consists of supplying constructing and reconstructing pipe culverts .
section num referred to below is from the aashtos lrfd bridge design specification .
sections num num and num referred to below are from the aashtos lrfd bridge construction specification .
num materials provide material in accordance with table num culvert material applications .
table num culvert material applications categorymaterial application a sub drainage cross drains turnouts storm drains b siphons c metal steel or aluminum or steel reinforced polyethylene cmp x x x u u spiral pipe x x x u double wall x u smooth flo x u concrete lined x u concrete reinforced x x x x u nonreinforced d x x x x u pressure x cylinder x cast in place x x x u precast cbc h x x x u polypropylene corrugated j x x x x u triple wall k x x x x u thermoplastic high density polyethylene hdpe pipe astm mnum d x u u u u corrugated x x x x u profile e x x x x u solid x x x thermoplastic pvc corrugated inout x x x u u profile f x x x x u solid x g x u pressure x miscellaneous ductile iron x section num pipe culverts page num table num culvert material applications categorymaterial application a sub drainage cross drains turnouts storm drains b siphons c aprimary applications could be used in other applications as approved by the project manager bjoints must be watertight in accordance with section num joints and have a maximum tested mannings coefficient roughness of num or less cmust meet the pressure tight requirements of section num joints dmust be approved by project manager etype s type d or astm f num fastm f num fnum and astm f num gschedule num hfor precast box refer to special provision num f if applicable jastm fnum and mpnum kastm fnum xnormal use uunacceptable design manufacture and install culvert materials in accordance with table num culvert materials specifications aashto lrfd awwa and table num culvert materials specifications astm aci .
table num culvert materials specifications aashto ansiawwa categoryparameters material pipe design a installation a corrugated metal galvanized m num m num section num section num aluminized type num m num m num section num section num aluminum m num m num section num section num fiberbonded m num a m num a section num section num polymeric m num m num section num section num coatings pavements and lining asphalt coating m num a concrete lined m num paved invert m num bc low n value m num a reinforced concrete round m num section num section num arch m num section num section num elliptically shaped m num section num section num reinforced dload m num section num section num cylinder c num awwa mnum pressure c num awwa mnum nonreinforced concrete b num in m num castinplace concrete c polypropylene section num pipe culverts page num table num culvert materials specifications aashto ansiawwa categoryparameters material pipe design a installation a pipe num inch num inch mpnum mpnum section num section num pipe num inch num inch mpnum mpnum section num section num thermoplastic hdpe corrugated pipe num inchnum inch m num pipe num inchnum inch m num section num section num thermoplastic hdpe profile profile num inchnum inch section num section num thermoplastic hdpe solid smooth pipe num inchnum inch section num section num thermoplastic pvc profile profile num inchnum inch m num section num section num thermoplastic pvc solid smooth pipe num inchnum inch m num section num section num pipe num inchnum inch section num section num thermoplastic pvc pressure pipe num inchnum inch c num c num mnum miscellaneous ductile iron pipe ansi awwa cnum anum ansi awwa cnum anum cnum steel reinforced polyethylene pipe num inch num inch dnum ainstall in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures section num utility items for pressure pipe bmust be approved by project manager .
csee section num castinplace concrete pipe .
dnmdot approved thru num inch if flowable fill is used as backfill section num deflection testing may be performed immediately after the flowable fill has cured in accordance with section num .
table num culvert materials specifications astm aci categoryparameter material pipe design installation a corrugated metal galvanized a num a num a num a num section num pipe culverts page num table num culvert materials specifications astm aci categoryparameter material pipe design installation a aluminized type num a num a num a num a num aluminum b num b num b num a num fiberbonded a num a num a num a num polymeric a num a num a num a num coatings pavement and lining asphalt coating a num concrete lined a num paved invert a num low n value a num reinforced concrete round cnum c num arch cnum elliptically shaped cnum reinforced dload cnum c num cylinder pressure c num c num nonreinforced concrete c num inch c num c num castinplace concrete d aci num polypropylene pipe num inch num inch f num f num d num pipe num inch num inch f num f num d num pipe num inch num inch f num f num d num thermoplastic hdpe corrugated pipe num inchnum inch d num numc d num pipe num inchnum inch d num numc d num thermoplastic hdpe profile profile num inchnum inch d num numc f num b d num thermoplastic hdpe solid smooth pipe num inchnum inch d num numc f num d num thermoplastic pvc profile profile num inchnum inch d num numc f num fnum f num d num thermoplastic pvc solid smooth pipe num inchnum inch d num num d num f num d num pipe num inchnum inch d num num f num d num thermoplastic pvc pressure pipe num inchnum inch d num d num d num miscellaneous ductile iron pipe anum a num section num pipe culverts page num table num culvert materials specifications astm aci categoryparameter material pipe design installation a steel reinforced polyethylene pipe num inch num inch dnum fnum d num ainstall in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures section num utility items for pressure pipe .
buse r. s. c. num and num only .
cmust be approved by project manager .
dsee section num castinplace concrete pipe .
num pipe num metal pipe provide helical corrugated pipe that have rerolled ends with at least two num annular corrugations .
if using stab joints only one num end may have a factory attached coupling as appropriate for the end .
the following ends of pipe do not have to be rerolled num .
connected to an existing pipe with helical corrugations num .
connecting to an end section or num .
to be embedded in concrete .
the department will allow direct connection of end sections utilizing a dimple band for cut ends on existing pipe and straps or rods on new installations .
use a half smooth half corrugated sleeve or a concrete collar for extensions of concrete pipe to metal pipe .
if using smooth interior lined steel culvert pipe double wall provide lock seams of the smooth interior liner and the corrugated shell that are continuous from end to end of each length of pipe section .
ensure the exterior gauge is not less than the specified gauge in the contract for unlined corrugated steel culvert pipe .
the interior metal lines shall be at least num inch .
use pipe with gasketed lock seams and rerolled ends for watertight installations .
joints must meet the requirements per section num .
num reinforced concrete pipe provide reinforced concrete pipe rcp with a bell and spigot design or a tongue and groove design .
the contractor may use lift holes or lifting anchors to handle and place rcp .
do not use more than two num lift holes in the wall of each piece of pipe .
place lift at the top of the pipe in line with the centerline of the pipe and along the minor axis of the reinforcement .
when using a single lift hole the contractor shall place it at the balance point .
when using two num lift holes the contractor will place them equidistant from the balance point .
the lift holes shall not interfere with the load carrying capacity of the pipe shall be neatly made shall be straight and may be either drilled or cast .
after the contractor has placed the pipe and before beginning backfill operations the contractor shall fill the lift holes with num .
nonshrink mortar in accordance with section num nonshrink mortar num .
joint mortar in accordance with section num rcp joint material to which nonshrink admixture in accordance with section num nonshrink grout for post section num pipe culverts page num tensioned bridge members has been added or num .
nonshrink grout in accordance with section num nonshrink grout for post tensioned bridge members .
num plastic pipe when required for thermoplastic pipe provide end sections located out of the clear zone that are either metal or hdpe with a minimum two percent num carbon black in accordance with astm d num .
num pipe certification and identification requirements provide certified test results showing that the material supplied meets specifications .
provide record heat numbers and supply chemical analysis for metal pipe .
the department will inspect the rcp factory out of state rcp suppliers shall arrange for witnessed plant tests at no additional cost to the department .
provide certification of cell classification and pipe stiffness for thermoplastic pipe in accordance with the material selected using the fill height table in the standard plans .
label each pipe before shipment .
all thermoplastic pipe sections will clearly display the date code number .
rcp will display nmdot stamp .
metal pipe will display a stencil or stamp displaying the manufacturers name date and country of manufacture thickness coating heat number and applicable astm or aashto specification .
all labels will correspond to test reports with a permanent print stamp or stencil .
provide test reports and certification for in plant joint tests required by section num .
num selecting pipe the contractor may select any approved type of pipe unless otherwise specified .
if the plans specify storm drain culvert pipes the contractor may select an approved type with a maximum tested mannings coefficient of roughness of num .
if the plans specify siphon culvert pipes the contractor may select an approved pressure pipe .
select a type of pipe based on the corrosion resistance number in accordance with section num corrosion resistance number except when using siphon culvert pipe .
if the plans specify a nominal diameter for pipe arch the contractor may supply arched or elliptical pipe equal to the nominal round pipe .
num joints select the appropriate joint in accordance with table num joint selection .
table num joint selection type of pipe structure soil tight water tight pressure tight restrained culverts under turnouts not under road x cross drain culverts x elbowed drop culverts x x a c storm drains x b rundowns or downdrains a x x a c section num pipe culverts page num table num joint selection type of pipe structure soil tight water tight pressure tight restrained pond outlet pipes and risers x irrigation pipe nonpressure x b irrigation siphons and sag pipes pressure x ause where pipe slopes are steep num and or velocities are high .
belliptical and arched concrete and steel arch pipe joints are not considered watertight without special joint design considerations for rcp refer to section num rcp joint material for cmp refer to section num cmp joint material or as approved by project manager .
crcp and cmp only .
num joint types num soiltight joints a soiltight joint does not allow migration of soil into the pipe .
num watertight joints a gasketed joint restricts infiltrationexfiltration and exhibits no visible leakage when subject to num psi over the crown for ten num min under testing conditions as outlined in the appropriate product astm specification .
when plant tested the appropriate product joint shall meet the requirements of astm d num thermoplastic or steel reinforced polyethylene astm c numc num concrete or astmanum metal .
num pressuretight joints use pressure pipe in accordance with section num utility items and the associated sections of the new mexico standard specifications for public works construction nmsspwc .
provide pipe with a pressure rating equal to or greater than the static head shown on the drawings .
select materials in accordance with table num pressure tight joint materials .
test pressuretight installations used in siphons and sag pipes shall show no leakage in excess of the allowable line leakage requirement when filled with water to the highest operating elevation and allowed to stand full for num h. the minimum coupling requirement will be in accordance with the testing requirements of aashtos lrfd bridge construction specifications section num num for standard joints in nonerodible soils .
table num pressuretight joint materials material nmsspwc section polyvinyl chloride num awwa c num reinforced concrete num astm c numm concrete cylinder num awwa c num ductile iron num ansiawwa cnumanum ductile and cast iron fittings num ansiawwa cnumanum ansiawwa cnumanum solid wall hdpe astm f num section num pipe culverts page num num restrained joint a restrained joint resists a tensile force in accordance with aashtos lrfd bridge construction specifications section num or as approved by project manager .
num joint materials num cmp joint material if the contract specifies soiltight joints factoryattached metal or plastic stab joints with modified gaskets huggertype bands without gaskets or fully corrugated bands without gaskets can be supplied .
if the contract specifies watertight joints the requirements of section num watertight joints must be met which shall include the following factoryattached metal or plastic stab joints with modified gaskets or huggertype bands with lubed oring gaskets is watertight when backfilled with flowable fill .
with round pipe a minimum of numc fully corrugated bands num wide with a lubed num wide closed cell neoprene flat gasket is watertight without flowable fill .
with pipe arch a minimum of numc fully corrugated bands num wide using rods and lugs with a lubed num wide closed cell neoprene flat gasket is watertight without flowable fill .
if the contract specifies restrained joints all pipe affected will use rods and lugs .
num rcp joint material provide flexible watertight sealing gaskets in accordance with astm c num astm c num or aashto m num for watertight applications .
provide external sealing bands in accordance with astm c num for arch and elliptical pipe in watertight applications .
provide closedcell neoprene gaskets in accordance with astm d num and aashto m num type b when required on the contract .
provide butyl rubber mastic sealant in accordance with aashto m num for soiltight applications for round arch and elliptical concrete pipe .
grout watertight and pressuretight joints as directed by the project manager .
num thermoplastic and steel reinforced polyethylene joint material provide couplings that snapon and engage an equal number of corrugations on either side of the pipe joint .
the department will not accept wraparound bands .
provide bell and spigot joints in accordance with astm d num and astm f num .
provide concrete structure connections with a water stop or boot .
do not use expanding sealants or gaskets .
num thermoplastic polypropylene joint material provide bell and spigot joints in accordance with astm dnum and astm fnum .
spigot shall have two num gaskets installed by the pipe manufacturer and covered with a removable protective wrap to ensure the gasket is free from debris .
the bell shall be reinforced with a polymer composite band installed by the manufacturer .
num durability num corrosion resistance number section num pipe culverts page num unless specified on the contract provide pipe culverts with a minimum corrosion resistance number of crnum .
however provide pipe culverts with a minimum corrosion resistance number of crnum for storm drains rundowns nonpressure irrigation pipe and elbowed drop culverts .
if the contract specifies a corrosion resistance number use table num pipe culvert durability to choose a pipe type from the column below the corrosion resistance number .
do not use table num pipe culvert durability for siphon culvert pipe .
table num pipe culvert durability type of pipe corrosion resistance number crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum crnum galvanized steel yes no no no no no no aluminized steel type num a yes yes yes yes no no no aluminum alloy yes yes yes yes yes no no rcp type ii cement b yes yes yes yes yes yes no polymeric coated steel yes yes yes yes yes yes no aramid fiber bonded steel yes yes yes yes yes yes yes thermoplastic c yes yes yes yes yes yes yes steel reinforced and nonreinforced polyethylene pipe yes yes yes yes yes yes yes rcp type v cement b yes yes yes yes yes yes yes athe table is based on a minimal structural gauge thickness .
the contractor may use a heavier gauge to increase the corrosion resistance number as approved by the project manager .
bcement type based on section num portland cement concrete .
if ph num use a rapid chloride permeability num coulombs .
ccell class corresponding to highest values on fill height table must be used for crnum num .
num dissimilar metal pipe joints use rubber gaskets on joints between dissimilar metal pipes .
num coating aluminum and aluminized steel pipe type num coat aluminum and aluminized steel pipe type num for the entire length of pipe in contact with fresh concrete except for grouted pipe or flowable filled pipe to a distance of num inch beyond the back face of the concrete in accordance with the contract .
provide a zincrich paint coating in accordance with aashto m num .
num construction requirements num general install pipe in accordance with section num and the requirements of table num culvert materials specifications aashto awwa and current aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications section applying to the pipe type .
ensure that no floating occurs during installation of pipe culverts .
use siphon culvert pipe in accordance with section num utility items and the associated sections of the nmsspwc .
section num pipe culverts page num num excavation and backfill excavate trenches in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
make the trenches wide enough to properly join the pipe and thoroughly compact the bedding material under and around the pipe .
where possible make the trench wall vertical .
when using flowable fill for backfill in accordance with section num flowable fill make trench widths in accordance with aashtos lrfd bridge construction specifications section num for metal pipe and steel reinforced polyethylene pipe section num for rcp and section num for thermoplastic pipe .
refer to nmdot num standard drawings for additional pipe installation requirements .
num fill height requirements provide minimum and maximum cover over the pipe in accordance with the standard drawings .
num laying pipe begin laying pipe at the downstream end of the pipeline except for extensions of existing pipes .
place the bottom of the pipe in contact with the shaped bedding throughout its full length .
place the bell ends or outside circumferential laps of pipes facing upstream to obtain a shingling effect .
place pipe with longitudinal laps or seams with the laps or seams at the sides .
lay paved or partially lined pipe so that the longitudinal centerline of the paved segment coincides with the flow line .
place elliptical and elliptically reinforced pipes with the major axis within num of a horizontal plane .
num joining pipe num joining rcp join pipe sections so that the ends are fully centered and the inner surfaces are flush within the inside diameter tolerance variations of aashto m num but shall not exceed num inch .
make watertight joints with the following num .
cement grout num .
flexible watertight gaskets num .
external sealing bands or num .
any combination of these types .
for grouted joints molds or runners shall be used to retain the poured grout .
flexible watertight gaskets shall be installed to form a flexible watertight seal .
if using portland cement mixtures protect the completed joints against rapid drying with a curing method approved by the project manager .
replace coupling systems that do not fit snugly in accordance with section num reinforced concrete pipe at no additional cost to the department .
num joining flexible pipe join metal or thermoplastic pipe with a flexible pipe coupling system .
ensure the coupling systems engage an equal number of corrugation or length on either side of the pipe joint .
replace coupling systems that do not fit snugly to the pipe ends in accordance with section num cmp joint material and section num thermoplastic joint material at no additional cost to the department .
section num pipe culverts page num use dimpled bands to attach end sections .
ensure the dimples fit snugly within the given pipes corrugations .
if the dimpled band connections do not fit correctly use an alternate way to connect the pipes .
where joints must have beveled ends to meet construction requirements form a continuous unit in accordance with the plans .
make water tight joints using a bell and spigot conforming to astm dnum and fnum .
push spigot into bell end so spigot reaches homing mark on bell end .
repair damaged protective coatings in accordance with aashto m num at no additional cost to the department .
num pipe installation inspection inspect the pipe before placing any backfill .
replace or relay unacceptable pipe at no additional cost to the department .
ensure that pipe is installed in full compliance with aashtos lrfd bridge construction specification section num metal and steel reinforced polyethylene pipe section num rcp or section num thermoplastic requirements .
for thermoplastic pipe provide the department with the results of the deflection test detailed in section num of aashtos lrfd bridge construction specification and a certification that the testing was completed .
the required deflection testing shall be performed at no additional cost to the department .
num salvaging culvert pipe remove culvert pipe to be salvaged or reinstalled from the existing location in accordance with section num removal of structures and obstructions .
clean salvaged pipe of deleterious material before storing or reinstalling .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit culvert pipe foot culvert pipe end section each culvert pipe arch foot culvert pipe arch end section each storm drain culvert pipe foot storm drain culvert pipe end section each storm drain culvert pipe arch foot storm drain culvert pipe arch end section each siphon culvert pipe foot reinstalling culvert pipe each the department will pay for the removal of culvert pipe in accordance with section num removal of structures and obstructions .
the department will pay for culvert pipe cleaning in accordance with section num cleaning of culverts and drainage structures when specified on the plans .
the department will pay for excavation for culverts in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
section num pipe culverts page num num work included in payment the following work and items shall be considered as included in the payment for the major items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
all joint materials shear connectors required for joining sections b .
testing and certification of all culverts and c. the coating of aluminum and aluminized steel pipe type num when placed with fresh concrete .
removal of culvert pipe shall be paid for in accordance with section num removal of structures and obstructions .
excavation for culverts shall be measured and paid for in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures siphon culvert pipe work shall include trenching connections to transitions pipe joining dewatering installation of pipe fittings miscellaneous components including elbows drains and blowoffs backfill and compaction encasing or special backfill and hydrostatic testing .
section num structural plate structures page num section num structural plate structures num description the work consists of providing and installing pipe pipe arches long span structures or metal box culverts made of metal structural plate in accordance with table num structural plate specifications aashto and table num structural plate specifications astm .
table num structural plate specifications aashto categoryparameter material design a installation b backfill structural plate galvanized m num sect .
num sect .
num m num aluminum m num sect .
num sect .
num m num box culvert aluminum m num sect .
num sect .
num m num galvanized m num sect .
num sect .
num m num coatings pavements and linings asphalt coating m numm paved invert aaashto lrfd bridge design specifications baashto lrfd bridge construction specifications table num structural plate specifications astm categoryparameter material design installation backfill structural plate galvanized a num a num aluminum b num b num b num box culvert aluminum b num b num galvanized a num a num coatings pavements and linings asphalt coating a num paved invert a num nuts and bolts galvanized plate a num aluminum plate a num or a num a num aluminum box culvert a num or a num a num num materials num general the contractor may provide aluminum or steel structures unless otherwise specified in the contract .
do not mix aluminum and steel materials in an installation except as specified for galvanized steel bolts and nuts on structural aluminum plate structures .
num structural plates section num structural plate structures page num provide steel structural plates in accordance with aashto m num .
provide aluminum structural plates in accordance with aashto m num .
num fasteners provide fasteners for steel structural plates in accordance with aashto m num .
provide fasteners for aluminum plate structures in accordance with aashto m num .
num asphalt coating if required protect structural plate structures with asphalt coating in accordance with aashto m num .
provide fieldapplied coatings in accordance with aashto m num .
coat the fasteners extending outside of the pipe after installation .
the contractor may leave the portions of the fasteners extending inside the pipe uncoated .
num design and certification requirements num design the contractor is responsible for the structural and foundation designs of metal box culverts and other structural plate structures .
geotechnical soils data and hydraulic scour depths will be provided by nmdot .
design structural plate structures in accordance with section num and num of aashtos lrfd bridge design specification .
at least num days before beginning fabrication submit to the state bridge engineer three num sets of the following stamped by a new mexico professional engineer num .
complete design calculations num .
shop drawings and num .
construction details and installation instructions for longspan structural plate structures and metal box culverts .
new mexico professional engineer stamp and foundation designs are not required for structural plate structures with structural inverts under num feet maximum .
the state bridge engineer will return one num set with notations to the contractor .
make the appropriate corrections and resubmit eight num sets of calculations and drawings to the state bridge engineer for final review and approval .
do not fabricate materials until receipt of written notification of the departments shopdrawings approval .
num certifications provide certificates to the project manager in accordance with section num of aashto m num for steel structural plates or section num of aashto m num for aluminum structural plates and the specifications before installing the structure at the project site .
num construction requirements num assembling when practical connect plates with the seams and stagger them so that no more than three num plates come together at one num point .
assemble structural plate structures using bolts with a minimum num inch diameter .
if assembling steel structural plates apply from num lbfft to num lbfft of torque .
section num structural plate structures page num if assembling aluminum structural plates apply from num lbfft to num lbfft of torque .
tighten the longitudinal seams of joined plates except for plates held in shape by cables struts or backfill .
num assembly tolerances ensure that the plates do not vary from the specified dimension before backfill by more than two percent num of the longest dimension span or rise or five num inches whichever is less .
however only apply the two percent num restriction for horizontal ellipse shapes having a ratio of top to side radii of three num or less .
when the rise of arches with a ratio of top to side radii of three num or more ensure that they do not vary from the specified dimension by more than one percent num of the span .
num welding weld steel in accordance with ansiaashtoaws bridge welding code dnum .
weld aluminum in accordance with aws structural welding code dnum .
ensure that qualified welders perform shop and field welding in accordance with section num of ansiaashtoaws bridge welding code dnum .
perform welding on steel plates other than fittings before galvanizing .
num rejection of damaged materials the department may reject damaged or defective structural plate structures or structural plates at any time during the construction operations regardless of prior approval .
replace installed structures or plates that are damaged or that fail to meet the restrictions of structure shape in accordance with section num assembly tolerances at no additional cost to the department .
num movement monitoring in long span structural plate structures place movement control devices at locations specified by the manufacturer for the entire length of the structure .
ensure that a qualified manufacturers representative continually monitors longspan structural plate structures for movement to detect excessive distortion of the structure shape due to progressive plate assembly and equipment and backfilling operations .
the department will determine excessive distortion in accordance with section num assembly tolerances and as a radius change more than num of the lower side plate of highprofile arches and the side plate of pearshaped structures .
upon completion of the structure submit the movement measurement records to the project manager with a statement certifying that any movements were within acceptable limits .
num excavation perform excavation in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
num bedding and backfill construct bedding material for culverts with closed bottoms in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
ensure that the backfill and bedding are in accordance with table num electrochemical criteria to ensure a numyear service life .
section num structural plate structures page num table num electrochemical criteria type of material ph resistivity ohm cm soluble salts snum by weight galvanized steel num oz .
coating num num num galvanized steel num oz .
coating num num num asphalt coating a num num aluminum plate num num num alower the ph range of the galvanized pipe by one num .
num backfill ensure that backfill material is in accordance with soil classification anum or anum in aashto m num and compact it to at least num of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
to avoid damaging the structure compact the initial two num ft of backfill over the crown of the structure with hand held equipment or small compaction machinery .
the department defines the crown as the area between the points of compound curvature of top and side plates or the area between the location of longitudinal structural stiffeners .
the department will not apply density requirements to the first two num lifts of backfill placed over the crown of the structure .
do not allow heavy machinery on the structures except for metal box culverts until the fill over the structure is at least four num ft deep or num of the span whichever is greater .
num repair of damaged coating repair damaged protective coating in accordance with aashto m num at no additional cost to the department .
use zincrich paint in accordance with federal specification ttp num or milpnum .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit structural plate pipe foot structural plate pipe arch foot metal box culvert foot excavation disposal of unsuitable material select backfill material placement and compaction of select backfill shall be included in the bid item unit price for each relevant pay item .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the major items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. submittals and design of structures b. longitudinal stiffeners c. reinforcing ribs d. installation and removal of shoring or ties to maintain shape e. on site inspection by manufacturers representative section num structural plate structures page num f. repair of protective coating and g. coating of the structures .
h. shallow or deep foundation elements .
section num castinplace concrete pipe page num section num castinplace concrete pipe num description the work consists of constructing castinplace monolithic concrete pipe in a prepared trench .
the department will allow the contractor to use castinplace concrete pipe in a storm drain system .
the contractor shall determine the suitability of this construction method for use in the existing soil conditions on the project .
num materials provide pipe that consists of portland cement fly ash coarse and fine aggregates admixtures if required and water in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs for special class concrete and the following requirements num .
hardened properties in accordance with section num engineering calculations and num .
slump requirements in accordance with table num slump requirements .
table num slump requirements pipe diameter in slump in num num num num num num num num num num maximum size of coarse aggregate use a concrete mix with a maximum sized aggregate that is no larger than onethird the size of the smallest clear space into which the contractor shall place this concrete .
num mix design prepare the mix design in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num construction requirements num engineering calculations provide engineering calculations supporting the use of castinplace concrete in the project soils with the contractrequired design loadings imposed .
use a qualified professional engineer licensed in the state of new mexico to prepare the calculations .
num soil conditions review the soil conditions and available geotechnical reports to ensure the project soils are competent to provide the specified trench .
num equipment construct the pipe with equipment specifically designed for constructing castinplace monolithic concrete pipe .
obtain project manager approval of the equipment before use .
provide evidence of successful operation of this equipment on prior work .
num quality control employ a quality control administrator fulltime employee or a consultant who will be responsible for pipe quality .
provide the project manager with documentation that demonstrates the quality control administrators experience in the manufacture and section num castinplace concrete pipe page num placement of the pipe .
authorize the administrator to control the activities necessary to ensure a product that meets the contract requirements including strength grade alignment and wall thickness .
ensure that the administrator inspects the pipe construction and completes the field report form issued with the approved mix design supplied by the state concrete engineer .
have the administrator submit the completed form to the project manager on the first working day following each day work is performed on the pipe .
num dimensions of castinplace concrete pipe provide castinplace concrete pipe with dimensions for the various sizes of pipe in accordance with table num dimensions of castinplace concrete pipe .
table num dimensions of castinplace concrete pipe inside diameter d outside diameter d width of pipe trench b wall thickness t num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note all dimensions are in inches .
num tolerances and geometry grade and alignment num .
departure from and return to established grade shall not exceed one num inch per ten num linear feet nummm per num m. maximum departure shall be limited num ½ inch num mm .
num .
departure from and return to established alignment shall not exceed two num inches per ten num linear feet num mm per num m. maximum departure shall be limited to four num inches num mm .
num wall thickness wall thickness shall be as shown in table num .
grade and alignment shall be controlled so that thicknesses of the pipe wall are symmetrical .
num pipe diameter tolerances internal diameter of pipe at any point shall not be less than num of the design diameter .
num excavation and backfill section num castinplace concrete pipe page num excavate and backfill in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures except as modified in section num trench excavation .
num trench excavation construct the pipe in native soil capable of standing unsupported from the bottom of the trench to the top of the pipe without sloughing .
the contractor may construct the pipe in a fill section if it is compacted to at least num of the maximum dry density if tested in accordance with astm d num .
excavate the trench to the lines and grades established by the project manager .
use a laser or other electronic equipment to control the grade of the trench .
shape the trench to form the bottom outside of the pipe .
grade and prepare it to provide full firm and uniform support by the undisturbed earth or rock over a minimum of the bottom num of the outside of the pipe .
when soft spongy or unstable material appears in the pipe or in the bottom of the trench remove the material as directed by the quality administrator and the project manager .
backfill the resulting area with material compacted to num of the maximum dry density in accordance with astm d num .
if boulders or rocks are in the bottom or sidewalls of the trench remove them to at least six num inches from the nearest surface of the pipe .
next backfill the space and compact and reshape it as required for unsuitable materials .
if necessary to provide stability in the trench slope the trench walls from a point num inch above the top of the pipe to the top of the trench as required by soil conditions .
limit the pitch of the slope to a safe degree of stability that meets osha requirements for trench safety .
num placement remove water entering the trench before constructing the pipe .
keep adjacent surfaces free of standing water mud and debris .
thoroughly moisten dry surfaces adjacent to the concrete being placed with water to keep it from neither drawing moisture from the freshly placed concrete nor expanding upon additional wetting .
place the concrete around the full circumference of the pipe monolithically in one num placement with fixed and traveling metal forms .
keep the invert of the pipe available for inspection during the placing of the concrete .
keep concrete free of rock pockets and completely fill the forms .
achieve concrete consolidation with internal mechanical tampers or consolidation rings and vibrators that are an integral of the pipe forming equipment .
use tamping and vibration to consolidate the concrete and secure a good bond between the pipe and the supporting soil .
the project manager may require the use of a spudtype vibrator in the hopper to assist the flow and consolidation of the concrete .
num forms use a fixed metal form that is strong enough to withstand vibrating or tamping and ensure that workmen walking on the forms do not cause springing bulging or other types of distress .
ensure that the forms do not vary more than num inch from the lower edge of a straight edge laid parallel to the centerline of the form and keep it free of holes larger than num inch .
ensure that the flow line of the finished pipe does not vary more than num ft from the specified grade .
num construction joints section num castinplace concrete pipe page num at the end of a days placement or when placement operations are interrupted for more than num min form a construction joint .
at construction joints bevel the pipe walls downward at an approximate num angle and leave rough .
embed numinch reinforcing bars that are num inches long into the ends of the pipe walls .
space the reinforcing bars at num inches on center for pipes with diameters num inches and smaller and at num inches on center for pipes with diameters larger than num inches .
within num minutes before pipe casting resumes pipe end surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign materials coatings and loose or defective concrete and thoroughly wetted .
a tiein cap shall be cast over joint across the top of pipe from trench wall to trench wall .
the tiein cap shall be num inches minimum in length and centered over the joint .
thickness shall be num times minimum wall thickness shown in table num .
num collar joint for connections to another pipe or structure shall be made by squaring off the end of pipe .
excavation of the trench shall be made along the sides and bottom of the pipe to permit casting of concrete collar .
collar shall be num inches minimum in length and centered on joint .
thickness shall be num times the minimum wall thickness shown in table num .
num cover and backfill ensure that the cover measured from the top of the pipe to the bottom of the surfacing is not less than num inches .
do not place backfill on pipes until the concrete has developed a compressive strength of at least num psi .
num temperature refer to section num temperature and weather limitations .
num curing and protecting concrete place polyethylene film in accordance with astm c num except provide a numinch nominal thickness on the exposed top surface of the pipe immediately after casting the pipe .
immediately cover the film with up to three num inches of moist soil to hold the film in place and protect the pipe .
maintain a humid atmosphere within the pipe evidenced by condensation on the interior surface for at least seven num days after placement .
however do not exceed the maximum period of num h for removing forms and making repairs .
take measures to prevent air drafts from drying pipe .
keep the ends covered except when conducting work on the inside of the pipe .
leave other openings open so that the inside of the pipe can cure effectively .
num inspection and repair of pipe after removing the forms make required repairs .
repair the offsets and indentations of the following size num .
larger than num inch for pipes with internal diameters of num inches or less num .
larger than num inch for pipes with internal diameters from greater than num inches to less than num inches num .
larger than num inch for pipes with internal diameters of num inches and greater .
repair defects not extending through the pipe wall and less than two num ftnum as directed by the project manager .
repair holes cut in the pipe as directed by the project manager .
num crack repairs perform interior crack repairs after backfilling .
clean and fill transverse cracks with a width of num inch or more with an elastomeric compound approved by the project manager .
ensure that the elastomeric compound section num castinplace concrete pipe page num penetrates into the crack at least num inch .
the department defines a longitudinal crack as a crack generally oriented within num of the pipe alignment .
the department may reject pipes with the following longitudinal cracks num .
a crack that has caused a surface fault within the pipe with a displacement greater than num inch num .
a crack with a width greater than num times the outside diameter of the pipe that can be penetrated by a standard machinist gauge leaf in accordance with aashto t num or num .
a crack with a width greater than num inch that can be penetrated by a standard machinist gauge leaf in accordance with aashto t num .
the project manager may allow pipes with longitudinal cracks to remain in place .
in such a case repair the cracks by fulldepth epoxy pressure grouting .
num rejection of pipe the department may reject a pipe for any of the following conditions num .
rock pockets blisters voids fractures porous concrete or similar defects that extend through the pipe wall or exceed two num ft num pipe may be rejected for one num foot on each side beyond the limits of the defects num .
the pipe is damaged during construction or num .
contractor does not repair other cracks and defects as directed by the project manager .
replace rejected sections of pipe at no additional cost to the department .
make the finished surface of the concrete pipe equivalent to a wood float surface substantially free of fractures cracks and roughness .
num verification of wall thickness if requested by the project manager drill four num ¾ inch diameter holes at approximately numfoot intervals in the walls of the pipe to verify thickness .
drill one num hole in the top one num hole in the bottom and one num hole in each side of the pipe as directed by the project manager .
if a deficient wall thickness exists drill enough additional holes to determine the nature and extent of the deficient thickness .
num field quality control num load tests load tests shall be performed when required by contract documents .
test load applied to the top of pipe shall be at least num of the maximum earth load plus live load to which the pipe will be subjected .
the pipe shall be inspected before and after load testing .
load tests shall be made without disturbing the earth supporting the lower num degrees of pipe .
the test load shall be applied in accordance with num or num .
num sandbox test load shall be applied to a four num ft num m length of pipe through a sandbox in such a manner that sand forms a bedding over num the circumference of the pipe measured at the centerline of the crown .
sandbox shall be made of metal or dressed timber so heavy as to avoid appreciable bending by side pressure of sand .
a strip of cloth or plastic film may be attached to the inside of the sandbox on each side along the lower edge to prevent the escape of sand between the sandbox and pipe .
depth of bedding above the pipe at the thinnest point shall be num the inside diameter of the pipe .
sandbox shall not contact pipe or sides of trench .
sandbox shall be filled with clean sand containing not less than five percent num moisture and passing a num mm no .
num sieve .
upper surface of sand shall be struck off level with a straight edge and covered with a rigid top bearing plate .
lower surface of the section num castinplace concrete pipe page num plate shall be a true plane made of heavy timbers or other rigid material capable of distributing the test load uniformly without appreciable bending .
test load shall be applied to the bearing plate by piling weights directly on the bearing plate or by moving heavy equipment of predetermined weight onto the bearing plate .
the bearing plate shall not be allowed to touch the sandbox .
num wheel load test a wheel load equivalent to the test load shall be applied to pipe .
two num feet of compacted fill shall be maintained between pipe and wheel load .
num hydrostatic test when required by contract documents a hydrostatic test shall be made on completed pipe at any time after the concrete has reached design strength .
pipeline shall be filled with water to the design head above inside pipe crown and kept filled for a minimum of num h before the test .
line may be filled in one num length or between bulkheads or structures .
water used shall have a temperature above num f. test shall be for a period of four num h. exfiltration rate shall not exceed num gal per inch diameter per mi per num h num l per num mm of diameter per km per num h. num method of measurement the department will include branch connections elbows collars and tees in the length measurement for the pipe .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit castinplace concrete pipe foot num work included in payment excavation disposal of unsuitable material select backfill material placement and compaction of select backfill shall be included in the bid item unit price for each relevant pay item .
division num page num division num miscellaneous construction division contents num removal of structures and obstructions num num slope and erosion protection structures num num temporary erosion and sediment control num num soil and drainage geotextiles num num drains num num metal and concrete wall barrier num num fence num num sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement num num curb and gutter num num cattle guards num num cleaning of culverts and drainage structures num num pipe casing num num vibration monitoring and video taping num num traffic control management num num headgates and flapgates for irrigation ditches num num selectivenonselective herbicide application num num mobilization num num field laboratories and field offices num num drop inlets num num wire mesh for slope stabilization num num scaling of rock slopes num num glare shields num num rumble strips num num revegetation num num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities num num manholes num num utility items num num landscape planting num num rest area and miscellaneous landscaping items num section num removal of structures and obstructions page num section num removal of structures and obstructions num description this work consists of removing and salvaging or disposing of buildings fences structures utility lines pavement in its entirety or partially to neat cut or saw cut lines and other obstructions .
this work also includes salvaging specified materials and backfilling the resulting trenches holes and pits .
the contractor shall repair salvageable items that are damaged during removal whether designated for removal in the contract or by the project manager at no additional cost to the department .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num general if the contract identifies material for salvage remove the material and return to the department in a transportable condition .
store this material in accordance with the contract .
notify the project manager in writing of disposal details for material not identified as salvage .
destroy unusable nonhazardous combustible material .
dispose of nonhazardous non combustible material .
if the contractor disposes of this material outside the right of way provide the project manager with a copy of the written permission from the property owner .
backfill holes created by structure removal .
if the hole is within the roadway prism compact in accordance with section num embankments and section num moisture and density control .
break up concrete aprons or surfacing before burying to allow water to drain .
provide a list of removals to the project manager at the preconstruction conference with the following information for each num .
a percent of the pay item amount and num .
a monetary value .
num removal of bridges culverts and other drainage structures remove existing structures in a streambed down to the stream bottom .
remove existing structures outside the stream to one num ft below the ground surface .
remove more of the existing structure if necessary to accommodate a new structure .
if dismantling a steel or wood bridge minimize damage to the removed material if identified as salvageable matchmark the steel members unless otherwise approved by the project manager and store salvaged material in accordance with section num construction requirements general .
if removed concrete is specified for use as riprap in the contract crush and stockpile as directed by the project manager .
num removal of pipe minimize damage while removing existing pipe .
if the project manager identifies existing pipe as reusable store the reusable pipe minimizing loss or damage .
section num removal of structures and obstructions page num num removal of pavement sidewalks curbs and gutters break concrete items including pavement sidewalks curbs and gutters and dispose of them in accordance with section num construction requirements general .
if approved by the project manager recycle existing ballast base course gravel asphalt material and other surfacing materials in accordance with section num disposal of removed asphalt pavement material .
the contractor is responsible for disposing of excess material in accordance with section num construction requirements general .
num removal of fence salvage fence materials unless otherwise specified in the contract .
place barbed wire into singlestrand rolls .
minimize damage when pulling posts .
num demolition if the contract requires demolition remove the existing structures and restore to the existing surface .
before beginning demolition coordinate disconnection of utility services with the appropriate utility owner .
immediately repair broken or damaged utilities at no additional cost to the department .
num hauling and stockpiling salvageable material if the contract requires the contractor to haul and stockpile salvageable material load haul unload and stockpile the materials in accordance with the contract .
minimize damage to the material .
place the salvageable material on blocks or other approved materials and maintain the stockpile area as directed by the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit removal of structures and obstructions lump sum removal of surfacing lump sum or square yard demolition lump sum the department will make partial payments based on the percent complete of each item on the list of removals provided to the project manager at the preconstruction conference .
the department will not make additional payment for minor removals not specified in the contract .
num work included in payment num .
no direct payment will be made for filling cavities left by structure removal and the work shall be considered incidental to the applicable items num .
no direct payment will be made for loading hauling unloading and satisfactorily stockpiling salvageable material and the work shall be considered incidental to the applicable items section num removal of structures and obstructions page num num .
saw cutting when designated on contract .
section num slope and erosion protection structures page num section num slope and erosion protection structures num description this work consists of providing and placing riprap gabions revetment mattresses sacked concrete revetment concrete block revetment wrapped rock faces and other systems on the embankment slopes and the sides and bottoms of channels drain outlets ditches and other such locations .
num materials unless otherwise specified in the contract provide slope protection structures as follows num .
hexagonal doubletwisted wire mesh riprap gabions and revetment mattresses or num .
welded wire mesh gabions revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces .
provide galvanized slope protection items in accordance with astm a num .
if specified in the contract coat galvanized items with pvc in accordance with section num pvc coating .
provide doubletwisted riprap gabions and revetment mattresses in accordance with astm a num .
provide welded wire mesh gabions revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces in accordance with astm a num .
num classifications the department will classify riprap and gabions in accordance with table num riprap classifications and gabion requirements .
provide riprap with at least num of the stones meeting the specified size requirements .
use stones less than the minimum dimensions to fill voids .
for riprap class a wrapped rock faces and gabions do not use stones smaller than the mesh openings .
table num riprap classifications and gabion requirements class stone volume ft num minimum dimension in a description minimum maximum a wire enclosed riprap num num num b b nonenclosed riprap num num num c b nonenclosed riprap num num num d derrick stone num num num e grouted riprap num num num f grouted riprap num num num g rock plating num c na wrapped rockfacing num na gabions num c aminimum size in the least dimension .
bclass b and c stone at least two num fractured faces .
cnum to num of the stone at least four num inches but not more than eight num inches in the smallest dimension .
num to num of the stone no larger than four num inches in any dimension .
num riprap gabions and revetment mattresses num stone for riprap gabions revetment mattresses and rock faces section num slope and erosion protection structures page num except for class g riprap provide rocks or rough quarry stone with no more than num wear in accordance with aashto t num .
provide stone with a soundness loss of no more than num in accordance with aashto t num using a magnesium sulfate solution with a five cycle test duration .
provide stone for riprap gabions revetment mattresses and rockfaces in accordance with section num classifications .
num wire mesh provide nonraveling doubletwisted wire mesh forming hexagons for riprap gabions and revetment mattresses in accordance with section num pullapart test .
provide nonraveling welded wire mesh for gabions wrapped rock faces and revetment mattresses forming squares or rectangles in accordance with astm a num section num material properties except that the strength requirement for mattress joints is num lb per foot instead of num lb per foot .
num wire provide soft temper wire with a class num zinc coating for constructing wire mesh in accordance with astm a num .
provide numinch diameter wire for gabions and riprap and numinch diameter wire for revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces .
num mesh openings ensure that mesh openings are uniform and hexagonal .
make mesh openings for riprap and doubletwisted gabions approximately num num inch num num inch and for doubletwisted revetment mattresses approximately num num inch num num inch .
make mesh openings for welded wire mesh gabions approximately three num inch three num inch and for welded wire mesh revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces approximately num num inch three num inch .
num selvedges mechanically selvedge the edges of doubletwisted gabions revetment mattresses and wrapped rock face including end panels and diaphragms .
use a selvedge wire with a diameter of at least num inch .
num lacing and tie wire provide lacing wire for doubletwisted gabions revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces with a diameter of at least num inch .
provide tie wire for doubletwisted gabions and revetment mattresses with a diameter of at least num inch .
provide tie wire for riprap with a diameter of at least num inch .
provide lacing and tie wire with the same tensile strength and coating as the mesh wire .
num spiral binders provide spiral binders for welded wire mesh gabions revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces of the same wire quality as the mesh wire with a diameter of at least num inch .
unless otherwise approved provide spiral binders with a maximum inside diameter of num num inches and with a maximum pitch of three num inches .
num alternate fasteners the contractor may use alternative fasteners such as ring fasteners with doubletwisted wire mesh and welded wire mesh riprap gabions revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces if approved by the project manager .
provide wire for alternative fasteners in accordance with section num spiral binders .
num minimum strength of fasteners section num slope and erosion protection structures page num use fasteners that provide a minimum strength of num lb per foot for gabion baskets and num lb per foot for revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces .
num approval of alternative fasteners use a certified laboratory to test alternative fasteners in accordance with section num pullapart test .
at least num days before using alternative fasteners submit ctrs to the project manager verifying that the fasteners meet the pullapart test requirements .
provide a description of the fastener with drawings and photographs showing the number of fasteners required details of the fasteners and load capacities .
in addition num .
lock and close each interlocking fastener .
for gabions use fasteners in every other opening .
for revetment mattresses and wrapped rock faces use fasteners in every opening and num .
close each overlapping ring fastener and overlap ends a minimum of one num inch .
provide one num ring for each opening .
the department will allow this fastener for forming individual baskets but not for interconnecting baskets .
num pvc coating provide pvc coating with an average thickness of num inch and a minimum thickness of num inch per side .
apply pvc coating over the galvanizing .
coat the galvanized wire with extruded or fusion bonded pvc material .
unless otherwise specified use a gray or green colored coating .
use a pvc coating that meets the following requirements num .
specific gravity of from num to num if tested in accordance with astm d num num .
abrasion resistance of less than num weight loss if tested in accordance with astm d numa method b at num cycles csia abrader tape num grit num .
brittleness temperature no higher than num f if tested in accordance with astm d num num .
tensile strength no less than num psi for extruded coating if tested in accordance with astm d num and no less than num psi for fusion bonded coating if tested in accordance with astm d num num .
modulus of elasticity no less than num psi at num strain for extruded coating if tested in accordance with astm d num and no less than num psi at num strain for fusion bonded coating if tested in accordance with astm d num num .
ultraviolet light exposure for a test period of no less than num h using apparatus type e at num f if tested in accordance with astm g num num .
salt spray test for a test period of no less than num h if tested in accordance with astm b num .
num pullapart test num sample preparation prepare two num identical rectangular panels along a selvedge wire each about num num meshopenings wide .
attach the two num panels along the two num selvedge wires using the proposed fastener system .
if the contractor uses alternative fasteners to join two num individual gabion baskets the contractor shall include two num additional selvedge wires each mechanically wrapped with mesh wires so that each fastener contains two num selvedges and section num slope and erosion protection structures page num two num mesh wires .
num test procedures mount the joined test panels in a loading machine with grips or clamps that secure the panels uniformly along the full width .
use grips or clamps designed to transmit only tension forces .
apply the load at a uniform rate of num lb per second until failure occurs .
the department will define failure as a drop in strength under continuous loading or when an opening between two num joined selvedge wires exceeds two num inch .
the minimum allowable strength at failure is num lb per foot for joined gabions and num lb per foot for joined revetment mattresses and wrapped rock face panels .
num certification submit a certificate to the project manager stating that the following proposed items meet the requirements of this specification before their use num .
wire mesh num .
gabion baskets num .
lacing wire num .
tie wire and num .
approved alternative fastener systems .
num stakes use steel railroad rails standard weight galvanized steel pipe or steel angles for riprap stakes .
use railroad rails with a unit weight of at least num lb per yard .
use standard weight galvanized steel pipe with a minimum outside diameter of four num inches .
use steel angles that are at least four num four num num inch .
num grout provide portland cement aggregate and water for grout in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num material provide geotextile filter fabric class one num as per section num soil and drainage geotextiles num sacked concrete revetment provide sacked concrete revetment from a vendor on the departments approved products list .
provide bags of concrete that weigh from num lb to num lb each dry weight and contain from num yd³ to num yd³ of concrete .
ensure each bag contains one num of the following mixes num .
one num part cement to three num parts sand num .
a mix design in accordance with the contract or num .
a mix design approved by the state materials bureau .
provide a concrete mix capable of attaining a minimum compressive strength of num psi after num days unless otherwise specified in the contract .
keep the sacked concrete in dry storage until application .
num packaging section num slope and erosion protection structures page num use permeable biodegradable sacks made of jute cotton or scrimreinforced paper that are capable of holding the sandcement mix without significant leakage and allowing sufficient water to hydrate the concrete mix .
provide nonasphaltic threelayer laminated polyesterfiberscrimreinforced paper sacks .
perforate each of the three num layers and offset the perforations to prevent cement leakage .
use only one type and size of sack throughout the project unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num portland cement provide portland cement in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num aggregate provide fine aggregate in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num steel anchorage provide steel staples in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
use steel staples either epoxy coated in accordance with aashto m num or galvanized in accordance with astm a num .
num concrete block revetment provide concrete block revetment products from the departments approved products list .
provide concrete block units compatible with the geotextiles being used and with a minimum compressive strength of num psi unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num construction requirements num general placement requirements place riprap stones forming a continuous blanket in accordance with the contract .
unless otherwise specified construct rock plating using riprap class g to minimum thickness of num inches .
place stones with the long axis parallel to the toe of the slope with a stable bearing upon the underlying soil or stones .
place large stones as close together as possible .
use smaller stones to fill the areas between the larger stones except when the contract requires class e or f grouted riprap .
ensure that the finished riprap surface varies no more than three num inches from the specified slope and derrick stone riprap varies no more than eight num inches from the specified slope .
unless otherwise specified place the riprap foundation course in a trench excavated to num inches below the toe of the slope of the embankment or side of channel .
place a layer of class num geotextile filter fabric between the slope and erosion protection structures and the backfill material .
num grouted riprap placement fill riprap voids with grout to the full riprap thickness .
after placing grout sweep the riprap surface with a stiff broom .
section num slope and erosion protection structures page num protect grout from freezing for at least four num days after placement .
cure grouted riprap placed in hot dry weather in accordance with section num curing .
num proportioning and mixing grout use grout that consists of one num part portland cement and three num parts fine aggregate by volume .
mix with water to a workable consistency .
num class a riprap placement enclose class a riprap with wire mesh drawn tightly on all sides .
the contractor may connect wire mesh using approved fasteners or lacing wire .
weave adjacent edges at least once with double loops of lacing wire that is as strong and flexible as the mesh .
provide continuous lacing as far as possible that passes through each mesh opening .
where splicing is necessary overlap the lacing at least num inches .
space galvanized wire ties connecting top and bottom mesh layers approximately num inches on centers .
anchor the ties to the bottom wirefabric layer .
extend the ties through the rock layer and secure to the top wirefabric layer .
anchor wireenclosed riprap to slopes with steel stakes driven into the embankment .
space stakes in accordance with the contract .
num placement of geotextile place class num nonwoven geotextile filter fabric between the riprap or revetment mattresses and the supporting soil .
ensure that the fabric is in accordance with section num soil and drainage geotextiles .
num sacked concrete revetment placement place sacked concrete revetment within num ft of the specified grade and slope or as directed by the project manager .
place the foundation course in a trench excavated to num inches below the toe of the slope of the embankment or side of channel .
stagger the sack ends and steel staple anchors of succeeding courses .
tamp each row of sacks round out the bags eliminate wrinkles minimize voids and prepare an even surface for the next row .
obtain the project managers approval of the compaction method prior to backfill and compact soil behind each row of sacks before placing the next row .
do not place large stones and jagged objects adjacent to the bags .
anchor the sacks with steel staples without damaging the sacks .
after placing the sacks wet thoroughly and keep moist for at least three num days .
num concrete block revetment placement construct concrete block revetment systems in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the contract .
remove slope obstructions and fill voids with approved material or grade slopes before placing concrete blocks .
num gabions section num slope and erosion protection structures page num supply gabions within five percent num of the manufacturers stated sizes .
num assembly of gabion baskets fabricate gabions for individual assembly at the construction site .
if a gabion is greater than num num times as long as it is wide divide the gabion into cells using diaphragms of the same wire mesh as the body of the gabion .
create cells that are no longer than the gabion is wide and anchor diaphragms to the base section of the gabion .
selvedges or bind perimeter edges so the joints are as strong as the gabion body .
assemble perimeter edges using approved fasteners or lacing wire .
place fasteners in each mesh opening .
secure lacing wire by double looping through every other mesh opening .
assemble gabions using one num of the following num .
double looped lacing twice or num .
connect with approved fasteners and double looped lacing once .
num foundation preparation level and compact the top six num in of the gabion foundation to at least num of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified and to field densities in accordance with aashto t num .
num placement of gabion baskets set assembled empty baskets into the specified positions and wire each unit to adjacent units along the top and vertical edges before placing stone .
num placement of gabion stone place stone in equal layers of from nine num inch to num inch .
minimize local deformations by not filling a gabion more than num inches higher than an adjacent gabion .
hand place stone at exposed surfaces .
provide crossconnecting wires on gabions with cells num inches or higher .
place cross connecting wires directly above each layer of stone .
equally space and tightly tie two num connecting wires in each direction for each layer through two num mesh openings at opposite faces of each gabion cell .
maintain alignment while filling gabions minimizing voids and bulges and finishing to a neat square appearance .
after filling bend the lid over and tightly bind to the perimeters and diaphragms in accordance with section num assembly of gabion baskets .
num gabion marking mark each gabion in an identifiable manner that clearly indicates its size .
num placement of geotextile install class num nonwoven geotextile filter fabric between gabion baskets and supporting soil and between gabion baskets and backfill .
num placement of wrapped rock faces place wrapped rock faces within num ft of the specified grade and slope .
place the foundation course num inches below the toe of the slope of the embankment or side of channel .
section num slope and erosion protection structures page num place each level of welded wire forms with biaxial geogrid embedded in the rock face in accordance with the contract and tensioned with anchor pins to remove slack .
lap the geogrid a minimum of num inches at the edges of adjacent panels .
tamp the welded wire form face to eliminate wrinkles minimize voids and finish to an even surface .
backfill and compact behind each welded wire form level before placing the next row .
obtain the project managers approval of the compaction method .
num method of measurement the department will measure riprap classand sacked concrete revetment ___ based on the specified thickness and accepted surface area .
the department will measure concrete block revetment and wrapped rockfacing based on the accepted surface area .
the department will measure gabions and revetment mattresses based on the specified basket dimensions .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit riprap class___ cubic yard riprap class g square yard sacked concrete revetment cubic yard concrete block revetment square yard gabions cubic yard revetment mattresses cubic yard wrapped rockfacing square yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately excavation backfilling and disposal of material required for the placement of slope and erosion protection structures dewatering stakes and steel staples drainage geotextiles .
section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num section num temporary erosion and sediment control num description this work consists of preparing a storm water pollution prevention plan swppp and constructing inspecting and maintaining erosion sediment control and storm water pollution prevention facilities for the discharge of storm water associated with construction activity .
this work includes construction phase activities through final stabilization .
num storm water pollution prevention plan the storm water pollution prevention plan swppp must satisfy the requirements of the current construction general permit and must contain the following sections forms and information sheet swppp required sections num .
storm water team num .
nature of construction activities num .
emergency related projects if applicable num .
identification of other site operators num .
sequence and estimated dates of construction activities num .
site map num .
construction site pollutants num .
nonstorm water discharges num .
buffer documentation num .
temporary erosion and sediment control plan and description of storm water control measures construction phase final stabilization num .
pollution prevention procedures num .
procedures for inspection maintenance and corrective action num .
staff training num .
documentation of compliance and other federal requirements num .
swppp certification and num .
postauthorization additions to the swppp .
swppp required forms num .
notice of intent noi num .
storm water program num .
storm water management num .
npdes general construction storm water permit checklist and num .
contractor certification for npdes general permit for storm water discharges from construction sites .
an information sheet provided by the nmdot provides the following num .
a site description num .
noi inputs section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num num .
drainage parameters num .
runoff discharge and volume calculations and num .
general notes .
the information sheet is included in the plans .
for more information on swppp see section num department responsibilities .
the npdes construction general permit issued by the epa requires a swppp and submittal of the noi for construction projects with num acre or more of earth disturbance as defined in the npdes construction general permit .
num temporary erosion and sediment control plan the final stabilization temporary erosion and sediment control plan tescp prepared by the department depicts the location type and length of temporary erosion control measures offsite flows discharge locations and flow paths within the right of way on plan sheets at final placement prior to seeding operations .
for more details on the final stabilization tescp see section num department responsibilities .
the construction phase temporary erosion and sediment control plan tescp prepared by the contractor depicts the location type and length of temporary erosion control measures offsite flows discharge locations and flow paths within the work area of the right of way on construction phasing plan sheets .
for more details on the construction phasing tescp see section num contractor responsibilities .
num department responsibilities the department will prepare and include in the plans a final stabilization tescp a re vegetationerosion control plan and a swppp information sheet .
the final stabilization tescp sheets will include the following num .
site maps num .
drainage patterns num .
discharge locations num .
approximate slopes num .
areas of soil disturbance num .
major controls locations num .
structural practices num .
surface waters including wetlands num .
conditions before and after construction num .
right of way lines num .
easements num .
existing and new structures num .
existing and proposed roadway grades and num .
detours outside of the right of way .
the revegetationerosion control plan sheet will provide a description and timing of final stabilization practices .
the swppp information sheet will include the following information num .
nature of the activity section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num num .
total site area num .
total disturbed area num .
runoff coefficient for prepost construction num .
receiving waters num .
latitude and longitude of the site num .
estimate of likelihood of discharge num .
endangered species or critical habitat num .
part num of the npdes general permit water qualitybased effluent limitations num .
basic drainage and site information required for swppp development num .
msnum areas and num .
numd impaired list .
num contractor responsibilities before disturbing any soil the contractor shall prepare and submit to the project manager a contractor developed swppp based on the planned construction phasing and schedule .
the contractor shall prepare amendments to the swppp as work progresses or as phasing or scheduling changes are made .
specifically the contractor shall prepare a construction phase tescp for each construction phase complying with provisions of the npdes construction general permit and include at least the following items or activities num .
develop the swppp using a combination of structural nonstructural and vegetative best management practices bmps appropriate for the identified location to control erosion and sedimentation and manage storm water during construction activities .
num .
include proposed methods for minimizing or eliminating pollution of streams lakes reservoirs canals and other water impoundments from storm water discharge associated with construction activities .
num .
do not start earthdisturbing activities until the contractor developed swppp has been submitted and the noi is active .
num .
refer to the recommendations in the current version of the departments national pollutant discharge elimination system manual storm water management guidelines for construction and industrial activities .
num .
provide a signed certified statement that states the terms and conditions of the npdes general permit are fully understood .
include a statement of intent to fully implement the swppp as proposed or modified at the preconstruction meeting in the certification .
num .
maintain the swppp in accordance with the npdes construction general permit until final grading erosion control and seeding operation completion .
num retention of records retain and maintain swppp changes as required by the npdes general permit .
include copies of the permit language and inspection and maintenance reports in the swppp .
prepare inspection and maintenance reports from commencement of earthwork activities to project completion .
deliver the swppp to the project manager at project completion .
ensure that these records are available to the public at all times .
num notice of intent noi section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num provide a copy of the electronic noi enoi to the project manager that meets the npdes general permit requirements for discharge of storm water associated with construction activities .
the department and the contractor will prepare and submit separate enois to the epa designating the status of owneroperator .
do not begin earthdisturbing activities until the enois are listed on the epa website as active .
the epa will post enoi approvals on their website .
the contractor shall submit a copy of the contractors enoi to the project manager .
num notice to termination not prepare and submit a not to the epa within num days after project completion indicating that the operator of the project has changed to the nmdot .
provide a copy of the submittal to the project manager .
num offsite pollution prevention plan prepare and submit a swppp enoi and not if required to appropriate agencies for work performed outside the project right of way .
the contractor is responsible for all associated npdes requirements for the offsite locations .
comply with npdes requirements for offsite locations .
provide a copy of each offsite submittal to the project manager .
num liquidated damages failure to comply with the npdes program may result in epa citations .
if the contractor does any of the following the department will assess liquidated damages in accordance with table num liquidated damages schedule num .
fails to maintain temporary erosion control measures in accordance with section num erosion control inspection and maintenance num .
fails to document inspection and maintenance activities as required by the general permit or num .
fails to document in a corrective action report as required by the general permit field changes of erosion control measures as directed in writing by the project manager .
table num schedule of liquidated damages total original contract amount charge per day num num num num num num num num the project manager will keep a schedule of noncompliance that the department will use to calculate liquidated damages .
the department will assess liquidated damages until the project manager issues a written notice of compliance to the contractor .
if the contractors failure to adhere to the npdes general permit requirements results in a fine assessed against the department the contractor shall reimburse the department within ten num days of the assessment .
if the contractor does not reimburse the department within the ten num days the department may pay the fine assessed and withhold the fine amount from the contractors next partial payment .
num materials num general section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num provide materials for erosion sediment control and storm water pollution prevention measures that consist of siltation fences socks rock riprap soil retention blankets or other acceptable measures approved by the project manager .
num slope drains provide materials for slope drains that consist of pipe flexible pipe and riprap .
the project manager may approve the use of other materials .
num pipe see section num pipe culverts for approved types of pipe .
num geotextiles num drainage geotextiles provide drainage geotextiles class b drainage applications for silt fence in accordance with section num soil and drainage geotextiles unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num soil retention blanket provide a soil retention blanket from the departments approved products list or as specified in the contract and approved by the project manager .
num riprap provide riprap and rock plating in accordance with section num slope and erosion protection structures .
num temporary soil stabilant provide a temporary soil stabilant from the departments approved products list or as specified in the contract and approved by the project manager .
ensure that the soil stabilant contains an antifoaming agent and color additive to assist in its uniform application and disappears from the surface within num hours after application .
num mulch socks or composted mulch socks core material mulch see section num revegetation for mulch and composted mulch specifications .
core material woodchips the material must be num untreated wood chip and free of inorganic debris such as plastic glass metal etc .
manufacturer shall certify that the material is free of noxious weeds .
woodchip size shall not be smaller than one num inch and shall not exceed three num inches in diameter shavings shall not be more than five percent num of the total mass .
containment mesh furnish containment mesh num biodegradable photodegradable such as burlap twine uv photodegradable plastic polyester or other acceptable material as directed by the project manager .
the mesh should not exceed num inch in diameter .
furnish biodegradable or photodegradable containment mesh when the socks will remain in place as part of the permanent or temporary vegetative plan .
the containment mesh shall be greater than nine num inches in height after being packed the containment mesh shall be section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num densely packed so that the socks do not deform .
the project manager will determine the maximum allowable height for containment mesh .
num construction requirements num general apply appropriate erosion and sediment control measures for construction activities per the accepted contractor developed swppp .
install temporary erosion and sediment control features and maintain until final grading erosion control and seeding operations completion .
incorporate permanent erosion and sediment control measures such as riprap pads or other forms of energy dissipaters at the outlets of structures into the project at the earliest practical time as directed by the project manager .
num contractors operations keep construction activity to a minimum within the project right of way adjacent to the project to prevent damage to vegetation .
repair damage or disturbance to areas not necessary for construction of the project at no additional cost to the department .
keep construction areas in an orderly condition and promptly dispose of refuse and discarded materials .
as directed by the project manager provide erosion and sediment control measures necessary to correct negligent or improper installation at no additional cost to the department .
num sequence of operations before work begins the project manager and the contractor will conduct a site inspection to review the planned erosion control protections .
use the contractor developed swppp for this review .
coordinate the placement and maintenance of the temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures shown in the contractor developed swppp .
the department will assess liquidated damages in accordance with section num liquidated damages if the contractor begins earthdisturbing work before the following num .
submission of the enoi and obtaining notification of permit coverage or num .
placing erosion control measures .
num watercourse protection provide filtration or settling basins to treat water used to wash aggregate or water used for similar operations .
locate and construct waste disposal areas and haul roads to prevent sediment from entering streams and water impoundment areas or leaving the project .
do not operate mechanized equipment in perennial streams unless otherwise specified in the contract .
use temporary bridges or other crossing structures constructed of nonerodable material where frequent stream crossings are necessary .
clear false work piling debris and other obstructions placed during construction from streambeds arroyos and watercourses as soon as possible .
do not allow waste from haul section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num truck cleaning to drain into watercourses .
the contractor shall provide the necessary buffer protection for adjacent surface waters as required by the general permit .
num temporary soil stabilant application apply temporary soil stabilant to exposed areas not being worked .
begin stabilization within num work day after work ceases unless construction resumes within num days after work ceases .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for storage and application of the soil stabilant .
maintain the rate of application recommended by the manufacturer .
if the soil stabilant does not produce the required results the project manager and the departments landscape architect may modify the manufacturers application rate .
reapply stabilant to areas of continued erosion and contractor activity within four num weeks after the initial application at no additional cost to the department as directed by the project manager .
num mulch socks or composted mulch socks install the socks near the downstream perimeter of the disturbed area as shown on the swppp to intercept sediment from sheet flow in the ditch as check dams or as inlet protection as directed by the project manager .
close contact between the earth and sock should be maintained by removing remaining vegetation rocks debris and dirt clods .
the socks will be interlocked or overlapped at the ends .
anchoring should be adequate to prevent displacement during design rain events and to prevent flow under the socks .
the anchors will be two num inch by two num inch wooden stakes or as approved by the project manager .
socks used as check dams or placed in areas where the flow is more concentrated will be staked .
num earthwork operations protect slopes as excavation or embankment construction progresses .
maintain and protect the earthwork in roadway sections through all construction stages to prevent sediment from leaving the construction limits .
provide temporary slope drain facilities that can collect runoff and carry it to the slope bottoms .
use drain materials capable of length change as earthwork operations progress .
num swppp inspection and maintenance inspect and maintain the project site for npdes compliance during the project .
inspect and maintain installations at the following frequencies per the general permit num .
at least once every seven num calendar days or num. once every num calendar days and within num hours of a num inch or greater rainfall event or num. for arid semiarid or droughtstricken areas .
the contractor may reduce the frequency of inspections to once per month and within num hours of the occurrence of a storm event of num inches or greater if your site is located in an arid semiarid or droughtstricken area as these terms are defined in appendix a of the construction general permit and construction is occurring during the seasonally dry period or during a period in which drought is predicted to occur .
the contractor must document that they are using this reduced schedule and the beginning and ending dates of the seasonally dry period in the swppp .
section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num maintenance work includes but is not limited to repair of damaged installations removal of trapped sediment and cleaning of any silt fence .
remove accumulated silt when the control installation becomes num filled .
inspect disturbed areas material storage areas discharge locations and structural control measures .
inspect vehicle entrances and exits for material being tracked offsite .
document each inspection on the swppp inspection form provided by the department .
submit the inspection report signed by a npdestrained and qualified person to the project manager within num hours after the inspection .
include copies in the contractors swppp .
install a rain gauge at the project site to track rainfall amounts for the inspection schedule .
designate the person responsible for the swppp on the qualification form provided by the department and sign .
ensure that the person is familiar with the project swppp and document the responsible persons experience and training on the qualification form .
include it with the swppp .
the project manager will assign a qualified department representative with qualification form experienced and trained in implementing bmps .
repair damaged erosion and sediment control installations within three num days of an inspection or following notification by the project manager that repairs are required .
if a damaged erosion control installation could result in sediment discharge into a live stream water impoundment or other body of water initiate repairs within num hours or sooner as necessary or as directed by the project manager .
maintain erosion and sediment control installations specified to remain following completion of the work until the project is completed .
dispose of erosion and sediment control installations in accordance with the contract or as directed by the project manager .
num removal of control installations remove temporary erosion and sediment control installations and features from the project area when no longer required unless otherwise specified in the contract or directed by the project manager .
after removing temporary erosion control installations restore ground lines cover and features as closely as possible to original condition .
removed sediment may be deposited at locations within the right of way if approved by the project manager .
where removed sediment is deposited in previously undisturbed areas the contractor shall reseed those areas at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the department will measure check dams along the crest of the dam .
num swppp plan preparation and maintenance the department will reimburse the cost to prepare the swppp prepare and install all bmps for the construction phase tescp and maintain the construction phase tescp bmps under pay item swppp plan preparation and maintenance .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit silt fence linear foot check dam type ____ linear foot earth dike linear foot section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num pipe slope drain linear foot sediment trap cubic yard soil retention blanket square yard temporary soil stabilant acre culvert protection square yard drop inlet protection type ____ each swppp plan preparation and maintenance lump sum mulch socks linear foot composted mulch socks linear foot swppp plan preparation and maintenance includes swppp preparation bmps installation of bmps inspection and maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures preparation of inspection reports updating andor modifying maintaining and retaining the swppp and other related records .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the above items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
cleaning and maintenance of the temporary erosion and sediment control measures b .
posts hardware and appurtenances of the temporary erosion and sediment control measures c. riprap for pipe slope drains and sediment traps d. excavation and disposal of sediment deposits e. removal and disposal of temporary erosion and sediment control measures if required f. subsequent applications of temporary soil stabilant due to unsatisfactory results g. removal and replacement of the measure at the same location due to construction and h. relocation of bmps during phasing and final placement .
num partial payments the department will make an initial partial payment for swppp plan preparation and maintenance upon receipt and acceptance of the contractor swppp based on the following equation pnum l x num num where pnum is the initial partial payment upon receipt and approval of contractor swppp .
the department will make monthly partial payments for swppp plan preparation and maintenance based on the rate of progress of the project less previous partial payments for this item .
the department will calculate partial payments in accordance with the following equation pnum a x lb c num where section num temporary erosion and sediment control page num pnum is the partial payment during the progress of the project l is the total bid amount for swppp plan preparation and maintenance a is the number of days charged the contractor toward completion of the project b is the contract time c is the total amount of previous partial payments for this item .
section num soil and drainage geotextiles page num section num soil and drainage geotextiles num description this work consists of providing and installing geotextiles .
num materials reserved num classifications use the class of geotextile in accordance with table num cross reference of old classes to new classes of geotextiles .
table num cross reference of old classes to new classes of geotextiles geotextile old class new class subsurface drainage a or b num or num sediment control b num erosion control c or d num or num separation c or d num ornum stabilization none num the department specifies class num for more severe or harsh installation conditions where there is a great potential for geotextile damage and specifies class num and num for less severe conditions .
num subsurface drainage geotextiles the department prohibits the use of woven slit film geotextiles or geotextiles made from yarns of a flat tapelike character .
provide class num geotextiles for drain system installations that require use of very coarse sharp angular aggregate with a one num inch diameter or greater or require a depth of trench greater than six num ft .
provide class num geotextiles for general underdrain installations that require smooth graded surfaces having no sharp angular projections and fine aggregate .
num erosion control geotextiles the department prohibits the use of woven slit film geotextiles or geotextiles made from yarns of a flat tapelike character .
if the contractor uses a woven monofilament geotextile the contractor shall provide a class num geotextile otherwise the contractor shall provide a class num geotextile .
num separation geotextiles provide separation geotextiles that are of woven or nonwoven material .
use a class num separator for pavement structures constructed over soils with an rvalue greater than num to separate dissimilar materials where water seepage is allowable .
use class num geotextiles where installation requires a depth of trench greater than ten num ft where stone drop height is to be more than zero or where there is no sand cushion protection .
the department requires field trials where stone drop height exceeds three num ft or where individual stone weight exceeds num lb .
use class num geotextiles to prevent mixing of a subgrade soil and an aggregate cover material subbase base select embankment etc to separate dissimilar materials where section num soil and drainage geotextiles page num water seepage is allowable .
do not use class num geotextiles under pavement .
the contractor may also use class num geotextiles in structures or under conditions where the geotextile is protected by a sand cushion or by num drop height placement of stone .
use table num required class of separator geotextile and cover thickness for rvalues greater than or equal to num to determine the class of separator geotextile and the required minimum thickness .
table num required class of separator geotextile and cover thickness for rvalues greater than or equal to num required minimum cover thickness compacted required class of geotextile num inch .
num num inch .
num do not use aggregate larger than one num inch .
num stabilization geotextiles provide stabilization geotextile in wet saturated conditions to provide separation filtration and also reinforcement .
use stabilization geotextiles for pavement structures constructed over soils with rvalues from ten num to num .
the contractor may provide stabilization geotextiles made of woven or nonwoven material .
the contractor may use stabilization geotextiles in applications that require a design by a licensed professional engineer .
obtain department approval of these designs .
num certification for each class of geotextile fabric provide a certificate from the manufacturer stating that the geotextile meets the physical and chemical requirements in accordance with aashto m num and that geotextile fabric meets rvalue requirements for the respective application .
include in the certification the product name chemical composition of the filaments or yarns or other relevant information to fully describe the geotextile .
submit the certification to the project manager before geotextile placement .
rvalues corresponding to california bearing ratio cbr used in aashto m num are presented in table num cbr values used in aashto m num and corresponding r values .
table num cbr values used in aashto m num and corresponding rvalues soil strength cbr corresponding rvalue num num num num num num num construction requirements num geotextile packaging storage and handling use geotextile rolls wrapped with a material to protect the geotextile including the ends of the roll from damage .
cover and elevate geotextile rolls during storage to protect them from the following section num soil and drainage geotextiles page num num .
site construction damage tearing excessive mud wet cement or epoxy num .
precipitation num .
extended ultraviolet radiation including direct sunlight num .
chemicals that are strong acids or strong bases num .
flames including welding sparks and num .
temperatures above num f and below num f. num geotextile exposure after placement do not expose geotextiles to the elements after placement for more than num days unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
num site preparation prepare the installation site by clearing and grading the area and preparing a firm smooth surface on which to place the geotextiles .
remove sharp objects and large stones and cut trees and shrubs flush with the smooth surface .
ensure correct orientation roll direction .
place geotextiles as smoothly as possible on the prepared surface pull tight align and anchor such that the geotextile is free of wrinkles and does not show evidence of holes tears or rips before placing cover material on the geotextile .
before placing cover material hold geotextiles in place by pins staples or piles of fill or rock as required by fill placement procedures .
on curves fold or cut geotextiles to conform to the curve .
the department will not allow vehicles directly on the geotextile but will allow vehicles after the contractor places at least six num inches of cover material on the geotextile .
do not allow vehicles to turn on the cover material until at least two num lifts of cover material have been placed .
num backfill obtain approval from the project manager before beginning backfill operations .
do not end dump backfill directly onto exposed geotextile .
backfill by end dumping onto previously spread backfill and then pushing the dumped backfill over the exposed geotextile .
on subgrades having an rvalue less than num dump and spread the material placed on the geotextile to minimize the potential of a localized subgrade failure .
backfill in layers from six num inches to eight num inches deep uncompacted unless otherwise specified in the contract .
after placement compact each lift to num of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
compact the top lift in accordance with section num subgrade preparation .
the contractor may use vibratory compaction equipment on initial layers of material if approved by the project manager .
repair ruts occurring during construction by filling with additional material and compacting to the specified density to maintain an even backfill surface and the minimum lift thickness over the geotextile .
obtain the project managers approval of geotextile placement before covering .
num subsurface drainage geotextiles place geotextiles in accordance with section num drains where specified .
use subsurface drainage geotextiles against soil in an underground drainage system or in an edgedrain to allow for longterm passage of water into a subsurface drain system while section num soil and drainage geotextiles page num retaining the in situ soil .
the primary function of the geotextile in subsurface drainage applications is filtration .
provide one num soil sample to the department for testing to confirm the applicable apparent opening size based on the percent of in situ soil passing the no .
num sieve and cohesiveness pi .
compact the aggregate with vibratory equipment to a minimum compaction of num of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
if a higher compactive effort is necessary substitute a geotextile suited for more severe installation conditions .
num sediment control geotextiles place geotextiles in accordance with section num temporary erosion and sediment control where necessary .
place and maintain sediment control geotextiles as a temporary control measure to prevent eroded soil from being transported off the construction site to rivers streams and impoundments and to prevent damage to private property from storm water runoff .
num erosion control geotextiles place geotextiles in accordance with section num slope and erosion protection structures where necessary .
use erosion control geotextiles between erosion control structures riprap and gabions and the in situ soil to prevent soil loss resulting in excessive scour and to mitigate hydraulic uplift pressures that may cause instability of an erosion control structure .
num separationstabilization geotextiles use separationstabilization geotextiles as a semipermeable separator to prevent mixing of a subgrade soil and subbase or base material .
fold overlap sew or join adjacent geotextile rolls in accordance with table num minimum overlap requirements for separationstabilization geotextiles unless manufacturers recommendations or the contract are more stringent .
table num minimum overlap requirements for separationstabilization geotextiles soil strength rvalue unsewn seams overlap inch sewn seams overlap inch num num num num num num num num num num ensure that both factory and field sewn or sealed seams meet or exceed the strength requirements as required by the manufacturer .
num repair of damaged geotextiles to repair subsurface drainage erosion control and sediment control geotextiles clear the damaged area and repair in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
obtain the project managers approval of repairs .
to repair separationstabilization geotextiles clear the damaged area plus an additional num ft around the damaged area and repair in accordance with table num minimum overlap requirements for separationstabilization geotextiles unless manufacturers section num soil and drainage geotextiles page num recommendations or the contract are more stringent .
replace removed cover material and compact to the specified density .
num method of measurement the department will only measure the area of one num layer at geotextile overlaps .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit geotextile class square yard payment for achieving subgrade preparation in accordance with section num subgrade preparation will be paid as subgrade preparation .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately repair of damaged geotextile fabric as a result of the contractors negligence improper shipping handling packaging or storing .
geotextile packaging storage and handling .
overlaps anchoring splicing and seam assemblies .
section num drains page num section num drains num description this work consists of constructing underdrains french drains vertical drains and drain outlets .
num definitions drain outlet lateral .
a drain outlet lateral is a nonperforated pipe placed in an unlined backfilled trench french drain .
a french drain is a nonvertical rectangular prismshaped subterranean watercollector drainage system consisting of opengraded granular material wrapped in geotextile fabric drainage blanket and a perforated collector pipe at the drainage blankets lowest elevation underdrain .
an underdrain is a collector drainage system typically located under pavement sections .
an underdrain system consists of a perforated collector pipe placed in a geotextilelined shallow narrow trench that is then backfilled with untreated opengraded base course vertical drain .
a vertical drain is a vertical rectangular prismshaped subterranean watercollector drainage system consisting of opengraded granular material wrapped in geotextile fabric .
num materials num pipe num polyvinyl chloride pipe provide pvc pipe in accordance with the following num .
astm d num num .
astm d num num .
astm d num and num .
astm d num .
provide perforations and slots in accordance with aashto m num except provide perforations with a diameter of num in unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num polyethylene pipe provide polyethylene pipe in accordance with aashto m num aashto m num and astm d num .
num metal pipe provide metal pipe in accordance with section num pipe culverts .
num drainage geotextiles provide drainage geotextiles for underdrains in accordance with section num soil and drainage geotextiles .
num granular materials provide granular backfill in accordance with section num base course for open graded base course or as specified in the contract .
section num drains page num num hardware screen provide galvanized steel or stainless steel hardware screen for drain outlets with one num inch nominal mesh openings .
provide galvanized connecting hardware .
num precast headwall provide precast headwall with hardware screen as per contract .
num construction requirements num placement of drainage geotextiles place drainage geotextiles in accordance with section num soil and drainage geotextiles .
connect and maintain overlaps of geotextiles so that the drainage geotextile covers the drain for the entire length and has no breaks or holes .
num placement of pipe place perforated pipe with the perforations down unless otherwise specified in the contract .
join pipe sections securely with the appropriate couplings fittings or bands as recommended by the manufacturer for the specific application .
place nonperforated pipe with the bellend upgrade .
close upgrade ends with concrete plugs to prevent entry of soil materials .
num placement of opengraded backfill after the department inspects and approves the pipe installation place granular material in layers no more than num inches thick and compact after placement of each layer with a steel wheeled selfpropelled roller that will provide good consolidation without excessive breakage of the aggregate to the satisfaction of the project manager .
do not displace pipe or geotextile .
num placement of impermeable material if the contract requires the contractor to place an impermeable material around the drain system the project manager must approve the material .
place the impermeable material in no more than six num inch layers of loose thickness .
compact each layer of impermeable material to at least num of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
num outlet laterals place nonperforated pipe in the unlined trench with ends firmly joined as recommended by the manufacturer for the specific application .
after the department inspects and approves the pipe installation backfill the trench with approved material in layers and compact in accordance with section num construction requirements general .
num exposed drain outlets provide hardware screens for openings of exposed drain outlets .
mechanically secure the screen along the circumference of the outlet without damaging the drain .
provide precast concrete headwall with hardware screen when specified in the contract .
section num drains page num num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit underdrains linear foot vertical drains linear foot french drains linear foot the department will pay for excavation in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately all opengraded aggregate geotextiles pipe precast concrete headwall with hardware screen rodent shield hardware and compaction .
section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num section num metal and concrete wall barrier num description this work consists of constructing metal barrier and end treatments and concrete wall barrier cwb .
num materials num metal barrier elements the types of metal barrier are as follows num .
wbeam metal barrier num .
thrie beam metal barrier num .
wbeam weathering metal barrier and num .
thrie beam weathering metal barrier .
use materials for metal barrier installations in accordance with a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware num aashtoagcartba report .
num rail elements num galvanized metal barrier provide wbeam and thrie beam rail elements with a corrugated beam in accordance with aashto m num type ii class a .
galvanize steel rail elements before or after fabrication in accordance with aashto m num if necessary .
provide wire rope or wire cable and required fittings in accordance with aashto m num for the specified diameter and strength class .
num weathering metal barrier provide wbeam and thrie beam materials for corrosionresistant weathering metal barrier in accordance with aashto m num type iv class a and astm a num type iv and ensure they have a corrosion resistance at least four num times that of plain carbon steel .
num fasteners unless otherwise specified galvanize fasteners in accordance with aashto m num or astm a num .
galvanize after fabrication .
provide bolts in accordance with astm a num and nuts in accordance with astm a num grade a or better .
provide fasteners for weathering metal barrier in accordance with aashto m num for type iv beams .
num posts num wood posts and wood blocks provide wood posts and wood blocks that are southern yellow pine western larch ponderosa pine douglas fir or lodgepole pine and that are either rough sawn unplaned or snums with nominal dimensions specified and with a stress grade of at least num psi .
section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num the size tolerance of roughsawn blocks in the direction of the bolt holes will be within num inch of specified dimensions .
only use one num combination of post and block for any one num continuous length of barrier .
use straight posts without defects that do not vary more than one num inch from a straight line connecting both ends .
perform cutting framing routing and boring before applying preservative treatment to the timber .
use pressure treated wood posts and blocks with petroleumpentachlorophenol consisting of a maximum of num by weight of petroleum oil and a minimum of five percent num by weight of pentachlorophenol with ammoniacal copper arsenite or with chromated copper arsenate .
use the emptycell process for petroleumpentachlorophenol treatment .
retain a pentachlorophenol amount of at least num lb of dry salt per cubic foot of wood .
perform treatment with ammoniacal copper arsenite or chromated copper arsenate in accordance with awpa cnum .
provide wood preservatives in accordance with aashto m num .
num structural shape posts and blocks provide structural shape posts in accordance with astm a num and galvanize them in accordance with astm a num .
do not perform punching drilling or cutting after galvanizing .
provide blocks with metal barriers in accordance with nchrp report num .
provide plastic blocks in accordance with the departments approved products list .
ensure suppliers of plastic blocks proposed for inclusion on the departments approved products list submit certification to the project manager for approval by the traffic services engineer .
num cwb the types of cwb are as follows num .
slipformed cwb num .
castinplace cwb and num .
precast cwb .
use class a concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
provide reinforcing steel in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
provide preformed asphalt joint filler in accordance with aashto m num .
provide penetrating water repellent in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
num cwb steel access panel provide and install cwb steel access panels in accordance with the plans or as directed by the project manager .
contour the steel access panel to the shape of and flush with the cwb .
the department will not allow the steel access panel to compromise the structural integrity and performance of the cwb assembly .
provide steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
coat the steel access panel in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
num materials certification provide mtrs and other test reports of the metal and the coating to the project manager certifying that the materials and fabrication are in accordance with these specifications .
fabrication shall be done by an identifiable source .
section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num num metal barrier end treatments the types of end treatments are as follows num .
metal barrier end treatmenttype b num .
metal barrier end treatmentdeparture end type num type num type a turndown or type d buried in backslope and num .
metal barrier end treatmentapproach end type num type num or type d. limit the use of metal barrier end treatment type b to curved guardrail installations on lowvolume lowspeed roadways in accordance with the contract .
suppliers of metal barrier end treatments proposed for inclusion on the departments approved products list shall submit certification for approval by the traffic services engineer .
the manufacturer will sign and notarize the certification stating that the materials have met the testing requirements in accordance with nchrp report num .
provide the project manager with the manufacturers certificates literature and shop drawings before fabrication and installation of the terminal and its transition .
provide metal barrier end treatments for types num and num in accordance with the contract and the departments most recent approved products list .
use the num ft length systems type num on the roadways with a speed of num mph or greater or as specified in the contract or directed by the district traffic engineer .
use the num ft length systems type num on other roadways or as specified in the contract or directed by the district traffic engineer via the project manager .
cover the entire face of the impact head with one num continuous piece of type vii reflective yellow sheeting with three num inch strips of black tape spaced num num inch apart and sloping downward at a num angle toward the side of the guardrail on which traffic is to pass unless otherwise directed by the district traffic engineer via the project manager .
num member identification and marking ensure the manufacturer permanently stamps the specific type of metal barrier end treatment at each location to correspond with those shown on the shop drawings provided to the project manager so that each is readily identifiable in the field .
num reflective barrier delineators provide ambercolored reflective barrier delineators for median barriers and white reflectors for shoulderside barriers in accordance with the contract and section num traffic markers .
place reflective barrier delineators back to back on median barriers .
num construction requirements during construction prevent exposed metal or concrete barrier ends from creating a hazard to the traveling public .
num metal barrier installation position steel parts stored in transit in open cars or trucks or outside in yards or at job sites to allow free drainage and air circulation .
handle fabricated steel parts to avoid gouges scratches and dents .
section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num keep the steel clean of deleterious material .
if the contract specifies a weathering metal barrier the department will not consider natural oxidation mill scale to be deleterious material and will not require galvanizing blast cleaning or pickling of weathering metal barrier to remove the mill scale .
draw bolts tight except adjustment bolts .
use bolts that are long enough to extend beyond the nuts .
num posts set posts plumb in handdug or mechanically made holes or by driving .
if upward vertical adjustment of posts is necessary remove and reinstall the post .
when driving avoid battering or distorting the posts .
the department will allow the contractor to drive steel posts through the asphalt surfacing .
the contractor shall not drive wooden posts through asphalt surfacing unless the contractor precuts or drills guide holes through the asphalt material .
perform post drilling and driving that does not cause bulging distressing or other disturbance of the asphalt surface .
backfill and compact postholes with acceptable material such as base course or cold mix placed in layers to within num inches of the hma grade .
fill compact and crown the remaining depth of the hole with asphalt material or cold mix .
crown shall not exceed two num inches .
the contractor may use concrete instead of asphalt surfacing material at no additional cost to the department and if approved by the project manager .
should bulging or other distress of the asphalt surfacing occur when driving steel posts remove and reinstall these posts using guide holes drilled through the asphalt surfacing .
make the guide holes with a maximum diameter in accordance with table num required guide hole diameter .
table num required guide hole diameter type maximum diameter round wood diameter of post square wood dimension of side steel shape dimension of least side after precutting or drilling the guide holes if bulging or other distress of the asphalt surfacing occurs or if posts can not be driven to the specified depths cease the driving remove the posts and extend the guide holes as necessary .
num metal rail installation erect smooth and continuous rail elements .
overlap rails in the same direction as the traffic flow of the nearest lane .
the department will only allow such drilling or cutting that is necessary for special connections and for sampling in the field .
shopfabricate curved rails having a radius of num ft or less to the appropriate curvature specified in the plans .
num repair of damaged coating if the galvanizing of metal barrier or appurtenances is damaged repair the coating by galvanizing or by coating with two num coats of zinc dustzinc oxide paint in accordance with federal specification ttpnum or military specification mlpnum .
section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num num concrete wall barrier use cast in place precast or slip formed permanent cwb .
ensure that precast cwb units are the same length and design .
the contractor is responsible for damage to precast cwb occurring during the work .
the project manager may reject or accept the damaged precast cwb .
if the project manager rejects precast cwb because of damage replace or repair at no additional cost to the department .
num concrete wall barrier fabrication fabricate cwb in accordance with section num portland cement concrete and section num concrete structures .
construct temporary precast cwb in accordance with the plans .
construct permanent cwb in accordance with the plans .
ensure that the top of the completed barrier does not deviate from the plans more than num inch .
give the cwb a class num rubbed surface finish or class num special surface finish in accordance with section num finishing .
if the manufacturer requires sandblasting do not displace mortar used in the surface finish from the bubble pockets pits depressions and honeycombs .
cure cwb in accordance with section num curing .
treat the entire exposed surfaces of cwb with penetrating waterrepellent treatment in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
when called for in the contract apply penetrating water repellent first then the special surface finish .
the department will not require fly ash in the pcc used to fabricate temporary traffic control cwb .
num concrete wall barrier joint treatment when sawing transverse weakenedplane joints perform the sawing after the concrete has hardened enough to prevent raveling crumbling or shape deformation .
saw control joints at num ft intervals .
after completing the sawing operations clean the sawed area of debris .
make a construction joint after the days permanent placement operations and at locations when concrete placement is interrupted for num min or more .
num concrete wall barrier installation construct footings and foundations and prepare the subgrade as necessary before placing the cwb .
construct vertically offset atypical cwb as specified in the plans .
num temporary concrete wall barrier requirements precast temporary cwb as specified in the plans .
do not intermix cwb of different designs .
set temporary cwb in accordance with the contract and the approved traffic control plan .
provide necessary loading hauling and unloading at designated sites .
the contractor shall reset the cwb during construction as required by the contract .
section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num after completing the project remove load haul unload and stockpile the stateretained or stateprovided cwb at the locations required in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
ensure that stateretained cwb stateprovided cwb and contractorretained temporary cwb are in accordance with section num concrete wall barrier .
num temporary concrete wall barrier stateretained concrete wall barrier if the contract specifies stateretained cwb provide new cwb .
temporary cwb stateretained cwb including shop drawings and connecting hardware as approved by the project manager will become the property of the department upon completion of the project .
remove and dispose of state retained cwb that is not in the opinion of the project manager in satisfactory condition at or before final stockpile location .
num stateprovided concrete wall barrier if the contract specifies stateprovided cwb load haul and unload stateprovided cwb from origins to destinations .
stateprovided cwb will remain the property of the department upon completion of the project .
if using stateprovided cwb provide connecting hardware for the cwb assembly if missing from the cwb units .
num temporary concrete wall barrier contractorretained concrete wall barrier if the contract specifies contractorretained temporary cwb provide new or used cwb .
contractorretained temporary cwb will remain the property of the contractor upon completion of the project .
provide connecting hardware for the cwb assembly .
num metal barrier end treatment fabricate and install metal barrier end treatment systems in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and approved shop drawings .
install posts in accordance with section num posts with the following exceptions num .
set metal barrier end treatment breakaway posts plumb in handdug or mechanically made holes and do not drive them num .
backfill postholes with existing materials or materials such as base course or cold mix num .
backfill postholes in six num inch lifts and rod each lift to within two num inches of the hma grade num .
fill and crown the remaining depth of the hole with asphalt material or cold mix and compact .
do not crown more than two num inches above hma grade and num .
the contractor may use concrete instead of asphalt to fill the remaining depth of the hole to match the existing concrete roadway surfacing .
ensure that foundation tubes do not project more than four num inches above the ground .
immediately repair traffic damage to barrier components .
section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num ensure that the manufacturer provides onsite assistance when installing metal barrier end treatments for the first time .
provide manufacturer certification of the installation to the department .
provide manufacturer certification at the project managers request .
also have the manufacturers representative present for final approval of the metal barrier end treatment installation .
num embankment grading requirements compact the embankment material to num of maximum density .
unless otherwise specified in the contract include the cost and placement of the embankment material and num num inches of asphalt material for the num slope in the bid item unit price for the metal barrier pay item .
num method of measurement num metal barrier measurement the department will measure the metal barrier installation along the face of the railing from end to end including the wbeam portion of the end treatment for types b and d end treatment systems .
the department will include the num ft section of metal barrier in the measurement of type a end treatment systems .
the department will include the num ft section of metal barrier in the measurement for type num end treatment systems and the num ft section of metal barrier in the measurement for type num end treatment systems .
the department will measure the metal barrier thrie beam to wbeam transitions as thrie beam .
doubled beams will be counted as singles .
num cwb measurement the department will measure the cwb along the centerline of the barrier .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit metal barrier wbeam linear foot metal barrier thrie beam linear foot metal barrier end treatment each weathering metal barrier wbeam linear foot weathering metal barrier thrie beam linear foot concrete wall barrier linear foot temporary concrete wall barrier linear foot resetting of cwb linear foot statefurnished cwb linear foot temporary cwb retained by the contractor linear foot concrete wall barrier modified linear foot concrete wall barrier half section linear foot num work included in payment section num metal and concrete wall barrier page num the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
all loading hauling unloading stockpiling or disposal b. footings foundations and subgrade preparation c. reflective sheeting and reflectors installed on metal barrier and impact head of end treatment d. all connecting hardware e. reflective barrier delineators installed on permanent and temporary cwb f. curing of cwb and application of penetrating waterrepellent treatment g. backfilling and compacting of holes created by removal and installation of posts h. patching material at posts i .
connection pins for temporary cwb j .
concrete wall barrier access panel k. reinforcing steel l. double thrie beam section at thrie beam to barrier railing transition m. metal barrier end treatment posts sleeves rail and impact head n. embankment material and num ½ inch layer of bituminous material for the num slope .
section num fence page num section num fence num description this work consists of constructing fence and gates .
num materials num certification submit independent testing laboratory certification to the project manager that indicates the fencing materials meet these specifications .
the department may inspect the manufacturing methods at manufacturing plants and may obtain material samples for testing and may base acceptance on the quality of manufacturing lots .
num barbed wire and woven wire fence num wire provide wire and wire components with at least a class num zinc coating in accordance with astm a num or astm a num unless otherwise specified in the contract .
instead of class num coating the contractor may coat the wire with aluminum alloy covering at least num oz per square foot of wire surface .
num barbed wire provide barbed wire and barbs in accordance with astm a num .
provide composite barbed wire strands that consist of two num coated wires with diameters of num inch .
provide round barbs that have a coated diameter of num inch with either twopoint barbs spaced four num inches apart or fourpoint barbs spaced five num inches apart .
provide stays for barbed wire fences in accordance with astm a num with a coated diameter of at least num inch and with lengths and spacing in accordance with the contract .
num woven wire provide woven wire in accordance with astm a num design number num unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num post fasteners provide coated staples with a diameter of at least num inch and a length of at least num num inch use for fastening fence wire to wood posts .
num brace wire provide coated brace wire with a diameter of at least num inch use for constructing braces and intermediate braces with wood posts .
num tie wire provide coated tie wire for fastening barbed or woven wire to steel posts with a diameter of at least num inch .
the contractor may use wire fasteners or metal clamps with thicknesses of num inch or greater instead of tie wires if approved by the project manager .
num posts provide metal or wood corner brace intermediate brace gate and line posts of the specified type size and length in accordance with the contract .
num metal posts section num fence page num provide metal posts and braces of rail billet or commercialgrade steel in accordance with astm a num or astm f num for galvanized standard weight pipe .
provide csection posts in accordance with astm a num .
galvanize steel posts in accordance with aashto m num for grade num steel and provide a top coating specified for grade num steel or an equivalent or better coating from the departments approved products list .
coat edges and damaged areas of posts in accordance with astm a num .
use posts of the same coating and color .
provide posts that weigh no less than num of the specified weight and are of the specified length num inch num inch .
provide line posts with a minimum weight of num lb per foot not including anchor plates .
the contractor may provide ibeam tbeam ubeam ybar or csection line posts .
provide line posts with corrugations lugs ribs or notches spaced one num inch on centers to attach fence wire .
the department will not accept posts with punched tabs used for crimping around the wire .
provide anchor plates with an area of at least num inch num and that weigh at least num lb .
clamp weld or rivet anchor plates to the post section to prevent displacement when driving the posts .
num wood posts provide wood posts cut from live southern yellow pine lodge pole pine or ponderosa pine trees .
provide straight posts that are free of decay and other defects barkfree trimmed smooth of knots and projections and with both ends sawed off perpendicular to the centerline .
provide an average nominal diameter at the top of each post of at least six num inches .
ensure the circumference of corner brace intermediate brace and gate posts is at least num inches measured six num inches below the top of the post .
the contractor may provide line posts with a slight crook in one num direction but the post may not vary more than num num inch from a straight line connecting both ends of the post .
ensure the average nominal diameter of the top of each line post is at least three num inches .
ensure the circumference of line posts is at least nine num inches measured six num inches below the top of the post .
provide coast region douglas fir or new mexico red spruce or fir braces for wood posts .
num preservative treatment of wood posts provide wood posts pressure treated with pentachlorophenol in accordance with section num preservatives and treatment methods with a minimum retention of num lb per cubic foot .
num gates for fence constructed with woven wire and barbed wire the contractor shall provide tubular steel or steel panel frame gates .
provide gates with woven wire or chain link fabric filler if specified in the contract or directed by the project manager .
if providing barbed wire gates use the same materials as for the barbed wire fence .
provide frame tube and panel materials for gates in accordance with aashto m num unless otherwise specified in the contract .
galvanize gates in accordance with section num metal posts or coat in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
use interstate green as the finished color coating except for galvanized gates and unless section num fence page num otherwise specified in the contract .
num fittings provide fittings hardware and appurtenances for fences and gates that are of commercialquality steel malleable iron or wrought iron and galvanized in accordance with astm a num .
num chain link fence num posts provide posts that are tubular steel hcolumn or csection for line posts .
provide either grade num or grade num steel posts in accordance with aashto m num .
provide grade num tubular posts braces and top rails in accordance with astm f num for galvanized standard weight pipe .
provide grade num steel posts in accordance with astm a num or astm a num .
provide csection line posts in accordance with astm a num .
provide hcolumn posts in accordance with astm a num .
provide pipe with minimum wall thickness as specified in the contract .
ensure that the product of the yield strength and section modulus of the pipe is in accordance with astm f num .
provide posts that securely hold tension wires in position without vertical movement .
num fittings provide fittings in accordance with section num fittings .
provide stainless steel straps and seals in accordance with astm a num .
provide coated tension wires that are galvanized coil spring steel wire of commercial quality with a diameter of num inch .
provide galvanized ferrules for tension takeup in accordance with astm a num .
provide pull cable and tension truss rods with diameters of at least num inch with drop forged turnbuckles or other approved tension devices .
provide pull cable and tension wires with a minimum zinc coating of num oz per square foot of uncoated individual wire surface tested in accordance with astm a num .
the project manager will determine the uniformity of the coating by visual inspection .
the project manager may reject coating with excessive roughness blisters discoloration spots bruises and flaking .
the department may make other inspections and tests at the manufactures plant before shipment .
num tie wires and fasteners provide galvanized coated tie wires for fastening chain link fabric to posts and rails with a diameter of at least num inch .
the contractor may provide galvanized steel or non corrosive metal bands or fasteners instead of tie wires as recommended by the manufacturer .
num compression braces provide compression braces that meet the same requirements as top rails in accordance with section num posts .
num chain link fabric section num fence page num provide chain link fabric in accordance with aashto m num with a class c coating or better .
provide chain link fabric full height .
provide galvanized coated wire with a diameter of num inch .
provide two num inch mesh fabric .
measure the mesh size as the distance between the wires forming parallel sides of the mesh .
num gates provide double drive single drive or single walk gates .
provide galvanized steel pipe gate frames in accordance with astm f num and astm a num .
num vinylcoated chain link fence provide vinylcoated chain link fences in accordance with section num chain link fence except as modified in this subsection .
if providing pvc coated chain link fabric use vinylcoated fabric posts and hardware in accordance with aashto m num for class a pvc coating .
continuously bond the vinyl coating do not spray or dip over the galvanized steel wire by the extrusion bonding process under pressure .
ensure the vinyl coating resists damage from prolonged exposure to dilute solutions of common mineral acids sea water and dilute solutions of salts and alkali .
galvanize using the electrolytic process before coating with pvc .
provide wire that was vinylcoated before weaving and is free and flexible at the joints .
num post and cable access fence num cable provide wire cable in accordance with aashto m num .
provide cable of type i class a num in diameter rope unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num hardware and fittings provide galvanized or cadmium plated parts hardware and fittings .
galvanize in accordance with aashto m num .
provide cadmium plating in accordance with astm b num for class num type iii .
provide bolts in accordance with astm a num and nuts in accordance with astm a num .
provide externally threaded fittings such as end tie rods anchor rods and splicing rods that transmit direct tensile stress having a minimum tensile strength of num psi .
provide internally threaded fittings such as turnbuckles cable sockets and nuts capable of withstanding a proof load that is num of the proof load requirements for nuts as specified in accordance with astm a num table num .
provide cable splices and connections that withstand a proof load equal to the tensile strength required of the attached wire rope cable .
provide steel rectangular plate washers and cable clamps with a minimum tensile strength of num psi .
provide plain washers of ferrous metal in accordance with ansi b num type a .
num wood posts provide wood posts from one num of the following species num .
northern white cedar section num fence page num num .
white pine num .
jack pine num .
red norway pine num .
southern yellow pine num .
ponderosa pine .
provide posts from live trees that are stacked and properly seasoned .
peel the entire length of each post closely trim knots saw both ends square and shave the entire length of the post to the white .
provide posts with a top diameter after shaving of four num inches num inch num num inch .
ensure posts are free of sap rot woodpecker holes plugged holes anteaten areas and hollow knots extending to center of the post .
do not allow butt rot to exceed five percent num of the butt area .
provide posts with sound tops however the department will allow one num pipe rot not exceeding a diameter of num inch on a cedar post .
provide posts that do not have excessive checking .
ensure that the posts do not have short kinks or more than one num one way sweep exceeding two num inches however the post may have a winding twist .
the department will not allow posts exhibiting both the maximum crook and maximum butt rot and will not allow more than ten percent num of the posts specified in the contract to contain the maximum crook or butt rot .
the department may reject posts with other defects that give the post an unsightly appearance or impair its durability or strength .
complete debarking trimming and sizing operations before treatment .
num preservative treatment of posts for post and cable barrier provide pressure treated wood posts with pentachlorophenol in accordance with section num preservatives and treatment methods with a minimum retention of num lb per cubic foot .
num snow fence provide snow fence of num inch num num inch wooden pickets spaced num num inch on center and woven between five num cables .
each cable will consist of at least two num strands of galvanized steel wire with diameters of num in or larger .
provide wooden pickets that are at least num inches long and treated or painted in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
provide wire braces attachments and fittings in accordance with astm a num and applicable requirements of section num barbed wire and woven wire fence .
num concrete provide class a concrete bearing blocks and anchors in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
the contractor may provide a prepackaged preblended cementitious material to which the contractor only adds water at the site .
num construction requirements num general clear the fence lines of trees bush stumps logs weeds existing fences and other obstructions that may interfere with fence construction unless the project manager requires section num fence page num certain trees to remain in place .
dispose of removed material in accordance with section num removal of structures and obstructions .
if the contractor is to embed posts braces or anchors in concrete the contractor shall install temporary guys or bracing to hold the posts in position until the concrete sets .
unless otherwise specified do not install materials on posts and do not strain posts braces or anchors set in concrete until seven num days after concrete placement or until the concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi whichever occurs first .
crown the concrete at the top of the foundation to shed water .
only cut the tops of posts as approved by the project manager .
apply protective coating to cut posts in accordance with section num repair of damaged coating on pull cables and tension wires .
firmly attach wire and fencing to the posts and braces .
tightly stretch wire and install it at the required elevations .
place fence wire on the field side of the posts except on the inside of curves .
at each location where an electric transmission distribution or secondary line crosses new fence provide and install a ground connection in accordance with the nec .
build new fences adjacent to existing fence before removing existing fences .
when removing and rebuilding fences maintain the security of livestock and protect adjacent properties and the traveling public .
remove the existing fence or unused materials and neatly roll it up in single strand rolls .
remove the fence posts without damaging them and place the posts with the rolls of wire within the right of way for property owners to salvage unless otherwise directed by the project manager .
if the property owners do not pick the fence up within the allotted time dispose of the fence as directed by the project manager .
num barbed wire and woven wire fence set posts plumb and in accordance with the plans .
the contractor may drive metal line posts .
excavate for footings and anchors in accordance with the plans or as directed by the project manager .
place post hole backfill in thin layers and compact each layer .
attach right of way fences to roadway structures in accordance with the plans .
num fence tensioning stretch fence wire with a mechanical stretcher or other similar device .
do not allow the length between pull posts to exceed num ft for barbed wire and num ft for woven wire .
num braces and corner posts place intermediate braces at intervals of num ft or less and at every fence gradechange such as edges of arroyos bottoms and tops of hills and as directed by the project manager .
maintain the required distance between the bottom wire and the ground .
space intermediate braces evenly between corner and gateposts or cattle guards .
place a corner post and brace at the intersection of cross fences and the right of way fence .
stretch the wires and firmly attach them to the corner posts .
num chain link fence install braces tension rods cables hardware and appurtenances in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the contract .
do not attach chain link fabric to posts until the concrete footings have reached a compressive strength of num psi or until num days after concrete placement whichever occurs first .
section num fence page num after permanently positioning posts setting anchorages firmly and drawing tension wires and pull cables tight with turnbuckles or other approved tension devices secure the tension wires to the posts with tension bands and tie wires .
secure the chain link fabric at one end and stretch away from the secured end .
stretch the fabric with a mechanical stretcher or other device approved by the project manager .
num chain link fence post placement set posts plumb in concrete footings .
space chain link fence posts at intervals of ten num feet or less .
measure the intervals from center to center of posts .
pull posts are line posts braced to adjacent line posts .
position pull posts at intervals of num ft or less .
provide end posts with an outside diameter of at least num inch .
brace end posts in the same way as corner posts .
num chain link security fence use chain link security fence in accordance with section num chain link fence .
supply security appurtenances on gates for access .
num post and cable access fence num post placement the department will allow a depth of post embedment that is greater than specified in the contract if the finished top of the post meets the required elevation .
compact the bottom of the holes to provide a stable foundation .
set the posts plumb with the front faces in a neat uniform line and with full contact on the foundation surface .
backfill holes with granular material and compact in layers so the posts maintain the specified position and alignment .
instead of setting posts in previously dug holes and backfilling the contractor may drive the posts except if the contract specifies bearing blocks .
only drive if there is adequate lateral stability and as long as the shoulders and adjacent slopes are not damaged from the driving operations .
remove posts that do not meet the requirements or are damaged below cutoff during driving and replace with sound posts .
if upward vertical adjustment of posts is necessary remove and reinstall them .
the contractor may cut off the tops of posts to the elevation specified in the contract .
round the tops of round posts to an approximate domed hemispherical shape centered on the axis of the post .
after cutting off treated posts apply two num coats of pentachlorophenol preservative to the cut surfaces .
num setting of anchors cable and fittings for post and cable access fence if a bolt projects more than one num inch from the nut cut off num inch and burr .
paint the ends of cutoff bolts with aluminum paint .
bore holes for cable supports after the posts are set .
place end and intermediate anchorages and bearing blocks in accordance with the contract .
excavate trenches for anchor blocks to their neat lines .
perform excavation for anchor rod installation without excessively disturbing the earth between the block and the anchored posts .
excavate holes for bearing blocks to their neat lines then place and level the block with anchor rods in place on undisturbed soil .
place backfill material and compact in layers .
do not apply final tension to the anchor assembly until after completing the backfilling .
after completing the anchor assemblies properly adjust and securely fasten the cables draw the cables tight then loosen them to meet contract requirements for the applicable temperature range .
section num fence page num use three num inch wide reflective sheeting in accordance with section num retroreflective sheeting silver white no .
num .
mount the sheeting on flexible aluminum alloy .
fix the sheeting to each end post and at maximum intervals of num ft on intermediate posts with a minimum of three num strips per installation .
completely wrap the reflective strips around each post before installing the post plate washers .
num snow fence construct snow fence in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the contract .
num pedestrianbicycle railing construct pedestrian and bicycle railing in accordance with the contract or as directed by the project manager .
num removing and rebuilding fence remove and rebuild existing fences in accordance with the contract or as directed by the project manager .
construct new fences in the same or better condition than the original fence .
salvage materials from removed fences and incorporate into the rebuilt fences .
if the project manager determines that some materials are not reusable replace those materials as necessary and in accordance with section num payment for changes differing site conditions and extra work .
firmly reset posts to the staked alignment .
use the same spacing of the posts and the same number of wires strung and stapled to the posts as the original fence .
use new staples to fasten the wires to the posts .
num repair of damaged coating on pull cables and tension wires the contractor may repair pull cables and tension wires that exhibit minor damage to the zinc coating by wirebrushing the damaged area and removing loose cracked or weldburned zinc coating .
paint the cleaned area with two num coats of zinc oxidezinc dust paint in accordance with federal specification ttpnum or military specification milpnum or with an equivalent coating approved by the project manager .
make repairs and provide repair materials at no additional cost to the department .
num gates fabricate and construct gates and stile and post wire traps in accordance with the contract .
num remove and reset gate remove and reset existing gates in accordance with the contract or as directed by the project manager .
num method of measurement the department will measure fences and watergap gates along the top from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence or watergap gate .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit barbed wire fence ___ft linear foot game fence ___ft linear foot section num fence page num woven wire fence ___ft linear foot chain link fence ___ft linear foot chain link security fence ___ft linear foot vinylcoated chain link fence ___ft linear foot snow fence ___ft linear foot pedestrianbicycle railing ___ft linear foot pedestrian screening fence type ____ft linear foot post and cable access fence ___ft linear foot remove and rebuild type fence linear foot standard gate ___ft each barbed wire gate ___ft each chain link gate ___ft span each chain link gate ___ft span by ___ft rise each pipe gate ___ft each water gap gate linear foot turnstile gate ___ft each remove and reset gate each stile and post wire trap each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately clearing and grubbing grading excavation backfill disposal of surplus material concrete fasteners galvanizing coating repairs and all additional bracing required for grade changes .
section num sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement page num section num sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement num description this work consists of constructing sidewalks drive pads detectable warning surfaces and concrete median pavement in accordance with these standard specifications and the americans with disabilities act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .. num materials num concrete provide class a or class f concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
num joint fillers provide preformed expansion joint filler in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num .
num silicone joint sealant and backer rod provide silicone joint sealant and backer rod bondbreaker from the departments approved products list and in accordance with section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints .
num bed course material provide bed course material that consists of cinders sand gravel crushed stone or other granular aggregate with num passing a num inch sieve and not more than num passing the no .
num sieve or base course as per section num base course .
num detectable warning surfaces num general obtain a list of approved suppliers from the departments approved products list .
contact the departments office of affirmative action to propose alternative suppliers .
stamped or imprinted concrete systems will not be allowed .
num color contrast provide a light colored material on a dark surface or a dark colored material on a light surface to contrast with adjacent walking surfaces .
use a uniform color over the entire surface that is homogenous throughout the thickness of the material as approved by the project manager .
should a concern arise over the color contrast the contractor will coordinate with the environmental program manager through the project manager for color contrast guidance .
allow a minimum of num days for coordination with the environmental program manager .
num contractor submittals submit certification to the project manager before proposed installation describing the following num .
the detectable warning surface material and name of approved supplier num .
all associated materials used including bonding material and color used for color contrast requirements section num sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement page num num .
installation procedure as per manufacturers recommendations num .
a detailed time element regarding application to new concrete num .
submit a num inch num inch sample of the detectable warning surface on concrete substrate showing the color contrast developed for the project num .
certified test results indicating compliance with manufacturer recommendations .
num construction requirements num excavation and backfill perform excavation or backfill to the required depth of elevation and to a width that will allow the installation and bracing of the forms .
remove soft and yielding material and replace with the specified bed course material .
shape and compact the foundation to a firm even surface .
num bed course placement compact existing ground under bed course to num of maximum density in accordance with section num moisture and density control .
place at least four num inches of bed course material .
compact bed course material to a density of at least num of maximum density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
compact bed course material for drive pads to a density of at least num of maximum density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
perform compaction in accordance with section num mixing and placing .
num forms use wood or metal forms that extend the full depth of the concrete .
ensure forms are straight free of warps and strong enough to resist the concrete pressure without deforming .
brace and stake forms so they remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment until their removal .
treat the forms with form release oil to prevent damage to the concrete when removing the forms .
use flexible forms in curved sections so that the top surface of the forms produces a smooth continuous arc .
num placing concrete moisten the foundation immediately before placing the concrete .
remove excess water remaining on the foundation .
proportion mix and place the concrete in accordance with the requirements for the specified concrete .
use castinplace or slip formed concrete .
ensure the surface of the patterned concrete pavement matches the finish grades .
consolidate the concrete placed in the forms by vibration or other acceptable methods .
num finishing finish the surface with a float .
do not plaster or retemper the surface with water .
give the top surfaces of the slabs a transverse broomed finish after floating unless otherwise specified in the contract .
use an edging tool with a num inch radius on the outside edges of the slab and joints .
num colored and patterned median pavement application apply the color to the mix at the concrete plant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
while concrete is still in the plastic state apply the imprinting tools to make the desired patterned surface .
section num sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement page num submit a sample panel at least two num ft two num ft showing color and texture to the project manager for approval before starting work on the patterned concrete pavement .
use the approved sample panel as a standard for the installation of patterned concrete pavement .
num joints fill the expansion joints with premolded expansion joint filler .
also fill sealed expansion joints with a backer rod and silicone joint sealant at the specified intervals .
divide sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement into sections with contraction joints formed with a scoring tool to create rounded edges .
create contraction joints that are approximately num inch wide and extend into the concrete at least onethird the depth of the sidewalk drive pad or concrete median pavement .
the department will not require contraction joints in patterned concrete median pavement .
construct expansion joints that extend into and through the sidewalk around manholes pipe inlets utility poles or other miscellaneous structures .
install a premolded expansion joint filler to completely fill the joint .
install expansion joint filler num inch thick between concrete sidewalks and fixed structures such as buildings or bridges .
ensure the expansion joint filler extends the full depth of the sidewalk .
num curing cure concrete in accordance with section num curing .
num surface tolerance do not allow the surface of concrete sidewalks and median pavement to deviate more than num inch in any direction if tested with a ten num ft straightedge .
correct deviations at no additional cost to the department .
the project manager must approve the correction method .
num detectable warning surface num installation requirements install detectable warning surfaces per the manufacturers recommendations and provide manufacturers assistance for proper installation when necessary .
provide the project manager the manufacturers certification stating that the contractor is certified to install the detectable warning surfaces .
num tile cutting provide detectable warning surfaces cut along the flat surface .
cutting along the raised dome surface is prohibited .
num cleanup leave a neat clean work area without any contamination .
remove and dispose all waste and excess material in an environmentally acceptable manner .
num warranties submit all warranty material to the project manager after acceptance of the work .
num method of measurementreserved section num sidewalks drive pads and concrete median pavement page num num basis of payment pay item pay unit concrete sidewalk ___inch square yard drive pad ___in .
square yard concrete median pavement ___inch square yard concrete median pavement ___inch colored square yard concrete median pavement ___inch colored and patterned square yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered incidental to the main items num .
excavation backfill compaction expansion joint coloring and other related items and appurtenances num .
bedding material num .
all labor manufacturer field assistance materials equipment submittals repairs cleanup and all guarantees and warranties num .
detectable warning surface .
section num curb and gutter page num section num curb and gutter num description this work consists of constructing asphalt or concrete curb concrete gutter and concrete curbandgutter combinations .
num materials num concrete construct pcc curb and gutter with class a or class f concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide class a concrete if the concrete is being cast directly into forms and class f if the concrete is being slipformed .
num joint fillers provide preformed expansion joint filler in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num .
num silicone joint sealant and backer rod provide silicone joint sealant and backer rod bondbreaker in accordance with section num sealing and resealing concrete pavement joints .
num bed course material provide bed course material that consists of cinders sand gravel crushed stone or other granular aggregate with num passing a num inch sieve and not more than num passing the no .
num sieve .
alternatively base course as per section num base course may be used .
num asphalt material provide asphalt material for curbing in accordance with section num hotmix asphalt superpave qla nonqla and as approved by the project manager .
num construction requirements num foundation place concrete curb and gutter on an approved foundation in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment section num subgrade preparation and section num base course .
prepare the foundation by excavating or constructing embankment to the specified subgrade .
num excavation if required excavate to the specified depth and compact the base for the curb and gutter in accordance with section num subgrade preparation .
remove soft and unacceptable material to two num ft below the specified subgrade and replace with material having at least the minimum specified design rvalue in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment and section num subgrade preparation .
num bed course placement for existing ground under bed course compact the thickness shown in the contract to num of maximum density in accordance with section num moisture and density control .
section num curb and gutter page num compact bed course material to a density of at least num of maximum density in accordance with section num mixing and placing .
num castinplace concrete curb and gutter num forms use wood or metal forms that are straight and free of warps and constructed to permit the inspection of grade or alignment .
ensure forms extend the entire depth of the curb and gutter .
brace and secure the forms sufficiently to prevent deflections during concrete placement .
use flexible forms in curved sections so that the top surface of the forms will produce a smooth continuous arc .
treat forms with form release oil to prevent damage to the concrete during form removal .
form the slope of the gutter to match the roadway cross slope .
num mixing and placing thoroughly moisten the bed course immediately before placing the concrete .
do not allow standing water on the bed course .
proportion mix and place concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete pavement section num portland cement concrete and section num concrete structures for the specified class of concrete .
consolidate the placed concrete in the forms using vibration or other acceptable methods .
finish the surface with a float .
do not plaster or retemper the surface with water .
unless otherwise specified give the top surfaces of the concrete a transverse broomed finish after floating .
use an edging tool with a num inch radius on the outside edges of the curb and gutter and joints .
leave forms in place until the concrete has set sufficiently to allow removal without damaging the curb and gutter .
num slipformed concrete curb and gutter the contractor may place curb and gutter using a slipform machine except on structures if the finished curb and gutter is true to line and grade and the concrete is dense and of the specified surface texture .
construct curb and gutter using a slipform machine in accordance with section num portland cement concrete pavement .
ensure that the top and face of the finished curb and gutter are true and straight and the top surface is of uniform width and free from humps sags and other irregularities .
use concrete of a consistency that will maintain the shape of the curb and gutter section without support after slip forming .
ensure that the forming portion of the slipform machine is readily adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine to provide a variable height of curb and gutter grade if necessary .
section num curb and gutter page num the contractor shall attach a grade line gauge or pointer to the slipform machine so that the contractor can make a continual comparison between the curb and gutter grades indicated by the gauge or pointer and the offset guidelines .
feed concrete to the slipform machine at a uniform rate .
operate the slipform machine under sufficient uniform restraint from forward motion to produce a wellcompacted mass of concrete that is free of surface pits with diameters larger than num inch and that requires no further finishing other than light brushing with a wet brush .
do not finish with a brush application of grout .
num joints construct curb and gutter in sections with uniform lengths of num feet .
separate sections by open joints num inch wide except at expansion joints .
construct contraction joints at intervals of five num feet .
form expansion joints at the intervals in accordance with the contract using the preformed expansion joint filler with a thickness of num inch .
construct transverse weakened plane and expansion joints at right angles to the line of the concrete curb and gutter .
the contractor may construct expansion joints by sawing through the concrete curb and gutter section to its full depth .
ensure that the width of the cut accepts the joint filler with a snug fit .
complete the operations of sawing and inserting the joint filler before curing the concrete .
at the conclusion of the curing period check the filler in each joint for tightness .
mortar in place and cure loose filler in joints .
if constructing the curb and gutter adjacent to or on concrete pavement locate expansion joints opposite to or at expansion joints in the pavement .
num curing cure concrete in accordance with section num curing .
num backfilling after the concrete attains a compressive strength of num psi fill the spaces in back of the curb to the specified elevation with embankment material and compact in accordance with section num moisture and density control unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num asphalt curbing if constructing asphalt curbing on an asphalt surface place the curb after cleaning the surface and applying a tack coat of asphalt material .
the project manager will determine the tack coat application rate .
construct asphalt curbing using a paver with curbing attachments .
num method of measurement the department will measure curb along the front face of the section .
the department will measure gutter and curbandgutter combinations along the flowline of the gutter .
num basis of payment section num curb and gutter page num pay item pay unit concrete curb ___inch linear foot bituminous curb linear foot header curb linear foot concrete sloped curb and gutter ___inch ___ inch linear foot concrete vertical curb and gutter type___ ___inch ___ inch linear foot standard curb and gutter linear foot concrete valley gutter ___inch ___ inch linear foot concrete laydown curb ___ inch linear foot num work included in payment the following work included in payment will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately excavation borrow bed course compaction and embankment for foundation of curb and gutter expansion joint material including silicone joint sealant and backer rod coloring and other related items and appurtenances and backfilling behind curb and reflectorized yellow paint for median curb and gutter from radius point to radius point on the bull nose portion .
section num cattle guards page num section num cattle guards num description this work consists of constructing precast concrete cattle guards or steel frame cattle guards .
num materials num general provide cattle guards and grids in accordance with the contract .
provide individual cattle guards with grids of identical type having the same shapes dimensions and weight of the steel members .
use steel frame cattle guards as an alternate to precast concrete cattle guards at turnouts or at other locations in accordance with the contract .
if the contract specifies precast concrete cattle guards the department will not allow substitutions .
num precast concrete cattle guards use class aa concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
the department will reject cattle guards with cracks chips spalls or honeycombed or patched areas in excess of num innum or those that fail to meet the minimum strength requirements .
provide precast concrete cattle guards from approved manufacturers listed on the departments approved products list .
num steel frame cattle guards provide steel frame cattle guards from approved manufacturers listed on the departments approved products list .
num reinforcing steel use grade num reinforcing steel deformed bars in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
provide welded wire fabric in accordance with aashto m num .
num cattle guard grids and hardware provide traffic grill units warning devices bolts tie bolts washers hardware and other materials in accordance with section num steel structures .
provide grid units in accordance with aashto m num .
provide aluminum members in warning devices in accordance with the astm specifications listed in table num aluminum members warning devices standards .
table num aluminum members warning devices standards description astm alloy temper tubing b num num tnum fence angle b num num tnum base plate b num num tnum section num cattle guards page num num construction requirements num concrete footings and foundations excavate or build with embankment level and compact foundations for cattle guards before installing the cattle guard .
excavate wide enough to compact and test material adjacent to the cattle guard or backfill with flowable fill at no extra cost to the department .
finish uneven foundation surfaces to ensure full bearing of cattle guard units .
compact subgrade foundations in accordance with section num subgrade preparation .
if the contractor finds unstable material in footing foundations the contractor shall stabilize or remove and replace with material approved by the project manager .
place a three num inches thick bedding of fine aggregate over the subgrade and compact it to at least num of the maximum density in accordance with aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
place the cattle guard unit on the fine aggregate bedding .
finish the tops of concrete footings so that stringerbearing surfaces receive the full bearing under each stringer .
num placement requirements place the concrete cattle guards in accordance with section num concrete structures .
the contractor may splice reinforcing bars over num ft long using a minimum numbardiameter lap .
chamfer exposed edges of concrete ¾ inch .
the contractor may use used steel members that are free of bends and in good condition as approved by the project manager .
fabricate grids so that the bottoms of the stringers are in a plane surface .
num protective coating provide cattle guards with a protective coating in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
stripe warning devices with two num coats of black coating material in accordance with the contract .
num backfill perform the excavation placement and compaction of select backfill in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit cattle guard ____ ft each num substitutions the department will not adjust the bid price for weights of rails greater than the specified minimum .
section num cattle guards page num num work included in payment the following work and items except when otherwise specified will be considered as included in the payment for the main items complete in place as detailed in the contract and will not be measured or paid for separately subgrade preparation excavation replacement of unstable subgrade placement and compaction of select backfill all steel reinforcement including welded wire fabric all structural steel bearing pads all connecting hardware and associated components all warning devices all field painting and all appurtenances necessary to complete the work .
section num cleaning of culverts and drainage structures page num section num cleaning of culverts and drainage structures num description this work consists of removing unsuitable material from within and around concrete box culverts concrete culverts corrugated metal culverts storm drains catch basins inlets and outlets .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements before beginning structure extension work clean the existing structures that will remain operational .
remove materials on the roads and streets that accumulate during the performance of the work .
clean ditch lines within the right of way to prevent ponding and ensure proper drainage .
num equipment if using a mechanical jet rodding machine in cleaning operations provide water necessary to complete the work .
num disposal requirements haul the debris and unsuitable material to an environmentally suitable disposal site .
obtain the permits and clearances from the appropriate regulatory agencies in accordance with section num legal relations environmental requirements and responsibility to the public .
notify the project manager in writing of the details of disposal operations .
do not place rock waste vegetative debris or any other debris in wetland areas or areas that may impact endangered species or archaeological resources .
obtain an archaeological survey and environmental clearance for approval of the disposal sites .
num traffic control requirements provide install and maintain traffic control devices necessary to protect the work and the safety of the public .
num final acceptance clean the project site before the final project acceptance .
num method of measurement the department will only measure cleaning culverts and drainage structures if specified as a pay item in the contract .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit cleaning culverts and drainage structures lump sum num work included in payment section num cleaning of culverts and drainage structures page num the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
water for cleaning b .
furnishing installing and maintaining traffic control devices c. hauling and disposal of waste and debris d. cleaning of ditch lines within right of way .
section num pipe casing page num section num pipe casing num description this work consists of providing and installing pipe for encasing utility lines .
num materials num galvanized steel pipe provide galvanized steel pipe in accordance with astm f num for galvanized standard weight pipe .
num corrugated steel pipe provide corrugated steel pipe in accordance with aashto m num and section num pipe culverts .
num polyvinyl chloride pipe provide polyvinyl chloride pipe in accordance with section num pipe culverts .
num construction requirements obtain project manager approval of the installation method before beginning the work .
dig trenches for laying pipe in accordance with section num trench widths .
connect the pipe sections in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
backfill the trenches in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit pipe casing linear foot section num vibration monitoring and video taping page num section num vibration monitoring and video taping num description perform vibration monitoring and video taping in and around all engineered structures sensitive features and construction areas as indicated in the contract and as determined by the vibration risk survey or as directed by the project manager .
sensitive features may include archaeological sites historical features utilities and historic structures watercourses and other areas subject to damage or erosion .
perform vibration monitoring and video taping to determine if potentially damaging vibrations to engineered structures and sensitive features are created as a result of construction activity .
num materials reserved num construction requirements num general num vibration monitoring consists of the following num .
vibration risk survey of all sensitive features within the influence zone of construction activity to determine size and locations of any existing cracks and other defects in any sensitive features num .
use of a seismograph by a qualified vibration specialist to monitor vibration levels num .
immediate notification of the project manager if visual inspection or seismograph readings indicate that damage to any sensitive feature is occurring due to vibrations .
num video taping consists of the following num .
video tape in both directions along the roadway corridor and along roadways to be constructed or reconstructed .
insure that these video tapes pick up existing utilities within the corridor as well as existing drainage patterns .
the maximum speed of camera movement shall not exceed four num fts num .
preconstruction video taping for each area on the project shall take place not more than fourteen num days prior to beginning construction in that area or as directed by the project manager num .
during all video taping provide an audio explanation of significant features observed during taping num .
any notification of any damage or any concernsremedies resulting from construction activities shall be immediately relayed to the project manager num .
video tape building structure front and side views including closeups of each view for any features or facilities that may be affected by construction .
where cracks exist on building structures place a scale next to the crack and video tape to show existing crack size .
such building features may include but are not limited to all buildings fences and landscaping adjacent to the project limits .
num .
video tape the construction area immediately following rainfall over the area to ascertain drainage patterns .
this video taping shall take place before commencing construction when possible .
num .
video taping equipment and operator shall be onsite within ½ h at the project managers request .
num .
the video viewing system and the appropriate video tapes shall be available for meetings as scheduled and at the request of the project manager .
section num vibration monitoring and video taping page num num .
the quality of the visual and audio portions of the video tapes and the method of indexing of locations on the tapes shall be acceptable to the project manager .
tapes or portions of tapes deemed defective or substandard shall be retaped .
num condition survey of engineered structures and sensitive features conduct a vibration risk survey of any sensitive features within the influence zone of construction activity .
num .
submit to the project manager a report documenting conditions of all potentially affected sensitive features within the survey influence zone or as shown in the contract num .
include the following information from the survey for each sensitive feature num the age foundation and aboveground structure type or sensitive feature num provisions for water drainage from roof and around foundation exterior num the age type and condition of any sensitive utility num documentation in the form of drawing photographs or videotape of the size and location of all cracks and the type and location of all structural defects .
num equipment num seismograph equipment provide seismographs with selftriggering units approved by the project manager and capable of recording three num mutually perpendicular components of ground motion time histories in terms of velocity .
in the case of monitoring blast vibrations provide additional capability for recording of airblast levels .
provide units capable of reporting the frequency as well as the peak values for all vibration time histories .
num video camera equipment num .
furnish at least one num video camera and appurtenances for the duration of the project .
the equipment shall be capable of producing a color picture when the tape is viewed equipped with audio capabilities and equipped with a zoom lens .
num .
furnish at least one num video tape viewing system and appurtenances for the duration of the project .
the equipment shall be capable of reproducing a color picture with audio on a television screen and capable of slow motion stop for viewing of single picture image and reverse controls .
num .
supply a sufficient number of twohour videotapes to videotape the entire construction area and adjacent areas before construction commences and as required or directed by the project manager during and after construction .
each videotape shall be titled catalogued dated sequenced in chronological order and crossreferenced .
a copy of each twohour videotape shall be submitted to the project manager .
this copy shall also be titled catalogued dated sequenced and crossreferenced and will remain the property of the department upon acceptance by the project manager .
num seismograph location and usage place seismographs outside the sensitive features closest to the construction activity as determined by the vibration risk survey or approved by the project manager .
the transducers shall be placed between the construction and the sensitive features and coupled to the ground .
num frequency of vibration monitoring section num vibration monitoring and video taping page num for all construction activity other than blasting perform monitoring at least two num times during peak construction when construction activity is occurring near the sensitive features and at the project managers request .
num qualification for vibration monitoring provide a qualified specialist competent to perform the work and analyze the results of vibration monitoring .
department approved specialist are on file with the departments geotechnical section .
num prior experience submit the following written documentation of prior experience to the project manager num .
copies of reports including analysis and conclusions for at least three num previous projects similar in scope to this project num .
resumes for all personnel involved in this work .
num analysis of vibration monitoring submit to the project manager eight num copies of a comprehensive report for each sensitive feature .
each report shall include a discussion of num .
site conditions and description including a site map drawn to scale showing the location of the sensitive feature and the location of the construction activity num .
field procedures and equipment used including the seismograph manufacturer model and unit serial number num .
the name of the seismograph operator num .
a hard copy of all ground vibration time histories in units of velocity num .
a record summary of the maximum value of ground vibration in any one num of three num directions measured longitudinal radial or vertical the frequency associated with the maximum value in unit of hertz and the measured distance between the seismograph and the construction activity num .
analysis of results with conclusions and recommendations in the case of blasting the report shall also include num .
a hard copy of the airblast time history in units of decibels and pounds per square inch psi the maximum value of airblast in decibels and the peak airblast frequency in hertz num .
the maximum charge weight of explosive used per num millisecond time delay num .
the scaled distance factor used for design num .
a plot of the ground motion velocity plotted against frequency for the maximum values recorded on a graph similar to that shown in figure num .
submit any additional inclusions to the reports at the direction and request of the project manager .
section num vibration monitoring and video taping page num figure num num safe vibration levels for blasting base safe levels of the maximum ground motions and air blast in accordance with nationally recognized standards specified by the u.s. bureau of mines num cfr parts num and num .
num method of measurement vibration monitoring will be measured as a lump sum unit .
vibration risk survey will be measured as a lump sum unit .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit vibration monitoring lump sum vibration risk survey lump sum video taping lump sum num num num blast vibration frequency hz num num num maximum recommended particle velocity ins num ins num ins section num traffic control management page num section num traffic control management num description this work consists of providing traffic control management in accordance with the contract and the mutcd current edition including supervision of personnel and the installation inspection and maintenance of traffic control devices on the project .
num requirements the contractor may assign more than one num traffic control supervisor tcs to provide traffic control management for the project .
if assigning more than one num tcs to provide traffic control management submit to the project manager a weekly schedule identifying who shall be in charge of providing traffic control management each day .
provide the tcs with a set of traffic control plans and a current copy of the mutcd .
the tcs shall possess these at all times .
if using a subcontractor to provide traffic control management ensure that the tcs is in accordance with the contract .
the contractor may assign one num or more traffic control technician tct to assist the tcs in inspection and maintenance of traffic control devices .
num certification before commencing work that requires traffic control management submit to the project manager a copy of the work zone safety supervisor certificate for the tcs wallet size card issued by the american traffic safety services association atssa the associated contractors of new mexico acnm or an agency or firm approved by the department .
the department will accept the tcs certification by atssa acnm or any agency or firm only if the following requirements are met num .
successful completion of a departmentapproved workzone traffic control course num .
passing a written examination on a workzone traffic control course num .
at least one num year of fulltime field experience verified by the agency or firm in work zone traffic control the department may verify the experience at its discretion .
the tct must only satisfy requirements num and num above .
before commencing work that requires flagger traffic control submit a copy of the flagger training certificate wallet sized card issued by atssa acnm fhwa or an agency or firm approved by the department .
num recertification renew the tcss certification every four num years through the atssa acnm or a departmentapproved agency or firm .
recertify in the fourth year before the expiration date of the current certification .
flaggers must obtain refresher training which meets the requirements of atssa acnm fhwa or agency or firm approved by the department prior to the fourth anniversary date shown on the current certificate .
num duties section num traffic control management page num the tcss only responsibility is traffic control management .
the department may allow exceptions to this rule if the project is small and requires limited traffic control .
the project manager and the district traffic engineer will determine approval of the exception at the preconstruction conference .
the tcss primary duties include the following num .
providing management and supervision services at the project site num .
preparing revisions requested by the contractor to the traffic control plan in the contract and submitting the new traffic control plan in cad format or hand drafted on a num inch num inch piece of numpound paper using current drafting standards to the project manager for approval by the district traffic engineer .
complex traffic control plans require development by a registered professional engineer prior to submittal to the project manager num .
coordinating the flagging and signing personnel training num .
supervising the flagging and signing personnel num .
coordinating traffic control operations for the duration of the contract including those of subcontractors utility companies and suppliers to ensure that traffic control is in place and fully operational before the commencement of work .
when dealing with utility companies the tcs shall coordinate concurrent utility traffic control with other construction traffic control to avoid conflicts num .
coordinating in writing project activities with the appropriate individual traffic control law enforcement and fire control agencies num .
preparing and submitting statements concerning road closures delays and other project activities to the news media as necessary .
before submittal to the news media the contractor shall submit news releases to the project manager for review and approval num .
notifying the project manager of accidents related to the project traffic control num .
recording time and date of accident notification in accordance with section num traffic control diary num .
attending the preconstruction conference num .
maintaining cleaning and replacing traffic control devices in use per the current traffic control plan during working and nonworking hours .
num traffic control diary the tcs shall maintain a project traffic control diary in a bound book .
obtain the diary from the acnm .
the tcs shall keep the traffic control diary current each day and sign each daily entry .
the tcs shall make entries in ink in a format approved by the project manager without erasures or whiteouts .
the tcs shall strike out unacceptable entries and replace with acceptable ones .
the tcs may use photographs to supplement the written text .
ensure that the traffic control diary is available for inspection by the project manager at all times and submit a copy of the diary to the project manager at the end of each week .
the traffic control diary will become the property of the department at the completion of the project .
if the contractor fails to submit the diary the department may withhold final payment until it is submitted .
num inspection of traffic control section num traffic control management page num the tcs shall inspect traffic control devices every day that traffic control devices are in use .
the tcs shall provide for the immediate cleaning repair or replacement of traffic control devices that are not functioning as required to ensure the safety of the motorists and construction personnel .
the tcs shall conduct inspections of the traffic control devices at the beginning and end of each day that traffic control devices are in use and as scheduled or directed by the project manager during the work day .
the tcs shall inspect the traffic control devices during working and nonworking hours on a schedule approved in writing by the project manager .
the tcs shall inspect traffic control devices that are in use for longer than seven num days at least once a week during nighttime periods .
num availability of tcs provide traffic control management under the supervision and direction of the tcs on a numhourperday basis throughout the duration of the project .
the tcs shall be on the project whenever work is in progress and available by telephone to be on the project within num hour at all other times .
the provisions for availability of the tcs will also apply during times of partial or full project suspension .
num compliance num failure to comply if the contractor fails to comply with the approved traffic control plan or fails to immediately correct unsafe traffic conditions after written notification of the problem the project manager may suspend all or part of the contractors operations .
if the contractor does not take appropriate action to correct the problem the department may proceed with the corrective action and charge the contractor for the additional cost incurred by the department .
if the department suspends the contractors operations the department will include the period necessary to correct these unsafe conditions and traffic control deficiencies in the normal assessment of contract time .
the department will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to provide traffic control safety to the traveling public if the department fully or partially suspends the project .
if the department suspends the project due to the contractors failure to comply with this section or the contract is in liquidated damages the contractor shall continue to provide traffic control management at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractor requests full or partial suspensions the contractor shall perform the additional traffic control management at no additional cost to the department .
num project manager modifications the project manager may change requirements for handling and controlling traffic during construction with the approval of the district traffic engineer due to actual field conditions .
the project manager will make these changes and provide written notice to the contractor .
num method of measurementreserved section num traffic control management page num num basis of payment pay item pay unit traffic control management lump sum traffic control management calendar day num partial payments if the department pays for traffic control management by the lump sum the department will make monthly partial payments for traffic control management based on the rate of progress of the project less previous partial payments for this item .
the department will calculate partial payments in accordance with the following equation c b l a p num where p is the partial payment l is the total bid amount for traffic control management a is the number of days charged the contractor toward completion of the project b is the contract time c is the total amount of previous partial payments for this item the department will negotiate payment for additional traffic control management resulting from an increase in work beyond the scope of the project .
do not start work until agreement on payment for additional traffic control management .
for normal increases in contract items resulting in extensions of the contract time the department will increase the original lump sum amount based on the ratio of actual additional days used to the original contract time .
section num headgates and flapgates for irrigation ditches page num section num headgates and flapgates for irrigation ditches num description this work consists of providing installing and repairing headgates flapgates and appurtenances and if specified constructing irrigation ditches .
num materials provide headgates flapgates and appurtenances in accordance with the contract .
provide reinforcement for concrete headwalls in accordance with section num steel reinforcement and concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete and section num concrete structures .
num construction requirements construct irrigation ditches in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment .
install headgates and flapgates in accordance with the plans .
compact backfill in contact with the structure to prevent leakage of water and erosion .
num protective coating provide headgates and flapgates with a protective coating in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if headgates and flapgates are uncoated coat noncontact surfaces in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit headgate type___ ___ inch each flapgate ___ inch each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately protective coating of headgates and flapgates concrete and steel reinforcement .
section num selectivenonselective herbicide application page num section num selectivenonselective herbicide application num description this work consists of providing and applying herbicide .
store handle mix and apply all herbicide in accordance with the manufacturers label and nmda rules and regulations .
num materials provide herbicide in accordance with the contract .
num construction requirements num handling mixing and loading herbicides keep livestock pets and persons away from mixing and loading areas .
when mixing herbicide provide a wellventilated mixing area away from perennial or ephemeral waterways to avoid contamination .
do not mix or load herbicides at night .
follow the instructions and warnings on the manufacturers labels during mixing loading and application of herbicides to protect against spills splash and winddrift .
wear personal protective equipment in accordance with the manufacturers label .
num storage of herbicides store herbicides in accordance with the applicable manufacturers label and other rules and regulations .
num labeling information the department will designate chemicals proposed for treatment .
provide the following information to the department num days before using the chemicals num .
appropriate specimen labels num .
msdss num .
technical bulletins num .
toxicity ratings and num .
epa registration numbers .
num laws and regulations strictly adhere to laws regulating the storage handling mixing loading transporting spill and accident reporting and use of herbicides .
num minor spills isolate the spill area and keep unauthorized personnel away .
use soil sawdust or other absorbent material to soak up the spill .
place contaminated material into a leakproof container and dispose of in accordance with applicable laws and regulations .
num major spills keep unauthorized personnel away confine the area and administer first aid if needed .
notify the chemical transportation emergency center chemtrec the local fire department and police and state herbicide authorities for assistance .
if a major spill occurs on a state highway county road or city street the contractor is responsible for notifying the affected state and local agencies .
if food or water is contaminated notify state or federal food and section num selectivenonselective herbicide application page num drug authorities and regional state and federal air quality or water pollution authorities .
num certification of applicators the department will only allow the contractor to apply herbicides under the direct supervision of an appropriately licensed and certified applicator .
the department requires the contractor or its subcontractor to be licensed in new mexico as a commercial applicator in accordance with nmda requirements and certified in appropriate applications .
the department will verify proper training and testing for competency in the safe and effective handling and use of herbicides .
provide proof of license through the nmda to the project manager num days before the application of the herbicide .
num safety guidelines adhere to the safety guidelines on the manufacturers label regarding the following num .
potential hazards to humans domestic animals and the environment num .
physical and chemical hazards such as fire explosion or chemical reactions to other products and num .
herbicide use misuse storage and disposal .
do not apply herbicide on frozen ground .
do not spray along and across irrigation ditches where damage to private property could occur .
if within the limits of a town or city spray in accordance with local ordinances .
do not spray if the wind speed exceeds num mph unless stated otherwise on the chemical label .
apply herbicide to both sides of the roadway to control noxious weeds as directed by the department .
the department will specify the spray width and exact beginning and ending points at the time of application .
the department reserves the right to reject equipment on the basis of suitability and safety to the environment the traveling public the contractors employees and department employees .
provide equipment in accordance with osha the u.s. department of transportation and the nmda .
ensure that each spray truck is properly licensed and carries the appropriate plaques as required by state law .
num records and documentation supply a current copy of the license and applicators certification to the project manager for verification by the departments roadside vegetation management unit .
keep a daily record of the herbicide application showing the following information num .
date of application num .
types and application rates of herbicides applied num .
time of day of application num .
air temperature num .
wind velocity num .
area covered num .
location of areas treated and num .
equipment calibration information .
the department will verify the contractors daily record .
submit copies of the records to the project manager within num days of the spraying .
section num selectivenonselective herbicide application page num num equipment num equipment calibration calibrate the equipment to apply the proper amount of liquid per unit area in accordance with the chemical manufacturers label before introducing chemicals into the equipment .
recalibrate the equipment in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and as required by the project manager .
num handheld spray applicators the department will allow the contractor to use backpack or handheld power equipment in inaccessible areas including cracks in medians or islands around guardrail posts and signposts .
use handheld applicators as directed by the project manager .
num broadcast sprayers apply herbicides with equipment that has a spray bar with sufficient width and number of nozzles to provide uniform application rates in accordance with the manufacturers label .
ensure the spray bar is adjustable to varying widths and heights to properly distribute the herbicide to minimize drift and to apply herbicides to specified areas only .
num boomless sprayers do not use boomless spraying equipment for herbicide application unless otherwise specified in the contract or directed by the project manager .
if specified or directed ensure that boom sprayers are capable of applying the herbicide to widths in accordance with the plans and at rates in accordance with the manufacturers label .
use a drift control agent with boom sprayers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num sprayer parts num tanks use tanks for herbicide applications with large openings for easy filling and cleaning and that have a gauge to show the liquid level .
the contractor shall equip tanks with a shutoff valve for storing liquid herbicide temporarily while the contractor services other sprayer parts .
num agitators equip spray equipment with hydraulic jet agitators of sufficient size and number to keep the chemical adequately agitated in accordance with the manufacturers label .
num strainers equip herbicide sprayers with strainers to prevent clogging of spray nozzles and to protect the working parts of the sprayer .
clean strainers at least daily or as specified and replace if damaged .
num pressure gauges equip sprayers with a pressure regulator to control the pressure and the quantity of herbicide liquid delivered by the nozzles and protect other sprayer parts from damage due to excessive pressure .
num pumps use spraying equipment with a pump capable of supplying the required volume to the spray nozzles .
ensure that pump parts resist corrosion and abrasion if using abrasive section num selectivenonselective herbicide application page num materials such as wettable powders .
use spraying equipment with gaskets plunger caps and impellers that resist swelling and chemical breakdown caused by liquid herbicides .
num nozzles use nozzles of the design and type that provide the proper spray pattern and uniformly distribute the herbicide mixture over the specified areas .
use nozzles composed of the following major components num .
nozzle body num .
cap num .
filter and num .
tip or orifice plate .
check nozzles for clogging as necessary and maintain them to ensure proper operation of the sprayer .
use driftcontrol spotspraying nozzles .
num hoses and fittings use hoses in accordance with the following num .
made of neoprene rubber or plastic material having a burst strength greater than the maximum operating pressure num .
resistant to oil and other solvents present in herbicides and num .
weather resistant .
do not use pvc hoses or fittings .
num cleaning of equipment ensure that sprayers are in good condition and have no leaks while standing mixing or spraying .
do not leave spraying equipment at the application site .
clean the spraying equipment before arrival at the site .
rinse mixing equipment into the sprayer tank after each use and before topping off the tank .
do not clean the equipment at the site .
num disposal num disposal of excess herbicides when calibrating the equipment do not allow chemical solutions to accumulate .
unmixed concentrated chemicals remain the property of the contractor .
exercise care with unmixed concentrated chemicals including those in unopened containers .
num disposal of containers dispose of empty containers in accordance with nmda guidelines .
num samples and inspection provide tank samples at the request of the department .
the department reserves the right to inspect the tank mix and equipment before during or after the spraying process .
quality assurance inspections are required before any payment .
num method of measurement the department will measure selectivenonselective herbicide application in square feet parallel to the ground surface divided by num .
section num selectivenonselective herbicide application page num num basis of payment pay item pay unit selectivenonselective herbicide application acre section num mobilization page num section num mobilization num description this work consists of preparatory work preliminary operations movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site and establishment of offices buildings and other facilities necessary for the project before beginning work on the project .
num materialsreserved num construction requirementsreserved num method of measurement num payment procedures if the contractors bid item price for mobilization is equal to or less than ten percent num of the total original contract amount less mobilization the department will pay the contractor using the following procedure num .
if the contractor has performed work representing less than five percent num of the total original contract amount less mobilization the department will pay num of the mobilization bid amount num .
if the contractor has performed work representing from five percent num to less than ten percent num of the total original contract amount less mobilization the department will pay num of the bid item price for mobilization and num .
if the contractor has performed work representing ten percent num or more of the total original contract amount less mobilization the department will pay num of the bid item price for mobilization .
if the contractors bid item price for mobilization is greater than ten percent num of the total original contract amount less mobilization the department will only apply the previous payment procedure to that portion of the contractors bid item price for mobilization equal to ten percent num of the total original contract amount less mobilization .
the department will pay the contractor the remainder of the bid item price for mobilization upon completion of the work .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit mobilization lump sum the department will not make additional payments for demobilization and remobilization due to shutdowns or suspensions of the work or for other mobilization activities required for satisfactory completion of the contract .
section num field laboratories and field offices page num section num field laboratories and field offices num description this work consists of providing and equipping field laboratories supplemental field laboratories and field offices .
num field laboratory construction requirements num general provide antitheft mechanisms for digital scales .
install a security light on the exterior portion of the field laboratory near each exterior door .
num sanitary facilities provide and maintain one num chemical toilet in satisfactory condition for each field laboratory .
the project manager will approve the model and location of the chemical toilet .
num eye wash facilities equip each field laboratory with one num eye wash unit in accordance with ansi znum .
provide a portable unit and place it in a readily accessible location .
when filled and ready for use the unit will not weigh more than num lb and will have a minimum capacity of num gal .
treat the flushing fluid with an antibacterial additive and change it as needed .
num electrical power requirements provide at least num kw of electric power to type i field laboratories and at least num kw of electric power to type ii field laboratories .
provide a minimum service amperage of num a for type i field laboratories and num a for type ii field laboratories .
provide enough electric power so that the voltage measured at the electric outlets in the field laboratory is num v ac to num v ac num hz for the nominally rated num v ac outlets and num v ac to num v ac num hz for the nominally rated num v ac num hz outlets .
install devices necessary to protect electronic equipment from damage due to power surges in the main power supply line .
label the electrical receptacles with legible information regarding voltage output .
num water supply requirements provide the laboratories with a pressurized potable water system and replenish as necessary .
use a fiberglass or stainless steel tank system equipped with an automatic shutoff valve .
drain flush and refill the water system every two num weeks .
provide a device to monitor the water level in the system .
place the water system indoors and under the counter top and sufficiently insulate it to keep the water from freezing .
use a water supply system with a separate outside water inlet and the necessary valves to connect to a pressurized municipal water supply .
provide type i laboratories with a num gal capacity water supply .
provide type ii laboratories with a num gal capacity water supply .
provide distilled or demineralized water as necessary for testing purposes .
section num field laboratories and field offices page num num heating ventilation and air conditioning requirements num type i field laboratory heating ventilation and air conditioning hvac provide type i laboratories with an hvac system capable of maintaining a temperature of num f during cold weather and a temperature below num f during hot weather .
num type ii field laboratory hvac provide type ii laboratories with a central heating and refrigerated air conditioning system with vents on the ceiling capable of maintaining a temperature of num f during cold weather and below num f during hot weather .
the unit will not draw in air from the sample room .
num supplemental hotmix asphalt field laboratory provide hma field laboratory with a central heating and refrigerated air conditioning system with vents on the ceiling capable of maintaining a temperature of num f during cold weather and below num f during hot weather .
the unit will not draw in air from the sample room .
num field laboratory placement and maintenance requirements place field laboratories and supplemental field laboratories as directed by the project manager .
these laboratories will remain the property of the contractor .
maintain field laboratories and supplemental field laboratories for the duration of the project .
remove these laboratories when the project is complete unless released earlier by the project manager .
place the field laboratories and supplemental field laboratories on the project in a ready touse condition at least one num week before project fieldtesting is necessary .
place the field laboratories so that the distance between the bottom of the door and the ground is less than six num inches or provide an adequate ramp with a skid resistant surface .
anchor the field laboratories in position to prevent them from overturning .
num supplemental field laboratories provide a supplemental field laboratory in accordance with the contract .
provide a heavyduty cabinet with sound insulation and bolts for mounting a rotap shaker .
provide a rigid steel stand num inch high capable of supporting the cabinet and rotap shaker in a stationary position while the shaker is operating .
mount the rotap shaker at the location shown in the supplemental field laboratory details unless otherwise specified by the project manager .
num supplemental hotmix asphalt field laboratories provide a supplemental hma field laboratory in accordance with the contract .
use class a concrete for the concrete slab foundation of the supplemental hma field laboratories ensure that it measures num feet num feet num inch .
at the conclusion of the project remove the building and foundation and restore the site to an acceptable condition at no additional cost to the department .
supply and install an accurately calibrated gyratory compactor for the supplemental hma section num field laboratories and field offices page num field laboratory .
use a gyratory compactor that is a mechanical asphaltmixture compaction device comprised of the following num .
reaction frame num .
rotating base num .
motor num .
loading system num .
loading ram num .
pressure gauge num .
height measuring and recordation system and num .
mold and base plate .
the national superpave regional center must approve the device for compaction of hma mixtures .
transport the device by picking it up from the bottom with a forklift and move manually on roller casters .
provide the following items with the gyratory compactor at no additional cost to the department num .
three num six num inch molds num .
extruder for specimen removal from mold num .
printer num .
printer cable num .
height standard block num .
serial cable num .
two num hundred and fifty specimen paper disks num .
operating service manual .
provide a power supply that will work on num v ac .
a list of approved models is available from the state materials bureau .
the gyratory compactor will remain the property of the contractor at the conclusion of construction .
provide and install a binder ignition oven for the supplemental hma field laboratory .
provide a binder ignition oven in accordance with aashto t num .
supply the necessary safety equipment including a heat reflective face shield high temperature gloves with num inch sleeves and aluminized rayon or other heat reflective coat or apron .
the binder ignition oven and safety equipment shall remain the property of the contractor at the conclusion of construction .
supply the following num .
a fine aggregate angularity test apparatus num .
a flat and elongated particles test caliper num .
an asphalt mix sample divider complete with one num quick funnel insert num .
four num sample containers and num .
one num materialhandling chute .
section num field laboratories and field offices page num a list of approved models of the test equipment is available from the state materials bureau .
this test equipment shall remain the property of the contractor after final acceptance .
num field laboratory computer facilities if the contract specifies type ii field laboratories provide the laboratory with a personal computer .
maintain this computer for the duration of the project .
the project manager will approve the model and location of the personal computer .
the computer equipment shall remain the property of the contractor .
provide computer hardware in accordance with the following requirements or latest industry standard or greater num .
microprocessor num ghz num mhz fsb or greater num .
memory minimum of num gigabyte num .
hard disk minimum of num gigabytes of disk storage num .
media drives numx dvd rrw numxnumxnumx cd rrw recorder num .
monitor numinch color graphics monitor vgadvi num .
printer letterquality color laser printer eight num pages per minute minimum num .
num inch x num inch flatbed scanner wnum optical dpi and num .
modem numk baud modem minimum full duplex auto dialauto answer internal or external with facsimile software .
provide computer software in accordance with the following requirements or latest industry standards or greater num .
operating system windows vista business and num .
microsoft office professional plus num .
provide a powersurge protection device and dust cover for the computer printer and keyboard .
num field laboratory facsimile machine facilities if the contract requires type ii field laboratories provide and maintain one num facsimile machine for the duration of the project .
the project manager will approve the model and location of the equipment .
the facsimile machine shall remain the property of the contractor .
use facsimile machine in accordance with consolidated committee on international telephone and telegraphs group num gnum standards .
provide a facsimile machine that num .
uses standard bond singlesheet paper num .
is capable of scanning and reading legal and lettersize documents compression of legalsize documents to letter size is acceptable as long as the documents are legible num .
is capable of holding a paper supply of at least num sheets num .
has a transmission speed of not longer than num s to transmit a single nongraphic page of printing num .
has at least two num scanning densities with a minimum low scanning density of num lines per one num inch num .
has a modem speed of at least num bits per second with automatic baud rate adjustment fall back section num field laboratories and field offices page num num .
is of the desktop variety in size num .
has automatic switching from telephone to facsimile machine type num capabilities num .
has local copy function for onsite reproduction num .
has lcd readout num .
has an automatic feeder capable of holding at least num sheets provide a facsimile machine with the following imaging requirements num .
contrast and fine mode controls and num .
a halftone minimum of num level gray scales use a facsimile machine with following transmission requirements num .
capability of producing activity reports with a minimum num transaction memory for both successfully and unsuccessfully transmitted transactions num .
displays message when transactions are unsuccessfully transmitted num .
has coded speed dialing for a minimum of ten num locations num .
has manual dialing and automatic redialing two num times minimum each redialing event features num .
documents memory of at least num megabyte num .
capability of sending a delayed transmission num .
capability of identifying the sending terminal when receiving transmissions provide a separate telephone line for connection to the facsimile machine .
num field laboratory utilities equip the field laboratory with telephone modular jacks in each separate work area .
num field office construction requirements num general if the contract specifies a field office provide a field office complete in place and operational before beginning work on the project .
if the field office is a mobile trailer ensure that it is in accordance with the manufactured housing improvement act of num and housing and urban development manufactured housing program .
if the field office is a permanent building ensure it is in accordance with the ubc the uniform plumbing code the uniform mechanical code and the nec .
make sure the field office has convenient access to the highway and is located within reasonable distance of the project .
locate the field office site where telephone and cellular service is available .
make sure the field office is clean with electrical outlets and other accessories and appliances in good working order .
make repairs to the field office as necessary .
make sure the field office has sufficient parking for at least num vehicles .
keep the parking areas free of mud snow and debris .
section num field laboratories and field offices page num enclose the field office and parking lot with a chainlink security fence at least six num ft high .
make sure the fence has an access opening at least num ft wide and one num or more chainlink gates at least six num ft in height at an appropriate location to allow vehicles to pass .
provide the fence and gates with at least two num strands of barbed wire and security appurtenances at the top .
num field office architectural requirements make sure the field office has at least num ft num of floor area .
provide the field office with a minimum of num ft num of shelf space .
equip the field office with num .
at least one num closet with at least ten num ft num of floor space and with a num inches wide door with lock and num .
at least one num closet with at least num ft num of floor space and num ft num of shelf space .
provide the field office with at least two num office spaces separate from the rest of the field office by full partition and door .
ensure that these office spaces have at least num ft num of floor space each .
ensure that the field office has sufficient overhead lighting so it requires no additional lighting .
ensure that the field office has num gauge hollow core steel doors with num gauge steel casings on the exterior entrances .
ensure that the field office has num inch nine num gauge smoothexpanded metal grating to cover the windows for security purposes .
weld the metal grating to an angle iron frame .
bolt the whole unit through the wall to an interior metal frame .
ensure that the grating opens or can easily be removed from the interior to comply with fire safety codes .
cover the floors with suitable floor covering such as linoleum or carpeting .
ensure that blinds or curtains cover the windows and that the walls are finished .
num field office hvac requirements equip the field office with an hvac system that can maintain a temperature of at least num f during cold weather and less than num f during hot weather .
num field office equipment equip the field office with num .
one num water cooler num .
one num six num gal minimum capacity water heater num .
a bathroom with lavatory and water closet num .
one drafting table num .
one num worktable measuring approximately num inches x num inches num .
two num chairs and num .
facsimile machine .
num field office utilities equip the field office with the following num .
a potable water supply section num field laboratories and field offices page num num .
adequate electrical power num .
other utilities required to operate the office num .
a system for wastewater disposal in accordance with state and local requirements .
install devices necessary to protect electronic equipment from power surges in the main power supply and communication lines .
equip the field office with telephone modular jacks in each separate work area and provide an external telephone demarcation point .
install a security light on the exterior portion of the field office near each exterior door .
num release of field office the department will retain possession of the field office for num days after the final inspection or until released by the project manager whichever occurs first .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit field laboratory type i each field laboratory type ii each supplemental field laboratory each supplemental hotmix asphalt field laboratory each supplemental field laboratory superpave each field office each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
hookup and furnishing of utilities and appurtenances b .
security fencing c. parking lot d. basic equipment as listed e. foundations and anchoring f. all phone installations and monthly bills g. distilled or demineralized water for lab testing .
section num drop inlets page num section num drop inlets num description this work consists of providing and installing drop inlets and junction boxes and adjusting existing drop inlets .
num materials provide class a concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide reinforcing steel in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
provide structural steel in accordance with section num steel structures .
provide coatings for structural steel in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
provide preformed expansion joint filler in accordance with aashto m num .
provide precast units in accordance with section num precast concrete structures .
num construction requirements construct drop inlets in accordance with section num concrete structures section num steel reinforcement and section num steel structures .
precast the drop inlets and junction boxes or cast in place .
raise the existing drop inlets by removing and reconstructing the top six num inches of the existing structure .
reuse the existing grate but provide a new frame .
num foundation requirements compact the foundations of drop inlets and junction boxes to at least num of maximum density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified in accordance with section num subgrade preparation .
replace unstable material with structurally adequate material before constructing new foundations .
num backfilling backfill in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures .
num coating of structural steel coat structural steel for drop inlets in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
num method of measurement the department will measure reinforcing steel concrete and structural steel for drop inlet extensions in accordance with section num steel reinforcement section num concrete structures and section num steel structures respectively .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit median drop inlet type i ___ to ___ ft each median drop inlet type ___ each section num drop inlets page num modified median drop inlet type___ each curb drop inlet type___ ___ to ___ ft each curb drop inlet type ___ over ___ ft each drop inlet type___ ___ to ___ ft each drop inlet type___ over ___ ft each transverse drop inlet type ___ ___ to ___ ft each transverse drop inlet type ___ over ___ ft each junction box each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. subgrade preparation b. compaction c. replacement of unsuitable foundation material d. excavation and backfilling for drop inlets e. coating of structural steel f. reinforcing steel concrete and structural steel except on extensions g. removal of the top six num inches on extensions h. gravel for drain pocket and hardware cloth for the weep holes and i. dewatering .
section num wire mesh for slope stabilization page num section num wire mesh for slope stabilization num description this work consists of roadway slope stabilization to restrain and channel rockfall .
num materials num anchor cable provide anchor cable with a diameter of at least num inch .
it shall be zinccoated steel wire strand common grade type num coating in accordance with astm a num .
num resingrouted steel bolt systems provide a resingrouted steel bolt system with the best standard products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in the production of this type of installation and of the manufacturers latest approved design .
use resingrouted steel bolts and hooked anchors with a minimum diameter of num inch .
use the headed type with flash forging .
use steel bolts with the following tensile properties num .
minimum yield strength num psi num .
minimum ultimate strength num psi use steel bolts and hooked anchors manufactured from any of the grades of deformed bars specified in astm a num .
use steel bolts and hooked anchors specifically designed for resin grouting with lugs vertical ribs and deformations to provide thorough mixing of the resin and to center the steel bolts in the drilled holes .
num resin cartridges provide the type of resin cartridges used in duponts fasloc a resin anchoring system designed for a num inch diameter cartridge in a one num inch diameter hole with a num inch bolt or anchor or provide an approved equal .
num earth anchor systems use earth anchor systems with the best standard products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in the production of this type of installation and of the manufacturers latest approved design .
use earth anchor systems designed for the conditions encountered and as approved by the project manager .
num bearing base plates use bearing base plates that are six num inches square or six num inches diameter round plates in accordance with astm f num .
num certification submit to the project manager for approval any manufacturers certificates literature and shop drawings at least two num weeks before beginning the work .
shop drawings will at a minimum include spacing boltanchor length working load and minimum required torque .
num slope stabilization wire and wire mesh provide tie wire and wire mesh in accordance with section num slope and erosion protection structures .
num polyvinyl chloride coated wire mesh section num wire mesh for slope stabilization page num in addition to section num slope and erosion protection structures use pvccoated wire mesh and connections in accordance with the following num .
extrude the pvc coating onto the wire core before weaving the coated wire num .
overall minimum diameter galvanized wire core plus pvc coating is num inch num .
edging wire will be a galvanized wire core with a diameter of at least num inch approximate u.s. gauge num coated with pvc and having a minimum overall diameter of num inch and num .
lacing wire will be a galvanized wire core with a diameter of at least num inch approximate u.s. gauge num coated with pvc and having a minimum overall diameter of num inch .
num pvc coating provide protective pvc coating that resists the damaging effects of natural weather exposure or immersion in salt water and that does not show any material difference in its initial compound properties in accordance with table num pvc coating physical property requirements .
table num pvc coating physical property requirements property required value test method initial property requirements specific gravity kgdm num num astm d num durometer hardness num astm d num shore d iso num volatile loss maximum astm d num num c for num h two percent numiso num num c for num h six percent num astm d num tensile strength kgcm num minimum num astm d num elongation num astm d num modulus of elasticity kgcm num minimum num of elongation num astm d num resistance to abrasion gm maximum num astm d num numa brittleness temperature c maximum num bs numa cold bend temperature num bs numb cold flex temperature creeping corrosion mm maximum a num apenetration of corrosion of the wire core from a square cut end when the specimen has been immersed for num h in a num solution of hydrochloric acid num be .
num construction requirements prepare top and bottom of slopes by trenching .
scale slope faces in accordance with section num scaling of rock slopes before installing steel boltsanchors and draping and anchoring the wire mesh .
num anchor hole preparation drill bore holes for steel boltsanchors approximately perpendicular to the rock face except in areas approved by the project manager incline the boreholes to a maximum of num section num wire mesh for slope stabilization page num off the perpendicular in order to intercept and seat the steel boltsanchors in solid rock .
upon completion of drilling blow the drilled holes clean with compressed air with an operating air pressure of at least num psi introduced at the back of the hole .
use the manufacturers recommended hole diameter for the steel boltsanchors .
ensure that the clearance between the steel boltanchor and borehole wall is from num inch to num inch .
num anchor installation carefully follow the manufacturers recommended installation procedures for steel boltsanchors .
during construction the contractor may reduce the centertocenter spacing in order to maximize anchorage by selective boltinganchoring in sound rock or to eliminate large voids between the wire mesh and the slope face .
use steel boltshooked anchors that are at least six num feet long .
ensure that the steel bolts extend at least one num foot into sound rock .
as construction progresses the rock conditions encountered may require the lengths of the steel boltshooked anchors to be greater than the minimum length so the project manager may direct varied lengths .
if using varied lengths the department will allow the contractor to use steel couplings or other methods recommended by the manufacturer .
num tensioning and testing of steel bolts and earth anchors tension steel bolts and earth anchors in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use a minimum torque of num lbfft unless otherwise specified .
after installation test a randomly selected set of ten percent num of the bolts or anchors to confirm the specified working load .
if more than one third of these fail test all boltsanchors .
after replacing the failed bolts and anchors test another randomly selected set of ten percent num of bolts and anchors not including those previously tested and accepted .
repeat the procedure until obtaining the satisfactory results .
replace unacceptable bolts and anchors at no additional cost to the department .
num installation of wire mesh if the contract specifies use pvccoated wire mesh .
lap the wire mesh at least six num inches and securely bind the perimeter edges of wire mesh so that the joints formed by tying the selvedges have a minimum strength equal to that of the body of the mesh .
space ties connectors locking clips or hog rings used for fastening edges four num inches apart or less .
the contractor may lace perimeter edges with binding wire by tightly looping it through every mesh opening .
extend wire mesh down the face of the slope and anchor it to the face of the slope by resingrouted steel bolts or anchors as required .
hold wire mesh in place by the bearing base plates to stretch it to the maximum and contour it to the existing surface .
section num wire mesh for slope stabilization page num anchor the wire mesh at the bottom to contain loose debris and allow periodic maintenance and debris removal .
num alternate anchoring method if specified in the contract anchor wire mesh using anchor cable and hooked resin grouted steel or earth anchors .
num site maintenance maintain the project area and keep it clear of falling rock and debris during construction and at project completion .
dispose of waste and debris at locations approved by the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit slope protection wire mesh square yard slope protection wire mesh pvccoated square yard resingrouted steel bolts linear foot resingrouted steel anchors linear foot earth anchors linear foot anchor cable linear foot num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. trenching at the top and bottom of the slope b. hauling and disposal of rocks and debris and c. ties lacing wire clips hog rings plates and other appurtenances .
section num scaling of rock slopes page num section num scaling of rock slopes num description this work consists of removing loose rock on the slope using hand scaling hydraulic splitters or blast trimming .
num materialreserved num construction requirements num work plan submit a detailed work plan for each rock slope scaling location to the project manager for approval by the state geotechnical engineer .
submit the plan to the department at least num days before beginning the rock scaling work .
include the following in the plan num .
the proposed construction sequence and schedule num .
the number of rock slope scaling crews to be employed on the project num .
a blasting plan for rock blocks requiring light blasting or trimming and num .
a rock removal and disposal plan for rock debris generated from the rock slope scaling work including provisions to protect adjacent facilities .
num general do not use heavy power equipment such as backhoes on the slope unless otherwise approved by the project manager .
num sequence of operations begin rock slope scaling at the top of the slope and proceed downward removing loose rock as the work progresses .
after completing the first rockslope scaling pass remove rock fragments or debris that hang up on the slopes during the scaling operations .
the project manager will inspect the new face to determine the adequacy of the scaling operation .
num blasting requirements blast in accordance with section num blasting requirements .
ensure that the blasting explosive force is sufficient to remove the loose rock without damaging the surrounding competent rock .
load the drill holes with a sufficient amount of explosive to break the rock between the drill holes without damaging the new face .
num debris removal dispose of the rock and debris resulting from rock slope scaling operations at a location approved by the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment section num scaling of rock slopes page num pay item pay unit scaling of rock slopes square yard num work included in payment hauling and disposal of the rock and debris blasting protection of facilities and work plan will be considered as included in the payment for the scaling of rock slopes and no separate measurement and payment will be made .
section num glare shields page num section num glare shields num description this work consists of providing and installing glare shields .
num materials provide new material for permanent installations or likenew material for temporary installations .
provide glare shields from the departments approved products list .
obtain project manager approval of likenew glare shielding systems for temporary installations before installation .
num mounting system use a mounting system with an approved steel mechanical anchor bolting system .
ensure that each anchor has a minimum num lb pullout and shear strength .
num multiple glare shield blade systems for multiple glare shield blade systems flush mount and internally thread the anchors to allow for removal and replacement of the base rail without damage to the anchors .
use a base rail made of a corrosionresistant material or protected with a rustinhibiting coating .
num glare shield blades provide glare shield blades in accordance with the following requirements num .
use blades of a durable impactresistant nonwarping and nonmetallic material num .
the blade material will not deviate more than num in the tensile strength and elongation values evident at num f if tested at num f and num f in accordance with astm d num num .
the blade material will not deviate more than num in the tensile strength and elongation values evident at num f after num h exposure if tested in accordance with astm d num and astm g num .
num .
the blade color shall be as approved by the department .
num construction requirements place four num inch num inch type iii reflective sheeting yellow or white as appropriate on the blades at num ft intervals .
num glare shield blade spacing space glare shield blades at intervals that will block the light within the glare zone defined as the zone num left and right from the axis of headlight .
make the spacing uniform and uninterrupted for the entire length of the installation .
num base rail construction requirements ensure that base rails for multiple glare shield blade systems fit within the top edge of the concrete wall barrier or form around the edge in a manner that fits tightly against the concrete wall barrier .
section num glare shields page num ensure that each base rail is a continuous single unit spanning the length of the concrete wall barrier unit .
do not span joints between concrete wall barrier sections with the base rail units of multiple glare shield blade systems .
secure each ten num foot baserail unit to the concrete wall barrier with at least three num anchor points unless the project manager or the manufacturer requires more anchors .
num bladetobase rail mounting requirements mount the glare shield blades to the base rail by a bracket assembly that allows the replacement of individual blades .
ensure that the bracket assembly holds the blade rigidly in a fixed position and is adjustable allowing the blades to be switched for traffic passing lefttoleft or righttoright .
num repair of inadequate glare shielding replace anchors that show inadequate bonding with the concrete wall barrier .
replace incorrectly placed glare shield blades .
incorrect placement of a glare shield blade includes the following num .
the blades have an incorrect skew angle num .
the blades are not vertically erect num .
the blades have nonuniform spacing or num .
the anchors are loose .
the project manager will determine which items need to be repaired or replaced .
perform the replacement or repair of inadequate glare shielding at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment glare shields used for temporary construction traffic control will remain the property of the contractor upon completion of the project .
pay item pay unit individual glare shield blades each multiple glare shielding linear foot num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for glare shields and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
base rails hardware and anchoring appurtenances b. relocation of glare shielding within the project c. maintenance repair and replacement and d. reflective sheeting type iii .
section num rumble strips page num section num rumble strips num description this work consists of milling rumble strips into roadway shoulders .
num materials num equipment use a device to mill the roadway shoulders that is capable of producing rumble strips in accordance with the contract .
obtain project manager approval of the milling device .
num alignment control use devices equipped with a guide in order to obtain proper alignment of the completed rumble strip .
num construction requirements num general make clearly incised grooves for the rumble strips in accordance with the contract .
place rumble strips in accordance with the plans .
remove or obliterate the rumble strips placed at locations other than shown on the plans and restore the pavement to the satisfaction of the project manager .
num placement allow the hma material to cure for a minimum of num h after compaction before starting rumble strip work .
mill the rumble strips with one num pass of the milling device .
seal all rumble strip surfaces including vertical surfaces with asphalt material .
num method of measurement the department will measure the rumble strips longitudinally parallel to the traveled way for each side of the roadway the contractor installs the rumble strips .
the department will measure rumble strips beginning at the transverse center of the first milled strip and proceeding along the centerline of the rumble strip pattern to the transverse center of the final milled strip in the pattern including breaks that are part of the rumble strip pattern .
the department will not include in the measurement breaks in the rumble strip pattern for exits principal intersections and other interruptions .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit rumble strips linear foot num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately equipment and labor repair of incorrectly placed rumble strips continuous application of seal coat to completed rumble strips and repair of damaged pavement .
section num revegetation page num section num revegetation num description this work consists of preparing the soil and seeding areas stripped of vegetation during construction operations and required to be revegetated as per the clean water act .
num materials provide certifications for all materials to the project manager before work commences .
num seed the revegetationerosion control plans will specify the species varieties or origins and rates of seeding .
the contract will specify varieties of certified weedfree seed in accordance with new mexico seed law nmsa num num et seq ..
the revegetationerosion control plan will specify the minimum standards for each species .
provide certified seed of named varieties in accordance with the minimum standards of the appropriate seed certification agency .
num labeling and certification seal and label each bag of seed in accordance with the federal seed act num u.s.c .
num et seq .
and nmda seed labeling requirements nmsa num num .
provide the following information on each bag tag for each species num .
variety specify if certified num .
kind of seed num .
lot number num .
purity num .
germination num .
percentage crop seed percentage inert percentage noxious weeds in accordance with new mexico seed law nmsa num num et seq .
num .
origin num .
test date and num .
weight in pounds of this species or percentage of total lot .
provide seed analysis results that are not older than num months .
provide to the project manager documentation of seed origin and pure live seed content from a certified testing laboratory .
seed must arrive in the original sealed containers from the certified supplier and the revegetation contractor must provide all tags and certifications to the project manager .
certification must be provided that the seed has been stored in appropriate conditions in the num months before arriving at the project .
any seed substitutions require letters from three num sources confirming that the originally specified seed is not available at the time of installation .
each seed bad shall have a unique identification number and the certified seed supplier shall maintain records of seed bad identification numbers for a period of three num years .
calculate the pure live seed using the following equation num g p pls num where section num revegetation page num pls is the pure live seed p is the percent purity g is the percent germination including dormant seed the contractor may provide premixed seeds .
provide documentation as if the supplier sold or bagged the seeds separately .
num amendments provide amendments specified type and formulation and suppliers certification in accordance with the contract .
num wood chip mulch provide certified weedfree core material woodchips .
the material must be num untreated wood chips and free of inorganic debris such as plastic glass metal etc .
manufacturer shall certify that the material is free of noxious weeds .
woodchip size shall not be smaller than one num inch and shall not exceed three num inches in diameter shavings shall not be more than five precent num of the total mass .
num hay mulch use perennial native or introduced grasses of finestemmed varieties unless otherwise specified in the contract .
provide bales of hay containing at least num by weight ten num inch herbage or longer .
the department will not accept rotten brittle or moldy hay or hay containing noxious seed or plants .
the contractor may provide marsh grass or prairie hay composed of native grass of specified species .
the department will accept tall wheat grass intermediate wheat grass switch grass or orchard hay if the contractor cuts it before seed formation .
use marsh grass hay composed of mid and tall native usually tough and wiry grass and grasslike plants found in the lowland areas of the rocky mountain region .
cure and harvest hay at least num days before use .
all hay mulch is to be free of noxious weeds as certified by an industry recognized forage certification authority .
num straw mulch do not use rotten or moldy straw .
all straw mulch is to be free of noxious weeds as certified by an industry recognized forage certification authority .
num wood cellulose mulch provide wood cellulose mulch that consists of a specially prepared virgin wood fiber processed to contain no growthinhibiting or germinationinhibiting factors .
manufacture and process mulch so the wood cellulose fibers remain in uniform suspension in water under agitation and will blend with grass seed fertilizer and other additives to form a homogenous slurry .
provide processed mulch materials with the following characteristics num .
can form a blotterlike ground cover on application num .
has moisture and percolation properties and num .
can cover and hold grass seed in contact with the soil .
section num revegetation page num num bonded fiber matrix bfm bonded fiber matrix bfm is a hydraulically applied blanket that controls soil erosion and accelerates seed germination .
bfm is a threedimensional composite of wood or paper fibers bonded by polymer tackifiers that provides high performance erosion prevention on slopes .
a submittal shall be provided to the project manager providing coredrill photographs indicating the depth of completed bfm on the a soil horizon .
the submittal shall reflect the tonnage of bfm required per acre on the project .
the project manager shall use this to confirm correct coverage of bfm on the project .
num composted mulch furnish and place composted mulch as shown on the plans and in accordance with the criteria as described below .
composted mulch provider must be registered with or permitted by the new mexico environment department solid waste bureau and must be in compliance with num nmac num .
the standard specified one num inch of compost mulch tilled into the top four num inches of soil for class a seeding equals num cubic yards of mulch per acre .
composted mulch is defined as the product of a controlled aerobic thermophilic biological decomposition process that meets the quality requirements in table num quality requirements for composted mulch .
raw materials used in producing composted mulch may include green waste animal manure animal bedding paper waste food waste biosolids or other nontoxic organic matter but shall not include animal mortalities .
table num material and operations for classes of seeding material measure method criterion all composted mulches moisture content evaporative loss at numc no more than num particle size sieve num to num of material passes ¾ inch screen num of pieces smaller than num inches in length and num inches in diameter electrical conductivity num slurry mass basis num mmhocm ph num slurry mass basis ph num ph num organic matter loss on ignition at numc num num of dry weight maturity minimum num germination to second set of leaves for marigold seeds in num volume basis mixture of ¾ inch screened composted mulch and twicerinsed nursery sand .
stability maximum core temperature of numf after num hours in num foot tall conical pile with moisture adjusted to between num and num .
debris less than one percent num inorganic debris by volume including but not limited to glass plastic stones and metal .
composted mulches with wastewater biosolids trace metals hnonum digestion complies with table num of numcfrnum fecal coliforms mpn with anum broth num mpndry gram tests marked with asterisks must be performed by a suitable analytical laboratory other tests may be performed by the composted mulch producer .
section num revegetation page num num acceptance before delivering composted mulch provider shall furnish documentation that includes the following num .
the raw materials by percentage used in the production of the delivered composted mulch num .
daily temperature records for at least num of the piles or batches used to produce the delivered composted mulch illustrating attainment of at least numf for at least num consecutive days num .
a laboratory analysis for criteria shown in table num performed on composted mulch no more than num days prior to composted mulch delivery and num .
an affidavit signed by a responsible company representative confirming that the composted mulch meets each requirement shown in table num quality requirements for composted mulch .
the project manager or landscape architect may inspect and approve the composted mulch application during installation and upon completion of the project .
certification of compost weight shall be required .
the weight shall account for moisture content at the time of sale .
certification must indicate date and time of sale source of compost and delivery location .
num rock mulch rock mulch shall be ¾ inch to one num inch diameter fractured face material installed over hydroseeded areas to a depth of one num inch thick to aid in erosion control and water harvesting .
the finished rock mulch surface must be smooth and uniform maintaining the original flow lines slope gradients and contours of the job .
certification of quantities must be provided to the project manager .
a sample of the proposed rock mulch must be provided to the project manager and landscape architect for approval before application .
a submittal shall be provided from a rock mulch supplier confirming the tonnage required per acre for one num inch thickness of coverage depending on the chosen rock type size .
num construction requirements num sampling the department may sample and test shipments of seed and fertilizer for compliance with the regulations and requirements of the nmda .
the department may reject seed or fertilizer not in accordance with the contract .
num seeding classes provide the various classes and the material and operations for each class in accordance with table num material and operations for classes of seeding .
table num material and operations for classes of seeding operation seeding class a c d ss seed bed preparation x x x amendments seeding chain harrowing or hand raking x x x x x x x x x x x compost mulch x x hay or straw anchoring crimping x a hay or straw anchoring tack x a x section num revegetation page num soil retention blanket x bfm x x aanchoring method is based on the specified mulch type .
key x required not required the department defines the seeding classes as follows num .
class a seeding with a drill slopes flatter than num num .
class c seeding with hydroseeder soil preparation bfm slopes flatter than num num .
class d seeding with soil retention blanket num .
class ss steep slope or inaccessible area seeding with a hydroseeder bfm num seedbed preparation till the seedbed with a disc harrow or chiseling tools to at least four num inches deep .
uproot competitive vegetation during seedbed preparation and uniformly work the soil to a surface free of clods large stones or other deleterious material that would interfere with seeding equipment .
add any soil amendments as specified by disc harrow or chisel to a depth of four num inches .
till across the slope if practical .
do not till the seedbed if the moisture content of the soil is outside the limits recommended by the seed supplier for planting or the ground is in a non tillable condition .
do not prepare more seedbed area on which the entire seeding operation can be applied before the surface crusts or loses seed and fertilizer to erosion .
if erosion or crusting occurs perform seedbed preparation again .
num amendments apply the specified amendment uniformly to the prepared seedbed .
num seeding season limitations there are no restrictions on time of seeding other than that the ground may not be frozen .
cool season grasses have been added to all seeding recommendations .
num seeding operations uniformly apply the seed mix at a rate in accordance with the contract .
if practical perform the seeding operations across the slope by drilling .
do not drive vehicles or other equipment on seeded areas .
if rainfall or some other factor prevents the contractor from seeding to the specified depth on prepared surfaces the contractor shall prepare the seedbed and apply seed again at no additional cost to the department .
num drill seeding plant seed approximately num inch deep with a maximum depth of one num inch unless otherwise specified in the contract .
ensure that the distance between the drilled furrows is no more than eight num inches .
if the furrow openers on the drill exceed eight num inches redrill section num revegetation page num the area .
perform seeding with grass seeding equipment in good working order .
ensure that the equipment has the following num .
double disc openers num .
depth bands num .
drop tubes num .
packer wheels or drag chains num .
rate control attachments num .
seed boxers with agitators for trashy seed .
num contractors responsibility for seeded areas protect and care for seeded areas until final acceptance of the work .
repair any damage to seeded areas caused by pedestrian or vehicular traffic at no additional cost to the department .
num contractors warranty of work a num day inspection of mulch following completion of application of mulch with mechanical crimping and tackifer must indicate a minimum of num of the original mulch still in place .
areas not meeting this criterion must be remulched and tackifier applied to meet the num standard .
allowance will be made for exceptional wind or water events which may have occurred during the num day time period .
num mulching do not perform mulching when wind velocity exceeds num mph .
ensure that hay and straw mulch have at least num of fibers exceeding ten num inches long on the ground after application .
spread the mulch uniformly over the area either by hand or with a mechanical mulch spreader .
if spreading by hand tear apart the bales of mulch and fluff it before spreading .
spread mulch for seeding with a mechanical mulch spreader .
anchor or tack the mulch with an approved tackifier .
use the materials and rate of application recommended by the manufacturer .
the tackifier shall be incidental to the seeding .
perform mechanical mulch anchoring with a tackifier when the mechanical method is impractical due to steep slopes or rocky areas and when approved by the project manager .
num hay mulch ensure that the rate of application of hay mulch is at least two num tons per acre of airdry hay .
anchor hay mulch using a crimper with flat serrated discs at least one num inch thick with dull edges spaced no more than nine num inches apart .
ensure that the disc diameter is large enough to prevent the frame of the equipment from dragging in mulch .
ensure that hay mulch anchoring is at least two num inches deep and do not cover it with excessive amounts of soil .
perform hay mulch anchoring across the slope where practical with no more than two num passes of the anchoring equipment .
num straw mulch section num revegetation page num ensure that the straw mulch rate of application is at least two num tons per acre of airdry straw .
anchor straw mulch with an approved tackifier at the rate of application recommended by the manufacturer .
num wood cellulose mulch apply wood cellulose mulch uniformly at the approved rate .
num method of measurement the department will measure parallel to slopes .
num basis of payment the department will make partial payments for seeding in accordance with section num seeding season limitations .
the department considers seeding and fertilizing of the following areas occupied by the contractor as incidental to this work for which the department will not pay for separately num .
campsites num .
office num .
plant sites num .
equipment parking num .
service areas and num .
areas stripped of native vegetation through unnecessary or improper construction practices by the contractor .
pay item pay unit class ___seeding acre steep slope seeding acre num work included in payment the following work items will be considered as included in payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. tackifier for mulch b .
all compost materials and related work c. seeding of the areas occupied by the contractor for campsites office plant sites equipment parking service areas areas stripped of native vegetation through unnecessary or improper construction practices by the contractor and any fertilizing .
section num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities page num section num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities num description this work consists of performing excavation trenching and backfilling for underground utility lines .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements num trenching and excavation grades for underground utility lines are the invert inside bottom of the pipe unless the contract specifies otherwise .
during excavation pile material suitable for backfill in an orderly manner far enough away from the banks of the trench to avoid overloading and to prevent slides or caveins .
perform grading necessary to prevent surface water from flowing into trenches or other excavations remove water that has accumulated by pumping or with other approved methods .
perform trenching far enough in advance of pipe laying to allow the project manager to make necessary grade changes .
unless otherwise specified in the contract begin backfilling immediately after laying pipe and keep pace with pipelaying operations .
num trench widths ensure that trenches are wide enough to properly lay align grade and joint the pipe .
dig trenches to at least num inches wide but in no case should they exceed num times the outside diameter of the pipe plus num inches plus twice the thickness of shoring structures at the level of the top of the pipe .
the contractor may use excavation for concrete structures as the outside form if approved by the project manager .
if trenching is behind a curb in lawns or adjacent to sidewalks or walls ensure that the trench is not wider than the outside diameter of the pipe plus num inches at the trench top .
provide sheeting or bracing as necessary .
the department will consider over depth excavation not ordered by the project manager as unauthorized .
fill the unauthorized excavation with granular or compacted embedment material or concrete as directed by the project manager at no additional cost to the department .
num shaping trench bottoms accurately grade trench bottoms for pipe six num inches or smaller to provide uniform bearing and support throughout the length of each section of pipe .
finish the bottom of the trench by excavating a shallow concave groove at the line of the pipe and shape it approximately to fit the pipe .
excavate trench bottoms for larger pipe to below the grade line as necessary to allow the installation of granular embedment foundation material for the pipe .
dig bell holes and depressions for joints after grading the trench bottom so that the full length of the pipe rests on the prepared bottom .
make these depressions the length depth and width necessary to properly fit the particular type of joint .
do not excavate below the specified final trench bottom elevation unless the contract section num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities page num requires granular embedment foundation material .
num foundations remove wet or otherwise unstable soil incapable of properly supporting the pipe and backfill the trench to grade with granular embedment foundation material or other suitable material .
if the contractor excavates deeper than the specified grade the contractor shall backfill the trench to grade with granular embedment foundation material or other approved material .
thoroughly tamp the replacement foundation material to provide a solid bed for the pipe .
the project manager will determine if material from the trench is acceptable .
num rock excavation remove rock that is not rippable with a rip tooth or that occurs in masses larger than num yd num or ledges at least four num inches thick in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment .
if the contractor encounters solid rock during excavation the contractor shall excavate to a depth six num inches below the outside bottom of the pipe and backfill the trench to the proper grade .
if materials can not be handled or compacted as earth including rock the contractor shall separate them from excavated materials that the contractor shall use as fill or embankment material .
dispose of rock separated from fill material as approved by the project manager .
num wet excavation requirements keep trenches and other excavations free of water by bailing pumping or draining during construction operations .
keep water away from concrete or cement joints until the materials attain initial set .
provide the following as necessary num .
cofferdams num .
pumps num .
drains num .
ditches num .
well points and num .
other means for removing water from the excavations or other parts of the work and for preventing excavated slopes from sliding or caving .
dewater for at least num h in the vicinity of concrete to allow the concrete to set properly .
dispose of water by pumping it into ditches storm drains or sanitary sewers in accordance with applicable regulations .
num bracing and sheeting the department will allow the contractor to cut trench banks on slopes to prevent sliding and caving where the increased trench width will not interfere with surface features or encroach on right of way limits .
slopes may not intersect vertical trench walls more than num inches above the top of pipe .
do not remove sheeting and bracing until sufficient backfill is in place to protect the utility structures and the adjacent roadway from caving damage .
section num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities page num leave sheeting in place if necessary and approved in writing by the project manager .
cut off sheeting left in place at least one num ft below the ground surface .
num bedding and backfill provide bedding and backfill for utilities in accordance with section num nmsspwc appurtenant stipulations except provide compaction within four num ft of pipe and utility appurtenances under the roadway prism to num of maximum dry density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
if backfilling uncased pipe do not break chip crush crack or otherwise damage the pipe .
backfill polyvinyl chloride pipe only if the pipe is num f or below .
num backfill material provide backfill material that after placement and compaction is capable of supporting the design loads .
provide backfill material that is free of lumps debris other deleterious materials and sharp rocks stones or other objects that might damage the pipe .
num backfill compaction operations compact backfill material placed around irregular areas with handoperated tamping equipment .
compact anchor loads for pipe testing and other backfill placed before the regular trench backfill .
num contractors responsibility for protection of public utilities repair damage to structures pipelines conduits cables sewers storm drains or other utilities encountered in or adjacent to the excavation due to the contractors negligence .
use reasonable measures and precautions including blue stake or one call to protect utilities .
locate underground utilities before excavating and provide support to protect these utilities and avoid damage or interruption in functions .
at least seven num days before beginning excavation provide written notification to owners of public utilities that may be affected by construction so that the owners may make necessary arrangements .
restore or rebuild property damaged by construction operations to at least the condition that existed before the construction operations .
get the project managers approval to relocate trench lines to avoid known obstacles .
permanently plug the dead ends left in the trench from removed abandoned pipes conduits or sewers .
num house service connections do not disturb or damage existing house lateral connections to utility mains .
replace broken lateral connections with the same type pipe or better at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will pay for authorized rock excavation in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment .
the department will pay for sheeting left in place at the direction of the project manager section num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities page num at an agreed price that does not exceed the actual material cost .
section num manholes page num section num manholes num description this work consists of constructing manholes .
construct manholes complete with covers steps fittings and other appurtenances .
this work also includes installation of reducing cones manhole extensions ties to existing manholes manhole adjustments and manhole frame and covers .
num nmsspwc appurtenant stipulations adhere to the applicable requirements of the nmsspwc except for the procedures for method of measurement and basis of payment .
num terms substitute engineer as it appears in the applicable sections of the nmsspwc with project manager .
the term owner refers to the entity owning the affected utilities on this project .
num manhole types use precast concrete sections to construct drop and standard manholes .
the department defines drop manholes as manholes that have outside pipe and fittings for dropping sewage into the lower line .
the department defines standard manholes as inside drop manholes where the incoming line discharges directly into the manhole and does not require special fittings .
num materials num general use new materials of the best standard quality available for the intended purpose .
the contractor may substitute contract specified brand name materials with generic materials of equal quality if the contractor provides adequate technical and descriptive data and the project manager approves .
num referenced materials provide materials in accordance with these standard specifications and the following sections of the nmsspwc num .
section num cement mortar and grout num .
section num brick num .
section num reinforced concrete pipe num .
section num reinforced concrete pressure pipe num .
section num concrete cylinder pipe num .
section num gray iron and ductile iron fittings num .
section num galvanizing num .
section num steel castings num .
section num gray iron castings and num .
section num aluminum castings .
section num manholes page num if the abovereferenced specifications and these standard specifications conflict the contractor shall use the more stringent .
num certification before installing an item or type of material provide the project manager with a certification that the item or type of material meets these standard specifications or the referenced specifications .
num masonry num concrete provide materials for concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num nonshrink mortar provide nonshrink mortar in accordance with section num nonshrink mortar .
num fine aggregate provide fine aggregate that passes a no .
num sieve but no more than four percent num passes the no .
num sieve .
num precast sections provide circular precast concrete in accordance with astm c num except that the minimum thickness and the reinforcement will be in accordance with the contract .
provide circular or horseshoeshaped box out openings for each connecting pipe with the surfaces grooved or roughened to improve mortar bond .
num gaskets provide rubber or mastic gasket materials in accordance with the following num .
mastic in accordance with federal specification sssnum .
num .
rubber that is neoprene or another synthetic and num num hardness if measured in accordance with astm d num and type a durometer .
num coal tar paint provide one num of the following types of coal tar paint num .
koppers bitumastic superservice black num .
porter tarmastic num num .
tnemec num heavy tenemecol or num .
an approved equal .
num castings provide castings in accordance with astm a num with asphalt varnish coating applied at the foundry .
provide the following manhole rings and covers num .
neenah rnum section num manholes page num num .
clay and bailey no .
num num .
mckinley et num m or num .
an approved equal .
provide aluminum manhole steps or polypropyleneencased deformedsteel reinforcing bar manhole steps in accordance with astm c num .
num construction requirements num general make excavations as necessary to determine the exact location of existing utilities that affect the new construction .
repair damage to existing utilities at no additional cost to the department .
the project manager will establish the final locations for new fittings connections etc .
in the field .
the project manager must approve modifications to the contract before beginning the work .
submit a proposed sequence of construction to the project manager for approval before beginning the work .
num waste containment and disposal requirements dispose of materials taken from sanitary sewers during cleaning operations at no additional cost to the department .
retrieve and dispose of sand and other debris from the sewers and secure a legal disposal site at no additional cost to the department .
do not discharge removed sewage or solids onto streets ditches catch basins or storm drains .
num delivery do not deliver precast concrete sections to the project until representative concrete control cylinders have attained at least num of the specified minimum compressive strength .
inspect precast concrete sections upon delivery and do not use cracked broken or visibly defective units .
num placement requirements use mortar within num min after mixing .
discard mortar that has begun to take on initial set and do not mix it with additional cement or new mortar .
if necessary extend the manhole as directed by the project manager .
num inverts ensure that the dimension of the invert section through a manhole is greater than that of the outgoing pipe .
ensure that the shape of the invert conforms exactly to the lower half of the pipe it connects .
connect side branches with as large a radius of curve as practical .
trowel inverts to a smooth clean surface .
num precast sections provide circular precast sections with a rubber or mastic gasket to seal joints between sections .
fill the space between connecting pipes and the wall of precast sections completely with nonshrinking mortar .
section num manholes page num num connections make connections in a sequence and method that minimizes inconvenience to the owner .
obtain project manager approval of the sequence and method before making the connections .
to stop the flow of water to make the connection to the existing line the contractor shall only close existing valves in the presence of an owner representative .
num manhole frames and covers cast or finish manhole frames and covers in accordance with the plans .
use machined cover seats and frame seats made of tough gray iron free of cold chutes or blow holes and with a finish to industry standards .
produce an indentation on a rectangular edge using a hammer without flaking the metal .
perform the following to castings at the foundry num .
hammer inspection num .
thoroughly clean num .
dip in asphalt or coal tar and num .
oil at a temperature of from num f to num f. use manhole frames and covers in accordance with the contract .
cast finish and machine the frame and cover so that the cover sits true and even without rocking within the frame .
ensure the position and spacing of the manhole step rungs are in accordance with the contract .
num submittals two num weeks before installation submit drawings and data regarding precast concrete sections to the department .
submit data and drawings regarding castinplace manholes to the department in accordance with section num portland cement concrete and section num concrete structures .
num manhole adjustments adjust manhole rings in existing paved roadway using the following procedure num .
remove the existing ring and cover num .
place a num inch thick minimum steel plate cover on the manhole opening num .
salvage the existing manhole rings and manhole covers and return them to the owner as directed num .
place and compact the required surfacing num .
locate the steelplate manhole cover with a metal detector or other method approved by the project manager num .
cut a five num foot five num foot square opening in the surfacing and remove the surrounding material in accordance with the plans the control point of the square opening is the center of the manhole num .
install a manhole ring and adjust in accordance with the plans num .
place the steel reinforcement and concrete the project manager will determine the section num manholes page num curing time allowed for the placed concrete before other work adjacent to or over the concrete can be started and num .
place and compact the required surfacing .
the contractor may propose an alternate method of adjusting manholes by providing the project manager the proposed procedure in writing .
do not use the proposed procedure until project manager approval .
num miscellaneous manhole construction if specified install reducing cones manhole extensions ties to existing manholes manhole adjustments and manhole frame and covers in accordance with the nmsspwc .
num method of measurement the department will measure additional depth for adjusted manholes from the inside bottom of the manhole to the adjusted finished top of the manhole ring and compare that measurement to the plan depth .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit manhole type __ __ft diameter ___ft to ___ft depth each manhole type __ __ft diameter over ___ft to ____ft depth each manhole type ___ each special manhole type ___ each manhole ___ft diameter each sewer manhole ___inch diameter each drop manhole ___inch diameter each ___ inch ___inch reducing cone each additional depth for manhole vertical foot additional depth for ___ft diameter manholes vertical foot manhole adjustment each manhole extension each tie to existing manhole each manhole frame and cover each section num utility items page num section num utility items num description this work consists of trench excavation and backfill and providing installing and connecting the specified utility items to existing utilities .
num nmsspwc appurtenant stipulations adhere to the applicable requirements of the nmsspwc as referenced added to or modified for utility relocation and construction .
num terms for the purposes of this section substitute engineer as it appears in the applicable sections of the nmsspwc with project manager .
the term owner refers to the entity owning the affected utilities on this project .
num applicable sections the following sections of the nmsspwc shall apply except as modified num .
section num trenching and boring for utilities num .
section num trenching excavation and backfill num .
section num boring drilling and jacking num .
section num water transmission collector and distribution lines num .
section num installation of water transmission collector and distribution lines num .
section num installation of water service lines num .
section num sanitary and storm sewer facilities num .
section num sanitary sewer collector and interceptor facilities num .
section num sanitary service lines num .
section num storm sewer pipe installations num .
section num storm sewer drainage appurtenances and num .
section num sanitary and storm sewer manholes .
num modifications to nmsspwc the sections listed above do not include references to measurement and payment measurement and payment will be in accordance with section num method of measurement and section num basis of payment .
num electrical perform work in accordance with state and local codes and ordinances the current edition of the nec the rules and regulations of the local electrical company authority and other authorities with jurisdiction .
whether shown on the plans or not make modifications required by any of the above authorities at no additional cost to the owner or the department .
num materials provide the following materials in accordance with the contract num .
pumps section num utility items page num num .
pipes num .
tubing num .
fittings num .
manual valves num .
reduced pressure backflow preventers num .
instrumentation and num .
miscellaneous system components .
provide new unused materials of the best quality available for the purposes intended .
if the contract specifies materials by brand names substitute other brands of equal quality with project manager approval of a submittal detailing adequate technical and descriptive data .
provide materials in accordance with these standard specifications and the following sections of the nmsspwc num .
section num materials num .
section num portland cement concrete num .
section num steel reinforcement num .
section num epoxycoated steel reinforcement num .
section num concrete curing compound num .
section num cement mortar and grout num .
section num joint filler and sealant material num .
section num brick num .
section num plastic pipe water and sanitary sewer use num .
section num reinforced concrete pipe num .
section num reinforced concrete pressure pipe num .
section num vitrified clay pipe num .
section num steel water pipe num .
section num concrete cylinder pipe num .
section num ductile iron pipe num .
section num gray iron and ductile iron fittings num .
section num galvanizing num .
section num steel castings num .
section num gray iron castings num .
section num aluminum castings and num .
section num electronic marker disks .
provide concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
provide steel for reinforcement in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num certification section num utility items page num provide the project manager with a certificate of compliance for each required item or type of material before use that indicates the item or material is in accordance with the contract .
num construction requirements num general excavate to determine the exact locations of existing utilities that affect the new construction .
the contractor shall repair damage to existing utilities due to contractor negligence at no additional cost to the department .
the project manager will establish the final locations for new fittings connections etc .
in the field .
the project manager must approve modifications to the contract in writing before use .
num waste containment and disposal requirements dispose of materials taken from sanitary sewers during cleaning operations at no additional cost to the department .
retrieve sand and other debris from the sewers and secure a legal disposal site for it .
do not discharge removed sewage or solids onto streets or into ditches catch basins or storm drains .
num pipe installation the contractor may select a contractspecified type of pipe as approved by the project manager and the owner .
store plastic pipes out of direct sunlight until placement and replace plastic pipes showing discoloration or deterioration with acceptable pipes at no additional cost to the department .
replace sections of pipe found to be defective before or after installation with new pipes at no additional cost to the department .
num trenching perform trenching and excavation for utilities in accordance with section num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities .
num pipe assembling perform the following before pipe assembly num .
clean off dirt and pipe scale num .
ream and remove burrs and num .
clear pipes and fittings of dirt dust and moisture .
use manufacturerrecommended fittings to ensure leakproof joints .
use elastomeric sealed joints in accordance with astm f num and astm d num .
clean the interior of pipes from foreign matter before lowering into the trench and keep them clean during installation using plugs or other methods approved by the project manager .
num pipe placement section num utility items page num lay pipes in accordance with these standard specifications and the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that the full length of each section of pipe rests solidly on the pipe bed including recesses to accommodate the joints .
if a pipe section is disturbed after initial installation remove and relay .
do not lay pipes in water or unsuitable weather conditions .
when not working on pipes securely close open ends of pipes and fittings to prevent trench water earth or other deleterious material from entering them .
num pressurized pipe tests thoroughly flush out main line supply pipelines and test them for leaks before placing backfill and installing valves .
firmly block the fittings at bends in the pipelines and at the ends of lines to prevent the fittings from blowing off the lines when under pressure .
ensure that fittings and couplings are visible for inspection during the entire test period .
test in accordance with nmsspwc .
num bedding and backfilling perform bedding and backfilling for utilities in accordance with section num excavation trenching and backfilling for utilities .
num sequence of construction submit a proposed sequence of construction to the project manager for approval at least num weeks before beginning the utility work .
use a sequence and method for making the connections that minimizes the inconvenience to the owner and obtain project manager approval before making the connections to existing lines .
to stop the flow of water to make the connection to the existing line the contractor shall only close existing valves in the presence of an owner representative .
num fences preserve and protect fences in the vicinity of construction .
for the relocation of utilities the contractor shall install temporary gates in existing fences if necessary if the gates are located only on rightsofway for the utilities or at other locations for which the contractor has obtained permission from the owner for such construction .
remove temporary gates and reconstruct the fence lines to original or better condition after completing utility construction .
num grading and cleanup after backfilling grade and level the area .
reshape and grade roadways to their original configurations including restoration of drainage ditches and other features .
num method of measurement the department will measure pipes along the centerline of the pipe .
num basis of payment section num utility items page num the department considers the work described in this section to be included in the special provisions for which the department will not make additional payments .
section num landscape planting page num section num landscape planting num description this work consists of providing trees shrubs and other materials necessary to complete the landscape .
this work includes labor equipment and the performance of operations including planting fertilizing watering cleanup of planting areas and replacement of unsatisfactory damaged and unacceptable planting materials .
num materials num plant materials provide healthy vigorous plants of the type species and variety and size specified .
provide plants with normal welldeveloped branch and root systems .
ensure plants are free of the following num .
damage from machines num .
sun or frost damage num .
insects and insect eggs and num .
disfiguring knots or other objectionable defects .
provide plants that equal or exceed the minimum specified measurements .
select plant materials for shape and branching habit that will produce the strong full foliage of a typical mature specimen .
num inspection of plant materials provide plant materials in accordance with state and federal laws including the new mexico plant protection act nmsa num num et seq .
for disease infestation inspection .
inspection certificates required by law must accompany each shipment invoice or order of stock .
on delivery provide the certificate to the project manager .
provide for department inspection at the place of origin or in a local nursery and upon delivery to the planting location at the project .
num notification and inspection submit an itemized list of the plants to the project manager along with a time and location the inspection may be made at least seven num days in advance .
the landscape architect and the project manager will make plant inspections jointly .
the project manager will tag the accepted plants before plants are removed from the nursery for delivery to the project .
the project manager and the landscape architect will inspect for size vigor representation of the species and variety damage condition of ball and roots and latent defects .
num container plants provide plants specified on the plant list as container grown at a reasonable stage of development for the specified container size .
provide plants grown in their containers long enough to develop good round root systems capable of holding the soil intact after removal from the container but not enough to become root bound .
num substitutions section num landscape planting page num the department will permit substitutions of equivalent varieties of plant materials or other materials only after the contractor makes every reasonable effort to secure materials of the species varieties and kinds listed on the bid forms or in the contract .
submit requests for substitutions in writing to the project manager for approval by the landscape architect .
obtain written approval from the project manager before substituting the materials .
num delivery of shipment to site protect plant materials before shipment to prevent damage overdrying or wind .
be careful when digging wrapping and binding plants to ensure safe loading shipment and handling of heavy balled plants .
notify the project manager of the time and manner of delivery at least seven num days in advance .
provide two num copies of an itemized list of the quantities of plant materials in each delivery with the notice .
the project manager will inspect the plants upon delivery .
the department will reject cracked or mushroomed balls and damaged plants that are unacceptable for planting .
immediately remove rejected plants from the project .
num tagging and labeling of plant materials securely tag plants with legible durable labels using weatherresistant ink and identifying the following for each plant num .
origin num .
species num .
variety num .
name and num .
size .
keep tags on through final inspection .
num fertilizer provide fertilizer in accordance with the contract .
num water use clean water that is free from pollutants harmful to plant growth or that could contaminate the environment .
num construction requirements num planting use the planting backfill mixture and provide watering basins in accordance with contract .
do not plant deeper than the original ground line .
num care and replacement water and maintain the plants for at least one num year from the date of final acceptance unless otherwise approved by the landscape architect .
if the contractor installs a drip irrigation system the contractor shall hand water the plants until the drip irrigation system is in place and operational .
at the direction of the project manager replace dead or unhealthy plants for one num year after the date of final acceptance .
provide replacement plants that are in accordance with the section num landscape planting page num contract .
num final inspection and acceptance after the completion of the landscape planting work the project manager and landscape architect will make final inspection and acceptance .
num method of measurement the department will measure the actual number of trees shrubs or other plants provided planted and accepted .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit trees shrubs and ground cover ___ each sodding ___ square yard num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
furnishing transporting and planting of plants b. excavation furnishing prepared backfill mixture wrapping staking watering care and maintenance of plants and c. oneyear replacement of dead and unhealthy plants .
section num rest area and miscellaneous landscaping items page num section num rest area and miscellaneous landscaping items num description this work consists of providing and constructing rest area items and miscellaneous improvements .
num materials num portland cement concrete provide portland cement and aggregate for concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete mix designs .
num steel provide steel reinforcement in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
provide anchor bolts for mailbox installations in accordance with astm a num grade a steel .
provide zinc coated anchor nuts and bolts .
num construction requirements construct work in accordance with the applicable local and state codes ordinances and regulations governing the particular class of work involved .
if there is a conflict between the applicable codes and the requirements in the contract use the more stringent requirements .
after completing the work clean the areas of debris and leave them in their existing or an improved condition .
num mailbox installations install mailboxes in accordance with aashtos a guide for erecting mail boxes on highways .
contact and coordinate with the local post office and property owner before removing old mailboxes and installing new mailboxes .
provide and install temporary mailboxes if necessary as directed by the project manager .
num method of measurement the department will measure special landscaping items by units specified in the contract .
num measurement clarifications a single mailbox installation consists of one num mailbox and one num mailbox support .
a double mailbox installation consists of two num mailboxes and one num mailbox support .
multiple mailbox installations consist of from three num to num mailboxes and one num mailbox support .
a picnic table unit consists of one num picnic table and two num benches .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit timber parking barriers each charcoal grills each section num rest area and miscellaneous landscaping items page num park benches each picnic shelters each picnic table pads each picnic tables and benches each litter receptacles each historical markers each skylights each mirrors each storage buildings each air systems each water closets each lavatories each urinals each mailbox installation single each mailbox installation double each mailbox installation multiple each rest room buildings lump sum sanitary sewer system improvements lump sum picnic shelter renovation lump sum corrals lump sum post and cable barriers linear foot glazed wall tiles square yard glazed roofing square yard if the contract specifies a mailbox support foundation and anchoring only the department will pay for the concrete and steel in accordance with section num concrete structures and section num steel reinforcement .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
labor tools equipment and appurtenances necessary to satisfactorily complete the work as approved by the landscape architect b .
removal and disposal of shrubs brush rocks or other obstacles that interfere with proper installation of the improvements and c. concrete slabs steel anchor devices reinforcement and foundations for rest area items d. coordination with the local post office and property owner e. removal of existing mailboxes f. removal and installation of temporary mailboxes .
division num page num division num traffic control devices division contents num traffic signs and structures num num construction traffic control devices num num traffic markers num num pavement markings num num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems num num signal and lighting systems num num signal and lighting standards num num foundations for signal and lighting installations num num rigid electrical conduit num num pull boxes and splice cabinets num num wiring num num signal assemblies num num detectors num num traffic signal controllers num num beacons and temporary signal equipment num num luminaires num num vehicular impact attenuator units num num pavement marking removal num section num traffic signs and sign structures page num section num traffic signs and sign structures num description this work consists of providing and installing traffic signs and sign structures in accordance with the mutcd current edition .
num materials num concrete use class g concrete for overhead sign structure foundations in accordance with section num drilled shafts .
use class a concrete for extruded panel sign foundations in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
num steel reinforcement use steel reinforcement in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num general provide materials manufactured in accordance with the requirements of astm d num current version .
num sign manufacturers quality control manufacture permanent signs in accordance with a quality control qc program approved and certified by the traffic services engineer before fabrication .
ensure the qc program includes the following num .
basis of raw material acceptance num sign manufacturer certificates of compliance for sign materials or num random lot testing and certification of sign materials by an independent testing laboratory itl and num traffic services engineers approval of methods of manufacture .
num .
type method and frequency of control tests num .
a record of qc program data for each sign component as follows num maintain a logbook or other approved form of documentation that cross references sign certifications .
include certifications for each sign component material lot used to make each sign .
maintain these records for at least three num years num file and crossreference any special instructions on how to use sign materials such as substrate preparation before applying sign sheeting or use of special inks num .
final inspection num provide a manufacturing checklist for signs .
identify all sign component material lot numbers and crossreference those with the manufacturers or itls certificates of compliance num provide a completed checklist to the project manager with each sign shipment num .
name and position of the quality control person .
num decertification of quality control program the department may withdraw approval of a sign manufacturers qc program if the manufacturer fails to follow the certified written qc program or fabricates signs that do not section num traffic signs and sign structures page num conform to department specifications .
the traffic services engineer or designee will determine the decertification period based on the severity and nature of infractions .
the department may prohibit the use of sign manufacturers that do not have a certified qc program .
however the traffic services engineer may allow the sign manufacturer to supply signs under the following conditions when the qc program certification has been withdrawn num .
the sign manufacturer shall hire an itl to inspect the manufacture of signs to be used on department projects as approved by the department and num .
the itl shall have a certified quality control program .
the itl shall provide a checklist in accordance with the certified qc program to the project manager indicating the signs were inspected and in accordance with the specifications .
the traffic services engineer or designee may recertify sign manufacturers if they meet department requirements .
num verification of manufacturers certification submit the name of the proposed sign manufacturer and project number in writing .
the traffic services section will verify that the proposed sign manufacturer is eligible to supply signs to the project .
num sign identification ensure that signs have identification labels as follows num .
display the following information on the manufacturers identification label num the wording manufactured by followed by the sign fabricators initials num month and year fabricated num reflective sheeting type and manufacturers initials num the statement property of the state of new mexico defacing or theft is a crime and num whether sign is laminated with antigraffiti sheeting .
num .
display the following information on the contractors identification label num contractors name and num date installed month and year .
the labels may be dye stamped in num inch letters and numerals or num inch letters and numerals made with hightack adhesive reflective or nonreflective sign sheeting prepared with screened ink .
place labels on the lower backside of the sign where not hidden by any post or frame member .
provide labels with weather resistance characteristics having a service life at least equal to that of the sign .
do not damage signs during die stamping .
num special coded signs submit requests for significant deviations from plan drawing sign sizes for special coded signs to the project manager for approval at the preconstruction meeting . .
provide drawings showing the complete legend arrangement of letters and numerals letter and numeral height letter series symbols borders and dimensions .
provide an ibeam post submittal and obtain approval before installing posts and before submitting overhead sign structure shop drawings for review .
num sign components num retroreflective sheeting use retroreflective sheeting included in the departments approved products list .
provide certification that sheeting is in accordance with astm d num current version .
section num traffic signs and sign structures page num provide sheeting that has a smooth flat exterior film with retroreflective elements homogeneous in appearance weather resistant and with a protected precoated adhesive backing .
num colors provide the diffuse day color of the retroreflective sheeting in accordance with astm d num current version table num .
num coefficient of retroreflection provide sign sheeting with a coefficient of retroreflection expressed as specific intensity per unit area or average candlepower per footcandle per square foot .
ensure the intensity values meet at least the minimum values at num and num observation divergence angles and when specified in the contract at least the minimum values at num andor num observation angles .
ensure intensity values are in accordance with table num type iv sheetingunmetallized microprismatic element table num type viii f sheetingfluorescent microprismatic lens table num type ix sheeting microprismatic lens table num type ix f sheetingfluorescent microprismatic element and table num type xi retroreflective sheeting .
conduct testing methods in accordance with astm e num .
table num type iv sheetingunmetallized microprismatic element oa ea white yellow orange red green blue brown num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num type viii f sheetingfluorescent microprismatic lens oa ea minimum reflectivity for fluorescent sheeting average candle power per foot candle per square foot orange num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num type ix sheetingmicroprismatic lens oa ea minimum reflectivity average candlepower per foot candle per square foot white orange yellow red green blue num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section num traffic signs and sign structures page num table num type ix sheetingmicroprismatic lens oa ea minimum reflectivity average candlepower per foot candle per square foot white orange yellow red green blue num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num type ix f sheetingfluorescent microprismatic element oa ea minimum reflectivity average candle power per foot candle per square foot yellow yellowgreen num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num type xi retroreflective sheeting minimum reflectivity average candle power per foot candle per square foot oa ea white yellow orange green red blue brown fluorescent yellowgreen fluorescent yellow fluorescent orange num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num retroreflective sheeting backing provide backing for sheeting types iv through xi in accordance with astm d num current version .
num retroreflective sheeting durability and workmanship use retroreflective sheeting material in accordance with astm d num current version .
provide sheeting material sufficiently strong and flexible enough for handling processing and application in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations without stretching .
when processed and applied in accordance with recommended procedures sheeting material must be weather resistant and following cleaning must show no discoloration cracking blistering or dimensional change .
section num traffic signs and sign structures page num when exposed to normal traffic and weather sheeting material must not support fungus growth or accumulate dirt that reduce brightness before cleaning to less than num of the brightness after cleaning measured at num divergence and num incidence .
use a sheeting surface that can be refurbished by cleaning and clear protective overcoating in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
apply retroreflective sheeting to a treated substrate as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure finished signs have a smooth and uniform surface and that letters and numbers are cleancut and sharp .
ensure the sheeting surface is solvent resistant and can be cleaned with a soft clean cloth dampened with vm p naphtha or mineral spirits .
num retroreflective sheeting delivery and handling if the contractor provides retroreflective sheeting in continuous rolls the contractor shall ensure splices are smooth with no discernible lines and that sheeting is suitable for continuous application .
use sheeting within the manufacturers recommended time frame .
num multiple pieces of sign sheeting ensure that sign faces from two num or more pieces of retroreflective sheeting match in color and provide uniform appearance and brilliance by day and night .
cover sign panels less than num inches tall with one num unspliced sheet of retroreflective sheeting .
the department will allow a horizontal splice only if the substrate panel is num inches or taller .
ensure sheet colors match .
sheeting shall be butt spliced when more than one num piece of sheeting is used on one num piece of substrate per manufacturers recommendations .
the sheeting pieces should not touch each other .
num screening inks the department will allow use of screening inks or acrylic film overlays recommended by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer instead of manufactured colors to produce the legend and background .
submit the manufacturers recommendations in writing to the department .
file a copy of the recommendations in accordance with section num sign manufacturers quality control .
use ultraviolet uv resistant inks requiring no additional clear coating or uv protection .
use inks that are one num part nonisocynate material easily removed from sign screens with citrusbased environmentally friendly screen cleaning solvents .
num outdoor weatherability use screening inks or acrylic film overlays with weatherresistant properties equal to retroreflective sheeting .
num adherence to test for screening ink process paste or film overlay adherence apply cellophane tape to a cured color processed area and remove the tape with one num quick motion no ink paste or film overlay should come off .
use num inch wide cellophane tape for this test .
num solvent resistance after curing ensure sign faces resist manufacturer recommended cleaning solvents .
section num traffic signs and sign structures page num num vandal resistance ensure that sign faces resist manufacturer recommended aromatic solvents used to remove paint or other oil based matter sprayed or painted on signs .
num color use a sign face color in accordance with astm d num current version .
num retroreflective intensity transparent colors process and apply transparent colored inks or transparent colored acrylic film overlays in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that the transparent color area processed on white sheeting provides a minimum retroreflective intensity value of at least num of the values specified in table num type iv sheetingunmetallized microprismatic element table num type viii f sheetingfluorescent microprismatic lens table num type ix sheeting microprismatic lens table num type ix f sheetingfluorescent microprismatic element and table num type xi retroreflective sheeting for each color at num oa and num ea or num andor num observation angles if specified in the contract .
num process colors on sheeting ensure the retroreflective intensity values are num of the retroreflective values specified in section num .
corresponding values at num oa and num ea are included in table num retroreflective intensity per process color .
num process inks ensure that process inks equal num of the coefficient of retroreflection of new sheeting and num at the end of the warranty period .
table num retroreflective intensity per process color type of sheeting intensity value average candelas per foot candle per square foot red blue green type iv unmetallized microprismatic element num num num type ix microprismatic element num num num type xi retroreflective sheeting num num num num sign legends and sheeting a sign legend shall contain such letters numerals symbols arrows borders and other accessories that convey the signs message .
sign legend and background shall be of the same type in accordance with section num retroreflective sheeting .
provide legends in accordance with mutcd current edition .
the legend may be num .
num in minimum thickness integral semirigid num .
selfadhering machine cut sheeting or num .
reverse screened using weatherproof screen process inks compatible with the background that provides the designated sign colors and retroreflectorization or a reverse film overlaid with an approved acrylic film overlay .
section num traffic signs and sign structures page num provide extruded panel signs with borders as follows num .
num num inch wide with six num inch corner radii for signs under six num feet tall num .
two num inch wide with nine num inch corner radii for signs from six num feet to num feet tall or num .
three num inch wide with num inch corner radii for signs over num feet tall .
num sign backgrounds provide a sign face with a plane surface free from defects .
the department may reject the entire sign face because of a defect or because of a dirty marred or defective background or legend .
the department will inspect in place signs at night for compliance .
num aluminum panel signs use num inch minimum thickness numtnum or numhnum aluminum alloy for signs num inch wide or less .
use num inch minimum thickness numtnum or numhnum aluminum alloy for signs wider than num inch .
provide aluminum alloys in accordance with astm b num .
supply as flat stock material .
provide aluminum panel signs with smooth edges and corners .
num corners cut corner radii in accordance with the fhwa standard highway signs manual .
num aluminum sign substrate prepare aluminum sign substrate for retroreflective sheeting as specified by the sheeting material manufacturer .
apply sheeting legend and clear coat in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
keep a copy of the manufacturers recommendations on file as specified in section num sign manufacturers quality control .
punch or drill a hole in the aluminum sign panel to receive tamper proof hardware .
num extruded panel signs use extrusiontype signs if mounted on steel ibeam posts or on overhead sign structures .
num aluminum extrusions use numtnum aluminum alloy in accordance with astm b num provided in num inch or six num inch sections in accordance with the contract .
num sign fabrication for extruded panel signs sign legend and background for extruded panel signs shall be fabricated on a metal facing panel unless a digital printing process is used .
num metal panel fabrication cover extrusiontype signs with a metal facing panel of the same metal as the extrusions .
the flatness tolerance for an installed panel is num inch per foot of length and num inch per inch of width .
for metal facing panels use panel units two num feet to four num feet wide installed vertically .
do not horizontally splice metal facing sign panels eight num ft tall or less .
for horizontal splices on signs taller than eight num feet offset the metal facing splices from the corresponding extrusion joint by num inch to one num inch .
section num traffic signs and sign structures page num for aluminum facing panels use a sheet of aluminum numtnum or numhnum alloy in accordance with astm b num supplied as flat stock material with a minimum thickness of num inch .
num digitally printed signs signs manufactured using digital printing process with a protective overlay film to produce all or part of the image shall conform to all other requirements of section num with the exception that signs may be comprised of extruded panels only or by using metal panel fabrication over the extruded panel .
for extruded panel signs without metal panels all or part of the image shall be printed on the required sheeting which then shall be laminated to the aluminum extrusion .
after lamination of the sheeting to the extrusions the extrusions may be assembled and bolted together to finish the sign .
for metal panel signs all or part of the image may be printed before or after the sheeting is laminated to the metal panel .
num outdoor weathering of digitally printed signs inks applied using digital printing processes with a protective overlay film shall produce standard traffic colors green yellow red blue brown black and have outdoor weathering properties equal to that of the base reflective sheeting .
num standard traffic colors digitally printed standard traffic colors green yellow red blue brown and black printed with digital printing technology with a protective overlay film must provide the diffuse daytime color of the retroreflective sheeting in accordance with astm dnum current version table num .
num retroreflective intensity of digitally printed standard traffic colors the coefficient of retro reflection of the standard traffic colors green yellow red blue brown and black digitally produced on white sheeting shall provide an initial minimum retroreflective intensity as specified in section num .
num extrusion hardware use numtnum aluminum alloy extrusions for hardware with an alumilite or alodine finish in accordance with astm b num .
num inspection the department may inspect material and finished signs before and after installation at the project site .
ensure that the department has free entry to plant areas involved in sign manufacture and production during work hours .
provide adequate facilities for the department to inspect signs and verify the manufacturers qc program .
on request provide num inch num inch test panels representing each production stage to the inspector .
produce the test panels during regular production in the presence of the inspector .
if the inspector can not validate that the test panel came from regular production provide a complete sign upon request .
num packaging and shipping package and protect signs and hardware for shipment and storage .
section num traffic signs and sign structures page num num field overlay panels for existing extruded signs provide retroreflective sheeting overlay panels that consist of a retroreflectorized face sheet fastened over an existing extruded sign .
for the face sheet use num .
numtnum or numhnum aluminum sheet alloy in accordance with astm b num a minimum of num in thick with type ix minimum sheeting backgrounds applied or num .
type ix minimum sheeting with an integral semirigid aluminum alloy backing a minimum of num in thick .
use type ix minimum for legends .
install retroreflective sheeting field overlays in accordance with section num sign legends and sheeting .
remove and repair the existing legend as directed by the project manager .
num sign structures and hardware select aluminum panel sign and base posts from the departments approved products list .
install posts in accordance with nchrp report num criteria for single and multiplepost installations and with the post manufacturers wind load chart .
supply certificates of compliance to the project manager .
use one num of the following finishes num .
hot dipped galvanizing in accordance with astm a num or astm a num or num .
hot dip galvanized zinc coating in accordance with aashto m num followed by a chromate conversion coating and a crosslinked polyurethane acrylic exterior coating or num .
color no .
num black paint or color no .
num green paint for uchannel posts .
provide paint in accordance with federal standard numa a minimum of one num mil thick .
num post assembly hardware use post assembly hardware that is num .
hot dipped galvanized or cadmium plated in accordance with astm bnum num .
stainless steel or num .
mechanically galvanized in accordance with astm bnum class fesn num .
num fasteners use size mnum tamperproof carriage bolts to attach signs that are num .
hot dipped galvanized or cadmium plated in accordance with astm bnum num .
stainless steel or num .
mechanically galvanized in accordance with astm b num class fesn num .
the contractor may use rivets to attach signs .
follow manufacturers recommendations for installation procedures .
use size mnum tamperproof nuts fabricated from c num hot rolled steel case hardened to rnum and plated with zinc yellow dichromate from num inch to num inch thick .
num ibeam posts fabricate ibeam posts for extruded panel signs from standard structural steel shapes in accordance with astm a num .
use one num of the following finishes num .
hot dipped galvanizing in accordance with the requirements of astm a num num .
cold galvanizing in accordance with the fabrication method approved by the traffic section num traffic signs and sign structures page num services engineer or num .
coating in accordance with section num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel .
use ibeam posts with fuse plate mechanisms .
num overhead sign structures fabricate overhead sign structures as specified in the contract .
num breakaway base systems use type i breakaway base systems that include sliptype connection hardware and stub post as specified in the contract .
num fabrication num shop drawing submittals review submit detailed overhead sign structure shop drawings for approval before fabrication .
the department will review overhead sign structure shop drawings .
do not erect the signs until obtaining approval .
num general fabrication requirements ensure arrangement letter spacing and height letter series symbols and borders for each sign face are in accordance with the fhwa standard highway signs manual .
shear blank saw or mill material num inch thick or less .
saw or mill material over num inch thick .
ensure that cut edges are true smooth and free from excessive burrs or ragged breaks .
fillet reentrant cuts by drilling before cutting .
flame cutting is prohibited .
drill bolt holes to finish sizes .
shop assemble metal extrusions facing panels and legend items .
ensure that facing panels are tightly butted together .
use additional fasteners as needed to achieve flatness but do not exceed eight num fasteners per facing panel .
do not field assemble these items .
the contractor may deliver assembled signs more than eight num ft high in two num parts .
num fabrication requirements for contact surfaces use galvanized or stainless steel for surfaces in contact with aluminum .
coat aluminum surfaces in contact with concrete or earth with an alkali resistant asphalt paint in accordance with manufacturers recommendation .
num construction requirements num general deliver removed existing traffic control signs to locations specified in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
document removals and deliveries in the traffic control diary in accordance with section num traffic control management .
num installation of breakaway sign posts section num traffic signs and sign structures page num ensure that slope and other material does not interfere with the proper functioning of installed sign breakaway systems .
num manufacturer certification verification supply signs with identification on the back as specified in section num sign identification that matches the approved sign manufacturer identified by the documentation letter .
do not install permanent signs until the project manager has num .
verified that the sign shipment has a manufacturers checklist and num .
given authorization to begin sign installations .
use the manufacturer for which certification was requested .
num site storage requirements elevate stored materials from the ground and surface runoff water .
store signs posts and hardware away from pavement or shoulder .
num installation requirements compact sign structure footing foundations and backfill to num of maximum density as determined by aashto t num modified proctor method d ttcp modified .
set posts plumb .
ensure that the mounting faces of multiple sign posts lie in the same plane .
num electrical components provide and install electrical components such as light fixtures lamps ballasts wires conduit junction boxes and other items necessary to mount and operate the electrical system in accordance with section num sign luminaire .
num removing and resetting traffic signs remove existing traffic signs posts and associated appurtenances from specified locations and reset on new posts with new hardware redesigned for existing conditions in accordance with section num traffic control management .
before removing existing signs submit a sign removal and resetting schedule to the project manager for approval .
num removing and resetting extruded panel signs remove specified existing extruded panel signs ibeam posts and footing and dispose of the materials in an environmentally acceptable manner .
stockpile removed ibeam posts at locations specified in the contract .
reset removed extruded panel signs on new ibeam posts and breakaway base systems using new hardware in accordance with section num i beam posts and section num breakaway base systems .
design new ibeam posts new breakaway base systems and new hardware for existing conditions in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as specified in the contract .
backfill holes left by the removal of ibeam post footings and compact in accordance with section num excavation borrow and embankment .
num mileposts installation notify the project manager two num weeks before placing mileposts the district traffic section num traffic signs and sign structures page num engineer will mark the milepost locations .
num method of measurement the department will not measure that portion of steel ibeam posts extending below ground level .
the department will not include stub post lengths in the measurement of steel ibeam post lengths .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit extruded panel signs square foot panel signs square foot overhead sign structure _____type _____ size each steel ibeam posts foot breakaway base system for steel i beam post each steel posts base posts for aluminum panel signs foot multidirectional slip base posts for aluminum panel signs each retroreflective sheeting field overlay panels foot remove and reset traffic sign each remove and reset panel sign each remove and reset extruded panel sign each the department will pay for overhead sign structure foundation installations in accordance with section num drilled shafts .
the department will pay for steel reinforcement used for overhead sign structure foundations in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
hardware b. excavation backfill and compaction for sign installation andor removal c. reinforcing steel for extruded panel sign foundations d. class a concrete for extruded panel sign foundations and multidirectional slip base posts e. hauling of removals and f. protective coatings .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be considered incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num construction traffic control devices page num section num construction traffic control devices num description this work consists of providing and installing construction traffic control devices .
num materials num construction signing provide sign substrate sufficiently durable to last the project duration and rigid enough to hold the sheeting flat .
provide materials in accordance with section num retroreflective sheeting section num sign legends and sheeting and section num sign backgrounds .
provide type viii or greater intensity retroreflective sheeting for legends and sign backgrounds unless otherwise specified in the contract .
use black letters on a reflective fluorescent orange background for construction signing unless otherwise specified in the contract .
provide type iv or greater intensity retroreflective sheeting for background of regulatory signs .
num steel posts and base posts for construction signing provide steel post and base post material in accordance with section num sign structures and hardware .
num portable sign supports provide portable sign supports in accordance with the mutcd current edition and the departments approved products list .
num barricades and channelization devices provide traffic control devices in accordance with the departments approved products list for barricades and channelization devices available from the state maintenance bureau .
suppliers proposing traffic control devices for inclusion on the departments approved products list must submit product certifications for approval .
the department will review and approve or deny the proposed certifications within num days .
unless stated otherwise submit to the project manager certification from the manufacturer stating that the traffic control devices proposed for use are in accordance with nchrp report num .
submit certification showing that the proposed traffic control devices are listed on the departments approved products list .
use traffic control devices from the following categories num .
category i traffic control devices .
low mass single piece traffic cones tubular markers singlepiece drums delineators or similar devices without lights or signs .
num .
category ii traffic control devices .
vertical panels type i ii and iii barricades moveable skid mounted sign stands or similar devices .
num barricades use reflectorized barricades with orange and white retroreflective sheeting or tape in accordance with the mutcd current edition and table num type iv sheeting unmetallized microprismatic element and table num type viii f sheeting section num construction traffic control devices page num fluorescent microprismatic lens .
num vertical panels use reflectorized vertical panels with orange and white retroreflective sheeting or tape in accordance with the mutcd current edition and table num type iv sheeting unmetallized microprismatic element and table num type viii f sheeting fluorescent microprismatic lens .
num traffic markers provide traffic marker materials in accordance with section num traffic markers .
num drums provide nonmetal drums in accordance with the mutcd current edition and as approved by the project manager .
use only one num size drum on the project .
use reflectorized drums with fluorescent orange and white highperformance retroreflective sheeting or tape .
use horizontal circumferential fluorescent orange and white reflectorized stripes from four num inches to six num inches wide for drum marking .
ensure the number of alternating fluorescent orange and white reflectorized stripes and the amount of nonreflective drum surface space is in accordance with the mutcd current edition .
provide drums that are a minimum num inches high and num inches diameter with a closed top and either a sandballasted preformed rubberized or tire sidewallcollared base in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num warning lights provide either type a low intensity type b high intensity or type c steadyburn warning lights in accordance with the mutcd current edition .
num flexible highperformance reflective sheeting provide retroreflective sheeting and adhesive materials in accordance with section num traffic signs and sign structures except provide type viii or greater intensity retroreflective sheeting .
provide sheeting with a precoated adhesive protected by a removable liner .
apply to channelization devices in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num sheeting flexibility use sheeting that does not exhibit cracking when bent around a num inch mandrel in one num second after conditioning for num h at num f with the liner removed .
test by spreading talcum powder on adhesive and bending with the adhesive side contacting the mandrel .
num adhesive provide pressure sensitive adhesives for use on substrates other than plasticized pvc in accordance with section num retroreflective sheeting .
num adhesive backing testing test pressure sensitive adhesive backing on flexible high performance sheeting in accordance with fhwa standard specifications for construction of roads and bridges on federal highway projects fpnum section num .
backing adhesive must support a num num lb weight for five num min without peeling away more than one num inch if applied to a smooth aluminum surface .
section num construction traffic control devices page num num reflectivity provide flexible highperformance sheeting that meets or exceeds the minimum reflectivity requirements in table num type iv sheeting unmetallized microprismatic element and table num type viii f sheetingfluorescent microprismatic lens .
num traffic cones provide traffic cones in accordance with the mutcd current edition and having a flexible cone above the base with an outer section made of a highly pigmented fluorescent orange polyvinyl compound .
provide cones at least num inches tall weighing at least ten num lb with a base alone weighing seven num lb with a distribution of cone weight effectively holding the traffic cones upright under traffic conditions .
if approved by the project manager use tubular traffic markers manufactured installed and maintained in accordance with section num traffic markers instead of traffic cones .
num sequential arrow displays use a sequential arrow display consisting of a sign panel assembly and a power source .
mount the display on a twowheeled trailer or on a vehicle for mobile operations .
provide a sequential arrow display in accordance with the mutcd current edition specifications for arrow displays .
use type b panels for mobile operations and type c panels for stationary traffic control .
provide a trailer in accordance with section num trailer .
provide a display powered by diesel or solar power or one that connects to an external power supply .
ensure electrical connections meet or exceed the applicable electrical code requirements .
provide solarpowered systems with a batterybackup power supply capable of maintaining operation for a minimum of num consecutive numhour days .
num operating modes ensure that displays are capable of the following operating modes see the mutcd current edition specifications for advance warning arrow display num .
pass leftthree num chevrons of five num lamps each sequencing righttoleft num .
pass rightthree num chevrons of five num lamps each sequencing lefttoright num .
pass either sidetwo num outermost chevrons on each end of the panel pointing outward forming arrowheads with crossing lamp rows burning continuously .
do not burn the first lamp directly behind the point of each arrow to define the arrow points num .
cautionfour num lamps one num at each corner of the panel .
num portable changeable message signs portable changeable message signs will consist of a sign panel assembly controller power supply and structural support system mounted on a twowheeled trailer .
supply new portable changeable message signs if the contract specifies that the department will retain the message signs upon final acceptance .
num sign panel assembly provide a sign panel consisting of a threeline panel assembly .
ensure that each line contains eight num matrices capable of producing at least eight num individually changeable characters .
ensure that each character module uses as a minimum a fivewide pixel by sevenhigh pixel matrix with each matrix measuring at least num inches high and nine num inches wide .
ensure a clearly displayed message on the sign panel that is legible from a distance of num ft during daytime and nighttime operation at angles in accordance with the mutcd section num construction traffic control devices page num current edition specifications for portable changeable message signs .
num controller provide a compact controller located to allow easy access to sign and message functions from a control cabinet on the trailer .
provide a solidstate unit controller capable of generating and storing sign messages .
provide a controller keyboard that allows the user to recall and use messages from permanent memory storage containing a library of standard messages .
the controller will also have the capacity to store recall and use at least num additional messages generated by the operator .
use a controller with a protective device that requires an entry code to access the memory and display messages to prevent unauthorized programming .
num power supply provide a power unit capable of powering the message sign continuously for at least num consecutive numhour days with a failsafe backup power supply system and capable of being powered directly by a num v ac external power supply .
num structural support systems provide a structural support system with a mechanism capable of raising and lowering the sign panel at sustained wind speeds of num mph and capable of operation by one num person without use of heavy equipment .
ensure a clearance of at least seven num ft between the sign panel bottom and the pavement surface when fully raised .
num trailer use a twowheel singleaxle system trailer with a suspension rated at no less than num lb .
provide a trailer equipped with the following num .
four num nonremovable leveling jacks one num at each corner of the trailer num .
a tongue and either a towing eye for use with the pintle hook or a ball receptacle for a balltype trailer hitch .
fabricate a num num inches inside diameter towing eye from one num inch round solid steel .
size the ball receptacle to accept a standard two num inch ball num .
two num safety chains with num inch diameter links .
install one num chain on each side of the draw bar and extend num inches beyond the towing eye .
install a safety hook on the outer end of each chain num .
two num combination tail turn and stop lights num .
a license plate bracket and illumination lamp num .
a standard sae sevenway trailer light wire connector on a cable extending num inches beyond the towing eye num .
a means of securing a receptacle on the trailer tongue .
num temporary signal span provide poles and associated electrical items for temporary signal spans in accordance with section num beacons and temporary signal equipment .
num construction requirements num general section num construction traffic control devices page num provide construction traffic control devices in accordance with mutcd current edition and nchrp report num .
construction traffic control devices shall remain the property of the contractor unless otherwise specified in the contract .
install signs steel posts and base posts in accordance with the requirements of section num traffic signs and sign structures .
provide drums equipped with type c steadyburn warning lights on channelization tapers if in night operation .
install traffic markers in accordance with the requirements of section num traffic markers .
use type a or type b flashing warning lights and flags to call attention to advance warning construction signing .
use traffic cones only during daylight hours .
num portable sign support system provide portable sign support systems from the departments approved products list .
num temporary signal spans use temporary signal spans consisting of poles and associated electrical items in accordance with section num beacons and temporary signal equipment .
remove temporary signal spans after project detours are removed or as directed by the project manager .
num maintenance maintain the traffic control plan and devices in accordance with section num traffic control management .
keep construction traffic control devices clean so that the intended visibility is not diminished .
the condition of construction traffic control devices is subject to department approval .
the department will assess liquidated damages at a rate of num a day for each day or portion of a day that a portable changeable message sign does not function .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit construction signing square foot steel posts and base posts for construction signing foot barricade type_____ each vertical panel type_____ each construction traffic marker each portable sign support each channelization device type_____ each sequential arrow display each portable changeable message sign each traffic cone each temporary signal span lump sum section num construction traffic control devices page num num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
supports required for vertical panels and poles and all associated electrical and mechanical items for temporary signal span b .
moving of construction traffic control devices from one num location to another maintenance and repair or replacement of damaged or destroyed traffic control devices c. additional traffic control device quantities approved and implemented solely for the contractors convenience d. type a lowintensity warning lights type b highintensity warning lights or type c steadyburn warning lights and signing which are attached to barricades drums and construction signs .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num traffic markers page num section num traffic markers num description this work consists of providing and installing traffic markers and appurtenances in accordance with the mutcd current edition and nchrp report num as specified in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
num materials num object markers delineator posts tenthmile delineators provide posts of shape dimensions and tolerances in accordance with the contract and the departments approved products list .
punch posts with num inch diameter holes and unless otherwise specified ensure a total length of seven num ft num inch .
num steel posts provide steel posts that num .
are rolled from rail or billet steel in accordance with astm a num num .
are galvanized in accordance with astm a num with the pivoted hammer test waived or painted with a black modified polyester paint meeting the requirements of federal standard numa color no .
num applied by electrodeposition to a minimum one num mil thickness num .
have a smooth uniform finish free from defects effecting strength or appearance whether galvanized or painted and num .
have a minimum weight of at least num lb per foot .
obtain department approval of alternate paint colors or application before fabrication .
num hardware provide hardware that is galvanized or cadmiumplated in accordance with astm b num num current version or mechanically galvanized in accordance with aashto m num class num or stainless steel .
num reflector unit for the reflector unit for object markers and road delineators provide a methyl methacrylate acrylic prismatic reflector with a rustproof or plastic housing of a minimum num inch thickness with a center mounting hole .
expand a metal or plastic grommet with a num inch inside diameter within the reflectormounting hole .
provide reflector units in accordance with table num specific intensity values round reflectors or table num specific intensity values rectangular reflectors as applicable .
provide round reflectors with at least a three num inch diameter and rectangular reflective panels at least six num inches num inches .
table num specific intensity values round reflectors oa ea minimum reflective intensity candlepower per footcandle crystal amber num num num num num num num num section num traffic markers page num table num specific intensity values round reflectors oa ea minimum reflective intensity candlepower per footcandle crystal amber num num num num num num num num table num specific intensity values rectangular reflectors oa ea minimum reflective intensity candlepower per footcandle crystal amber red num num a num num num num num a num num num num num num num num num num b num num num num num b num num num num num b num num num num num b num num num num num b num num num aindicates off traffic side .
bindicates traffic side .
num flexible traffic markers provide flexible traffic markers that consist of a nonmetallic post with reflective sheeting and a drivable or nondrivable anchor system as applicable .
provide posts for flexible traffic markers fabricated from a flexible nonmetallic material resistant to impact ultraviolet light ozone and hydrocarbon damage and stiffening with age .
provide wellmanufactured posts free from burrs discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects .
use white yellow brown or orange for flexible traffic markers as specified in the contract .
provide flexible traffic marker posts that are flexible throughout the temperature range of from num f to num f and provide an installed height of from num inches to num inches .
use selfrestoring flexible traffic markers remaining serviceable after being subjected to a series of direct impacts by a standard vehicle .
ensure posts and delineators are capable of withstanding five num impacts at any angle at a speed of num mph and ten num impacts at any angle at a speed of num mph .
provide posts designed for a permanent installation to resist overturning twisting and displacement from wind and impact forces .
num tubular flexible traffic markers provide tubular traffic marker posts and bases of a thermoplastic or pliable elastomer composition meeting the manufacturers requirements with dimensions in accordance with table num dimension requirements for tubular traffic markers .
provide tubular traffic marker bases painted black or the same color as the post .
provide assembly units necessary for the particular marker in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
section num traffic markers page num table num dimension requirements for tubular traffic markers description dimensions inch outside diameter num wall thickness minimum num num flexible traffic marker anchor systems provide preformed steel anchors for drivable reusable anchor systems .
if providing tubular anchors ensure closed bottoms to prevent soil entrance during driving .
use nondriveable predrilled systems for direct burial of the post into soil .
the contractor may retain posts with o clips selflocking for posts in holes num inches deep .
the department may accept other direct burial methods after local demonstration of their stability .
provide surface mounted bases with a height of from num inch to two num inch and an outside diameter of from seven num inch to num inch .
provide drivedown bases with the dimensions listed on the departments approved products list .
num adhesives for flexible traffic markers provide epoxy type permanent installation or butyl type temporary installation adhesives in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor may use other methods as approved by the project manager before the work begins .
num flexible traffic marker retroreflective sheeting provide flexible traffic markers with two num three num inches high preapplied retroreflective sheeting bands .
begin the bands no more than two num inches from the top with no more than six num inches between them in the front and back or around the entire circumference .
provide preapplied retroreflective sheeting in accordance with section num barricades and channelization devices and table num type iv sheeting unmetallized microprismatic element and table num type viii f sheeting fluorescent microprismatic lens of a color in accordance with the contract .
num reflective barrier delineator provide a reflective barrier delineator that consists of an acrylicplastic shell assembled on a flat plastic base to form a hermetically sealed unit .
ensure that the sloped face contains one num prismatic reflective surface to reflect incident light from a single direction .
provide methyl methacrylate acrylic plastic shells and flat plastic bases in accordance with federal specification lpnumc type i class num .
num reflective barrier delineator adhesive provide adhesive capable of fixing delineators for the duration of their intended use .
use primer as specified by the manufacturer to prepare the precleaned barrier surface .
num reflective barrier delineator configuration provide the reflective barrier delineator in accordance with the contract and table num requirements for reflective barrier delineator configuration .
section num traffic markers page num table num requirements for reflective barrier delineator configuration description requirement slope of reflecting face degrees num area of reflecting face minimum square inches num num ensure that the outer shell surface is smooth except for identification markings .
provide a nontransparent white or light gray base of the marker with an attached num inch thick pad of pressure sensitive adhesive and a minimum overall height of num inches including the adhesive pad .
num reflective barrier delineator optical requirements when the reflective barrier delineator is mounted with its base flat against a vertical surface with the leading edge of the delineator perpendicular to the horizontal plane ensure the specific intensity in accordance with table num specific intensity values reflective barrier delineator .
ensure the specific intensity for yellow delineators of at least num of the value for crystal reflecting surface .
table num specific intensity values reflective barrier delineator minimum reflective intensity candlepower per footcandle oa ea crystal num num num num construction requirements set posts plumb and to the depth specified in the contract .
posts may be driven .
the project manager will direct placement of posts set in rock .
provide object markers and road delineators in accordance with the mutcd current edition .
label object markers as anum omnum omnumh or omnum .
if removal of an installation temporary or permanent is necessary and the metal concrete or asphalt surface is damaged repair and otherwise restore the damaged surface to its original condition at no additional cost to the department .
replace defective posts bases assembly units adhesives or reflective sheeting that interfere with the intended use of the traffic markers at no additional cost to the department .
num surfacemounted flexible traffic marker installations thoroughly clean metal concrete or asphalt surfaces before mounting flexible traffic markers .
sandblast or wirebrush metal and concrete surfaces .
clean asphalt surfaces in accordance with the adhesive manufacturers recommendations .
remove loose sand dust and other deleterious material from cleaned mounting surfaces .
apply adhesive and install surface mounted flexible traffic markers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num reflective barrier delineators installation install reflective barrier delineators in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations using a pressuresensitive system on a clean dry vertical surface at intervals and the distance above the road surface as specified in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment section num traffic markers page num pay item pay unit object marker type_____ each road delineator type_____ each flexible traffic marker each tubular flexible traffic market each reflective barrier delineator each nummile delineator each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. adhesive b .
anchors c. retroreflective sheeting d. reflector units e. hardware and f. excavation backfill and compaction for marker installations .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num pavement markings page num section num pavement markings num description this work consists of providing and placing pavement markers reflectorizedplastic pavement symbols legends and stripes .
num materials num traffic paint provide traffic paint in accordance with the departments specifications for white and yellow traffic line paints used on construction projects high solids waterbase acrylic specification mtpcwbacr for standard acrylic paint or high solids waterbase acrylic hi build mtpcwbacrhb for hibuild acrylic paint available from traffic services engineer .
num acceptance of traffic paint provide certificates of compliance and documentation that the state materials bureau has tested the batch of paint .
the department may take random samples of the traffic paint .
the department will reduce payment for or reject traffic paint used before submitting the proper documentation if the test results do not meet the specifications .
num reflectorized glass beads provide high performance beads for improved retroreflectivity and durability for highway markings in accordance with table num bead retained percentage .
table num bead retained percentage u.s .
mesh microns retained num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num provide beads that are colorlessclear and free of carbon residue .
provide beads where all num us mesh beads are num minimum rounds and overall rounds are num minimum .
use astm d num test method for all beads except the num us mesh which are inspected visually .
provide beads with an index of refraction minimum num by oil immersion method in accordance with astm d num .
provide beads with a resistance to acid specifically when tested as specified in federal specification ttb numc num the beads shall not develop any surface haze or dulling .
provide beads with a resistance to calcium chloride specifically when tested as specified in federal specification ttb numc num the beads shall not develop any surface haze or dulling .
provide beads with a resistance to sodium sulfide specifically when tested as specified in federal specification ttb numc num the sodium sulfide solution shall not darken the beads .
provide beads with water resistance specifically when tested as specified in federal specification ttb numc num the water shall not produce dulling or hazing of the beads and not more than num ml of numn hydrochloric acid shall be used for the titration .
provide beads with moisture resistant coating .
section num pavement markings page num provide all post consumer and post industrial glass beads manufactured from north american glass waste streams .
the bead manufacturer shall submit a notarized certification to the department that north american glass waste streams were used in the manufacture of product meeting this specification .
provide beads that are compatible with all binder systems including alkyd thermoplastic water and solvent based paint epoxy and methylmethacrylate .
provide glass beads furnished in bags identifying contents manufacturer and net weight .
num sampling testing and acceptance contractors or subcontractors supplying glass beads for use on department projects shall notify the department and make available to the state materials bureau a copy of the shipping invoice and a copy of the manufacturers test results of the lot numbers shipped to the contractor .
upon request the contractor will submit to the state materials bureau two num unopened bags of glass beads per batch or lot number as well as a copy of the above information .
the state materials bureau will obtain a representative sample and test it for specification acceptance by astm d num astm d num and such other tests as designated in these specifications .
upon determination of acceptability or rejection of beads a report covering the lots tested will be issued by the state materials bureau to the contractor .
the contractor shall furnish each project a certificate with reference to the state materials bureau test control number indicating that beads provided to the project have been tested and accepted by the state materials bureau .
verifications of the certification will be made by project personnel checking the lot number on the bags furnished to the project .
no field sampling of beads will be required when the above procedures are followed .
num temporary marking tape provide temporary marking tape of traffic resistant yellow or white reflective marking material on a conformable nonmetallic backing coated with a pressuresensitive adhesive and designed for marking asphalt or pcc surfaces that meets or exceeds the minimum retroreflectivity values in table num temporary marking tape as measured in accordance with the testing procedure of federal test method standard num unless a higher value is specified .
provide weather resistant material that shows no measurable fading lifting or shrinkage and is free of cracks with true straight and unbroken edges .
the department will designate temporary marking tape as removable or nonremovable in accordance with section num removable temporary marking tape and section num nonremovable temporary marking tape dimensions .
match the visible or outer surface color to the paint color in section num traffic paint .
table num temporary marking tape oa ea minimum retroreflectivity millicandelas per footcandle per square foot white yellow num num num num num num num num section num pavement markings page num provide material that is flexible formable shows no cracking flaking or loss of reflective elements and remains consistent with the texture of the pavement surface after application .
num removable temporary marking tape num removable temporary marking tape dimensions for normal use provide removable temporary marking tape that is at least num mil thick and four num inches or six num inches wide .
num removable temporary marking tape removability provide removable marking tape that is readily removable from the pavement with the manufacturers recommendations without sandblasting solvent burning or diamond grinding methods unless otherwise specified .
num nonremovable temporary marking tape dimensions provide nonremovable temporary marking tape that is at least ten num mil thick and four num inches or six num inches wide .
num retroreflective preformed plastic markings provide retroreflective preformed plastic marking material made of white or yellow weather resistant retroreflective film .
provide prefabricated legends and symbols in accordance with the applicable shapes and sizes in the mutcd current edition .
num composition provide retroreflective preformed plastic markings that consist of high quality plastic materials pigments and glass beads uniformly distributed throughout their cross sectional area with a retroreflective layer of beads embedded in the top surface .
provide the adhesive system recommended by the manufacturer for installation .
num skid resistance ensure that the surface of the retroreflective preformed plastic marking material provides a minimum skid resistance value of num british pendulum number when tested in accordance with astm e num .
num thickness provide retroreflectivepreformed plastic marking material including symbols and legends without adhesive which is num mil thick if inlaid into new asphalt surfaces or applied to existing surfaces .
num durability and wear resistance ensure that the retroreflective preformed plastic marking materials provide a neat durable marking when properly applied and that the preformed plastic marking materials provide a cushioned resilient substrate that reduces bead crushing and loss .
provide film that through normal traffic wear is weather resistant shows no measurable fading lifting or shrinkage throughout the life of the marking and shows no significant tearing rollback or other signs of poor adhesion .
num conformability and resealing section num pavement markings page num provide retroreflective preformed plastic marking material capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks faults etc .
under traffic .
num hot thermoplastic pavement markings the thermoplastic reflectorized material shall consist of a solid mixture of heatstable resins white or yellow pigment intermixed glass beads filler and other materials in granular or block form specifically compounded for reflectorized pavement markings to be applied to the pavement in a molten state .
the characteristics of the liquefied material shall be such that complete and even coverage of specified areas to the required thicknesses is provided by the required application method and rate .
upon cooling to normal pavement temperature this material shall produce an adherent reflectorized marking capable of resisting deformation and wear in the roadway .
num acceptance of hot thermoplastic contractor shall supply a letter of certification from the manufacturer with each batch certifying the material meets the requirements of the nmdots hot thermoplastic pavement markings section num .
test methods all tests shall be performed according to astm aashto federal test method standard number num or methods designated by the state .
the department will reduce payment for or reject hot thermoplastic pavement markings used before submitting the proper documentation if the test results do not meet the specifications .
num general requirements the thermoplastic material shall not exude fumes which are toxic injurious or require specialized breathing apparatus when heated to the temperature range specified by the manufacturer for application .
the material shall remain stable when held for four num hours at this temperature or when subjected to four num reheatings not exceeding a total of four num hours after cooling to ambient temperature .
the temperature viscosity characteristics of the plastic material shall remain constant throughout the reheatings and shall show like characteristics from batch to batch .
there shall be no obvious change in color of the thermoplastic material as a result of reheating and the color of the material shall not vary from batch to batch .
num color the thermoplastic material after heating for four num hours five num minutes at num three num degrees f and cooled to num three num degrees f shall meet the following white daylight reflectance at num degrees num degrees shall be num percent minimum .
color shall match federal test standard number num color chip no .
num .
yellow daylight reflectance at num degrees num degrees shall be num percent minimum .
color shall match federal test standard number num color chip no .
num .
num retroreflectance the white and yellow thermoplastic materials shall meet the minimum retroreflectance values in accordance with table num as measured by a portable retroreflectometer device within num days after application to the roadway surface .
section num pavement markings page num table num hot thermoplastic pavement markings oa ea minimum retroreflectance millicandelas white yellow num num num num num softening point after heating the thermoplastic material for four num hours five num minutes at num three num degrees f and testing in accordance with astm d num the thermoplastic materials shall have a softening point of num num degrees f. num water absorption and specific gravity the thermoplastic material shall not exceed num percent by weight of retained water when tested in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
the specific gravity of the material as determined by section num of aashto t num shall be between num and num .
num impact resistance after heating the thermoplastic material for four num hours five num minutes at num three num degrees f and forming test specimens the impact resistance shall be not less than ten num inchpounds when tested in accordance with section num of aashto t num .
num bond strength after heating the thermoplastic material for four num hours five num minutes at num three num degrees f the bond strength to portland cement concrete shall be not less than num pounds per square inch .
the bond strength shall be determined in accordance with the procedures specified in section num of aashto t num .
num abrasion resistance the abrasion resistance of the thermoplastic material shall be determined by forming a representative lot of the material at a thickness of num inches on a fourinch square monel panel thickness num num inches on which a suitable primer has been previously applied and subjecting it to num revolutions on a taber abraser at num c using hnum calibrated wheels weighted to num grams .
the wearing surface shall be kept wet with distilled water throughout the test .
the maximum loss of thermoplastic material shall be num grams .
num cracking resistance at low temperature after heating the thermoplastic material for four num hours five num minutes at num three num degrees f applying to concrete blocks and cooling to num three num degrees the material shall show no cracks when observed from a distance exceeding num inches .
testing for low temperature crack resistance shall be in accordance with the procedures specified in section num of aashto t num .
num flowability after heating the thermoplastic material for four num hours five num minutes at num three num degrees f and testing for flowability in accordance with section num of aashto t num the white thermoplastic shall have a maximum percent residue of num and the yellow thermoplastic shall have maximum percent residue of num .
num yellowness index the white thermoplastic material shall not exceed a yellowness index of num when tested section num pavement markings page num in accordance with section num of aashto t num .
num flowability extended heating after heating the thermoplastic material for eight num num hours at num three num degrees with stirring the last six num hours and testing for flowability in accordance with section num of aashto t num the thermoplastic shall have a maximum percent residue of num .
num flash point the thermoplastic material shall have a flash point not less than num degrees f when tested in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
num storage life the materials shall meet the requirements of this specification for a period of one num year from the date of manufacture .
the month and year of manufacture shall be clearly marked on all packages of thermoplastic material .
the thermoplastic material must also melt uniformly with no evidence of skins or unmelted particles for this one num year period .
any material which does not meet the above requirements or which is no longer within this one num year period at the time of application shall not be used .
the contractor shall replace any outdated material with material meeting the above performance and time requirements at no additional cost to the department .
num primersealer primersealers shall be used on portland cement concrete surfaces and existing aged asphalt with exposed aggregate .
primersealer should not be used on new asphalt surfaces .
the primer sealer shall be applied as recommended by the thermoplastic material manufacturer .
the primersealer shall be compounded specifically for use with the specified thermoplastic material .
num color stability using accelerated weathering per astm gnum cycle num white color stability shall be measured for no color change after num hours of exposure and for yellow color shall be measured for no color change after num hours of exposure .
num composition the thermoplastic composition shall conform to the following requirements table num percent by weight white yellow binder num minimum num minimum titanium dioxide for white num minimum yellow lead free pigment for yellow num minimum reflective glass intermix beads num num num num calcium carbonate or equivalent filler num num num num the ingredients of the thermoplastic composition shall be thoroughly mixed and in a solid or sectionalized block or freeflowing granular form .
when heated in a melting apparatus the material shall readily liquefy into a uniform solution .
this solution shall be free from all skins dirt foreign objects or any other ingredient which would cause bleeding staining blotting or discoloration when applied to the bituminous or concrete pavement surfaces .
the thermoplastic shall be based on the following binder composition alkyd shall consist of a mixture of synthetic resins at least one num of which is solid at room temperature and of highboilingpoint plasticizers .
at least one third of the section num pavement markings page num binder composition and no less than eight percent num by weight of the entire material formulation shall be solid maleicmodified glycerol ester resin or maleic modified pentaerythritol ester resin .
the alkyd binder shall not contain any petroleumbased hydrocarbon resins .
an alkyd thermoplastic formulation may be used for symbols legends and transverse lines including stop bars and crosswalks .
an alkyd thermoplastic formulation may be used for longitudinal lines including lane lines and edge lines unless otherwise shown on the project plans or specified herein .
extrusion or spray formulations shall be used in accordance with requirements of the application equipment used to install the markings .
num reflective glass beads the intermix glass beads shall conform to aashto m num type i and may be coated or uncoated as recommended by the manufacturer .
if uncoated beads are used the thermoplastic formulation shall be configured to minimize settling of the inter mix beads when the material is heated and applied .
in addition to incorporating glass beads in the thermoplastic mix glass beads shall be applied to the surface of the molten material immediately after application .
the dropon beads shall be in accordance with new mexico state department of transportation standards and specifications for highway and bridge construction section num and shall be applied at a minimum rate of num pounds of glass beads per num square feet of line ex .
num linear feet of four num inch stripe and num linear feet of six num inch stripe .
num filler the filler shall be a white calcium carbonate or equivalent filler with a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch .
num titanium dioxide titanium dioxide shall conform to the requirements of astm d num for type ii num percent .
num yellow pigment the yellow pigment shall be heat resistant and be lead and heavy metal free .
the type of yellow pigment shall be at the option of the manufacturer provided that the material conforms to all color requirements in a stable and durable fashion as specified herein .
num raised pavement markers the department will specify raised pavement markers as follows num .
type a nonreflective circular white marker num .
type ay nonreflective circular yellow marker num .
type b twoway white reflective marker num .
type c redwhite reflective marker num .
type d twoway amber reflective marker num .
type g oneway white reflective marker num .
type h oneway amber reflective marker num .
type j redamber reflective marker num .
type td temporary twoway amber reflective marker num .
type tg temporary oneway white reflective marker num .
type th temporary oneway amber reflective marker section num pavement markings page num num .
type tj temporary redamber reflective marker num .
type pd plowable twoway amber reflective marker num .
type pg plowable oneway white reflective marker num .
type ph plowable oneway amber reflective marker num .
type pj plowable redamber reflective marker .
num nonreflective raised pavement markers types a and ay raised pavement markers consist of a heatfired vitreous ceramic base and a heatfired opaque glazed surface to produce the required properties .
provide markers produced from any suitable combination of uniformly mixed clays shales talcs flinits feldspars or other inorganic materials that meet the required properties .
provide markers thoroughly and evenly cured and free from defects .
num nonreflective raised pavement markers finish requirements provide nonreflective raised pavement markers in accordance with table num nonreflective raised pavement marker requirements .
table num nonreflective raised pavement marker requirements test requirement specific intensity millicandelas per lux directional reflectancetype a markers only glazed surface minimum num body of marker minimum num yellow indextype ay markers only glazed surface maximum num body of marker maximum num colortype ay markers only purity num dominant wave length num μm total luminous reflectance y value minimum num autoclave resistance glaze shall not spall craze or peel strength minimum num kip water absorption maximum num num reflective raised pavement markers provide the prismatic reflector type of reflective raised pavement markers consisting of a methyl methacrylate or suitably compounded acrylonitrile butadiene styrene shell that is filled with a mixture of an inert thermosetting compound and filler material .
ensure a smooth exterior surface of the shell containing one num or two num methyl methacrylate prismatic reflector faces of the specified color .
num reflective raised pavement markers requirements if illuminated by a motor vehicle headlight ensure the reflectors appear an approved white yellow or red in accordance with table num reflective raised pavement marker requirements .
the department will reject markers with offcolor reflection .
section num pavement markings page num table num reflective raised pavement marker requirements test reflectance requirement specific intensity millicandelas per lux white yellow red num incidence angle minimum num num num num incidence angle minimum strength num kip num num num num temporary reflective raised pavement markers provide the prismatic reflector type of temporary reflective raised pavement markers consisting of either a highgrade polystyrene or acrylic plastic in accordance with federal specification lpnumcnum type i class num .
ensure a smooth exterior surface of the shell containing one num or two num prismatic reflector faces of the specified color .
provide a reflector of either polycarbonate microprism sheeting or prismatic air cell reflective lens .
provide a sealed metallic backed reflector to prevent water penetration with a reflector face area of num inch num .
num temporary reflective raised pavement markers requirements if illuminated by a motor vehicle headlight ensure that the reflectors appear an approved white yellow or red in accordance with table num temporary reflective raised pavement marker requirements .
the department will reject markers with offcolor reflection .
table num temporary reflective raised pavement marker requirements test reflectance requirement specific intensity millicandelas per lux white yellow red num incidence angle minimum num num num incidence angle minimum num kip num num num plowable reflective raised pavement markers provide a plowable reflective raised pavement marker with a replaceable prismatic retroreflector in accordance with section num reflective raised pavement marker requirements .
place the marker in a metallic or nonmetallic casting able to withstand bidirectional plowing without damage to either the casting or the retroreflector .
num construction requirements num general standard procedures sample and handle paint in accordance with the contract requirements .
contact the state materials bureau for paint sealing sampling and testing requirements .
the contractor shall use mtpcwbacr or mtpcwbacrhb for temporary striping and only use mtpcwbacrhb for permanent striping .
num redispersement of settled paint if paint settles excessively redisperse the settled pigments at the bottom of the paint drums with a mixing device before pumping or loading paint into the striping unit so that excess pigments are not left in the drums .
num equipment section num pavement markings page num place the traffic paint and beads on the pavement using a spray type selfpropelled pavement marking machine .
the department will allow placing temporary striping during construction with other equipment designed for application of paint or beads .
use a machine capable of applying clearly defined four num inch lines .
use a machine equipped with a mechanical device capable of placing a broken reflectorized centerline with a ten num ft painted segment and a num ft gap .
use a machine with an airoperated glass bead dropin dispenser controlled by the spray gun mechanism .
use a dispenser capable of placing the glass spheres into the paint line as the paint is applied to the pavement to provide marking and delineation as specified .
num measurement devices provide measurement of the volume of paint and beads in the tanks by one num of the following measurement methods num .
strap measurement num .
external tank marks indicating a volume equivalent to the tolerances shown in section num tolerance requirements for placing paint and beads or num .
a calibrated rod marked with the equivalent volumes .
provide certification for the volumes of the paint and bead tanks .
num volume control requirements measure the volumes of paint and glass beads placed with the quantitypermile method or using paint and bead gauges .
strap the tanks before beginning striping operations and again after striping one num mile .
if approved by the project manager and if the striping machine is equipped with airatomized spray units and paint and bead gauges the contractor may determine the paint and bead volumes using these gauges .
also measure the volumes at the start and end of each days operations .
num letter of transfer for paint ensure that the striping machines paint and bead tanks are empty before filling at the start of the striping operations for the project .
the department will allow transfer of paint or glass beads left in the tank from another department project if the contractor provides the destination project manager a letter of transfer for paint and a copy of the certificates of compliance for paint and glass beads .
the origin project manager shall include the following in the letter num .
the amount left in the tanks upon completion of the origin project num .
the origin project including termini project number and control number num .
the destination project num .
the date and num .
the previous project managers or designees signature .
num placing beads and traffic paint num weather limitations apply pavement markings during daylight hours or as directed by project manager if the pavement surface is dry and the weather is not foggy rainy excessively windy or otherwise detrimental to the application of markings .
pavement markings must be installed as per manufacturers recommendation .
num surface preparation section num pavement markings page num ensure that the surface is free from excess asphalt or other deleterious substances before applying traffic paint or beads .
remove dirt debris grease motor oils rocks or chips from the pavement surface before applying markings .
num striping operations traffic control requirements provide the necessary personnel and equipment to divert traffic from the installation area while the work is in progress and during the drying time .
submit a traffic control plan in accordance with the mutcd current edition to the project manager for approval before starting the work unless the contract already provides one .
num number of striping applications permanent reflectorized painted markings consist of three num applications of markings unless otherwise specified in the contract .
place the second and third applications no sooner than num days after placement of the first application of markings or as directed by the project manager .
num repair and replacement of unacceptable or damaged striping remove and replace the striping if num .
paint does not adhere to the pavement num .
glass beads do not adhere to the paint num .
the second application of pavement markings is not placed over the first application of markings in accordance with section num tolerance requirements for placing paint and beads .
repair damage to pavement markings due to negligence or failure to maintain traffic control at no additional cost to the department .
num tolerance requirements for placing paint and beads ensure smooth aesthetically acceptable finished lines free from undue waviness .
num width requirements the allowable tolerance for four num inch six num inch eight num inch or num inch wide painted lines is num inch .
num paint application rate apply paint at a minimum rate of num gal per mile of paint for a solid four num inch line and num gal per mile for a broken four num inch line based on a ten numfoot stripe and a numfoot gap numfoot cycle .
apply other widths of striping at appropriate multiples of these minimum rates for solid and broken paint stripes .
num longitudinal tolerance requirement ensure that the length of painted segment and gap does not vary more than six num inches for a num ft cycle .
num transverse gap dimension provide the following transverse gap dimensions between centerline stripes for two num and three num stripe combinations using a threepaint gun set up on the striping machine num .
place the broken line on the centerline of the roadway with the respective left and right no passing zone stripes placed with a two num inch gap between the broken and no passing zone stripes section num pavement markings page num num .
ensure an eight num inch gap between the double yellow markings for nopassing zones .
num glass reflectorizing beads application rate apply glass reflectorizing beads on the wet paint at a minimum rate of six num lb to each gallon of paint .
num hot thermoplastic pavement markings the thermoplastic material shall be delivered in cardboard containers or plastic bags of sufficient strength to permit normal handling during shipment and handling on the job without loss of material .
the net weight of each container shall be approximately num num pounds .
when supplied in bags the construction of the bag shall be such that it can be placed into the melter with the thermoplastic striping material to become part of the finished product .
each container shall be clearly marked to indicate the color of the material the process batch number the manufacturers product number the manufacturers name and address and the date of manufacture .
num moisture all surfaces shall be inspected for moisture content prior to application of thermoplastic .
approximately two num square feet of a clear plastic of tarpaper shall be laid on the road surface and held in place for num to num minutes .
the underside of the plastic or tarpaper shall then be inspected for a build up of condensed moisture from the road surface .
if the amount of condensed moisture is of a sufficient amount to result in water dripping from the plastic or tarpaper when held in a vertical position thermoplastic shall not be applied .
this moisture test shall be repeated until the moisture in the road surface has been allowed to evaporate to a level whereby there is not excessive build up of condensed moisture on the underside of the plastic or tarpaper .
num cleaning all surfaces shall be clean and dry before thermoplastic can be applied .
loose dirt and debris shall be removed by blowing compressed air over the area to be striped .
if the thermoplastic is to be applied over existing paint lines that are determined to have poorly adhered painted markings the paint markings shall be swept with a mechanical sweeper or wire brush to remove any such areas that would interfere with the proper bonding of the thermoplastic .
curing compound and loosely adhered surface film shall be removed from all new portland cement concrete surfaces by loose grain abrasive pressure blasting mechanical abrasion wire brushing or high pressure water blasting .
when primer sealer is required insure that all dust and diamond grinding debris is removed completely prior to applying the primer sealer .
open graded roadways may require sweeping to ensure cleanliness .
num layout the pavement markings shall be placed in proper alignment with guidelines established on the roadway .
deviation from the alignment established shall not exceed two num inches per num feet of roadway nor shall any deviation be abrupt .
longitudinal markings shall be offset at least two num inches from construction joints of portland cement concrete surfaces and joints and shoulder breaks of asphalt surfaces .
if interim or temporary striping is required on final mat and water borne traffic paint is utilized seven num wet mils with beads reduced accordingly can be used or as per manufactures recommendation .
this interim or temporary striping shall be paid for as specified in the contract .
num primer application the primer shall be applied to the road surface in a continuous film at a thickness as section num pavement markings page num recommended per manufacturers product data sheet .
before the thermoplastic is applied the primer shall be allowed to dry to a tacky state .
the thermoplastic shall be applied within and not exceed num hours after the primer application .
num ambient conditions the ambient air and road surface shall be num degrees f and rising before application of thermoplastic can begin .
num material requirements the pavement marking material shall be installed in a molten state by the conventional extrusion or ribbon extrusion method at a minimum temperature of numºf and a maximum temperature of numº f. scorching or discoloration of material shall be cause for rejection by the engineer .
the machinery shall be constructed so that all mixing and conveying parts up to and including the extrusion die or spray head maintain the material in the molten state at the required application temperature .
num application film thickness the pavement marking material shall be applied at a thickness of not less than num mils for long line markings on all roads and not less than num mils for cross walks stop bars legends symbols .
inlay of markings should be taken into consideration in snow plow areas or areas where aggressive traffic shear is a concern .
if inlay of markings is required payment for inlay shall be paid for separately .
num placing temporary marking tape the department will allow only removable marking tape for temporary marking of final pavement surfaces unless otherwise specified in the contract .
provide the necessary personnel and equipment to warn and divert traffic during installation and removal of temporary marking tape from the area where the work is in progress .
ensure that the pavement surface is dry and free of oils grease dust dirt and other deleterious substances and primed with a primer material as recommended by the tape manufacturer .
roll or tamp the tape immediately after application until it adheres properly and conforms to the surface of the pavement .
where striping is continuous do not place more than three num splices per num ft of length .
num placement of retroreflective plastic pavement symbols legends stripes and markings apply retroreflective pliant polymer reflectorized plastic pavement symbols legends stripes and markings to the pavement as specified or as directed by the project manager .
for placement of inlaid markings apply retroreflective preformed plastic pavement markings to the pavement before final rolling is completed on new asphalt pavement or per manufacturers recommendations .
num surface preparation ensure that the pavement surface is free of moisture soil or other deleterious substances by brooming clean or using compressed air .
num requirements for adhesive for raised pavement markers unless otherwise directed in writing by the project manager cement the markers to the pavement with standardset epoxy adhesive .
the contractor may substitute rapidset epoxy section num pavement markings page num adhesive for standardset epoxy adhesive with approval from the project manager and at no additional cost to the department .
use butyl or standardset epoxy adhesive for the installation of temporary reflective raised pavement markers .
use rapidset epoxy adhesive in heavy traffic areas as specified in the contract or when the ambient temperature at the time of application is below num f except as limited in accordance with section num temperature and weather limitations .
num surface preparation for raised pavement markers clean the specified pavement locations of dirt curing compound grease oil moisture loose or unsound layers paint and material that would adversely affect the adhesives bond and prepare the pavement surface for preparation of placement of the adhesive and raised pavement marker .
clean new and existing concrete surfaces by sandblasting and provide containment blastcleaning enclosure for the airborne debris .
ensure that sawcut slots for plowable raised pavement markers are dry and free of loose material before applying the epoxy adhesive .
num temperature and weather limitations do not use standardset epoxy adhesive for placing plowable raised pavement markers if either the pavement temperature or the air temperature is less than num f. num application set the raised pavement markers to the alignment established by the project manager .
place reflective markers so that the reflective face of the marker is perpendicular to a line parallel to the roadway centerline .
do not place pavement markers over longitudinal or transverse joints in the pavement surface .
place the adhesive and markers in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
immediately remove excessive adhesive around the edge of the marker on the pavement and on the exposed surfaces of the marker as per manufacturers recommendation .
ensure that temporary reflective raised pavement markers are easily removed without heating or diamond grinding and without damage to the pavement surface .
num plowable raised pavement markers sawcut slots in the pavement for the plowable raised pavement markers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
accurately lay out the locations of sawcut slots on the pavement .
handplace the plowable raised pavement marker casting into the manufacturer approved adhesivefilled sawcut slot so that the snowplow deflecting surfaces are below the adjacent pavement surfaces .
num disposal of hazardous materials dispose of thinner solvent and other hazardous waste in accordance with appropriate hazardous materials regulations .
num method of measurement no payment will be made for the number of skips spaces in long line pavement marking applications .
section num pavement markings page num the department will measure retroreflectorized painted markings for four num inch six num inch eight num inch num inch and num inch widths using multiples of the standard four num inch width to calculate a total length .
the department will measure hot thermoplastic pavement markings for four num inch six num inch eight num inch num inch and num inch widths using multiples of the standard four num inch width to calculate a total length .
the department will measure the volume of paint and glass beads in place by the quantity per mile method in accordance with section num volume control requirements .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit retroreflectorized painted markings____inch foot temporary striping foot removable marking tape foot nonremovable marking tape foot retroreflectorized plastic pavement stripe ____inch foot retroreflectorized plastic _____type arrow each retroreflectorized word ___ each retroreflectorized plastic ____type symbol each retroreflectorized plastic railroad crossing each retroreflectorized painted railroad crossing each hot thermoplastic pavement stripe _____inch foot hot thermoplastic _____type arrow each hot thermoplasticword ___ each hot thermoplastic ____type symbol each hot thermoplasticrailroad crossing each reflective raised pavement marker type ____ each nonreflective raised pavement marker type ____ each temporary reflective raised pavement marker type ____ each plowable reflective raised pavement marker type ____ each num payments the department will not pay for striping until the project manager receives the required certification and documentation .
if the project manager determines that the specified amounts of paint and glass beads were not installed the department will reduce payment in accordance with table num reflectorized painted markings payment price reduction schedule based on actual placement quantities .
table num reflectorized painted markings payment price reduction schedule based on actual placement quantities paint gallons per mile percent reduction num to num num num to num num num to num num num а num glass beads pounds per gallon section num pavement markings page num table num reflectorized painted markings payment price reduction schedule based on actual placement quantities paint gallons per mile percent reduction num to num num num to num num num to num num num a num asubject to complete rejection and replacement .
price reductions for paint and glass beads are cumulative .
if the contractor has not installed the specified amount of glass beads and paint the project manager will observe the striping at night to determine whether restriping is necessary at no additional cost to the department .
the department will require the contractor to restripe the roadway for the following reasons num .
if less than num of the specified quantity of paint or beads are placed on the roadway or num .
if the project manager determines that the striping is not adhering to the pavement or the glass beads are not adhering to the paint .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
removal of temporary marking tape b .
repair or replacement of damaged striping due to contractors negligence or operations c. furnishing mixing and applying adhesive d. surface preparation and e. maintaining and protecting the pavement markings from traffic during the marking operations .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be considered incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems page num section num general requirements for traffic signal and lighting systems num description this work consists of providing and installing complete and functioning traffic signal and lighting systems .
num definitions trafficactuated controller .
an electronic timing device that controls the timing and sequence of traffic phases in accordance with the varying demands of traffic registered by detectors .
num materials num signal and lighting materials provide new materials unless otherwise specified in the contract .
provide electrical materials in accordance with nema standards the nec and state and local ordinances or requirements .
if revisions to nema or nec requirements create a conflict with material requirements apply the more stringent .
provide signal and lighting systems complete with the necessary accessories for proper operation .
the contract will specify the extent and general arrangement of signal and lighting systems .
complete the systems as specified .
num material approvals within num days of contract execution submit a list of signal and lighting materials proposed for use and their supply sources to the project manager for approval by the lighting and signal engineer and traffic services engineer .
include materials identified in the contract by performance characteristics on this list with the following information about each item num .
name of the manufacturer num .
size num .
catalog number of each item and num .
other performance data if required .
include complete shop drawings and material certifications in submittals for standards poles including lowering devices for high masts .
provide material certifications after part manufacture but before erection .
if requested by the project manager or specified in the contract submit samples of the proposed material .
num prequalification use only trafficactuated controllers controller cabinets system masters signal monitors vehicle detectors load switches signal standards and lighting standards prequalified before bid opening .
the list of pretested and acceptable signal items is on the departments approved products list and is available on the nmdot website .
the department lists each acceptable item by manufacturer and model number or identification number .
section num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems page num sample items must be submitted or resubmitted by the manufacturer or its representative to the product evaluation committee .
it will normally take the department a minimum of num days for evaluation and notification of results .
num backfill materials provide backfill materials for signal and lighting system excavations within the roadway prism or for foundations suitable for compaction in accordance with section num compaction .
backfill excavations for conduit or drilling pits outside the roadway prism with the material removed from that excavation .
remove stones with diameters larger than four num inches large pieces of concrete vegetation and other deleterious materials .
provide additional backfill material if necessary .
num pavement and sidewalk material provide pavement and sidewalk replacements for signal and lighting system excavations in accordance with the contract for the replacement of the material removed .
num construction requirements num general ensure that the electrical work is in accordance with the nec and applicable local ordinances .
obtain a permit from the state electrical board or equivalent state or local agency before constructing traffic signals lighting systems or other electrical installations .
provide permit proof to the project manager before work begins .
all electrical work relating to the installation or preparation of installation of signals and lighting must be supervised by an onsite licensed journeyman electrician .
obtain approval from the local power company for the exact location of the electric service before its installation .
prior to final inspection of the project submit a written certification to the project manager that all electrical work and installations have been done in accordance with project specifications and details .
unless waived by authorizing agency submit evidence to the project manager that all electrical work and installations have been inspected and approved by an authorized representative of the state electrical board or the traffic services signal laboratory .
know the nec and local requirements and notify the project manager promptly of any conflicts with the contract documents .
num excavation and backfill perform the excavation required for the installation of conduit foundations and other items minimizing damage to highways streets or roads .
do not excavate until immediately before the installation of conduit and foundations .
do not cut the existing pavement until the project manager approves .
perform compaction for standard foundations in accordance with section num compaction .
the contractor may use original material mechanically tamped and neatly leveled to original grade to backfill excavations in natural ground or out of defined roadway prism .
in grassed or landscaped areas carefully remove sod before excavation and replace it after backfilling .
to prevent damage to conduit during backfilling place at least two num inches of fine grained material that passes a num inch sieve on the sides and above the conduit for the width of the trench .
if the bottom of the trench contains rocks or material the project manager section num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems page num determines to be unsuitable place at least two num inches of this material below the conduit to cushion it .
num existing and temporary traffic signals and lighting systems provide install and maintain temporary traffic signals and lighting systems if specified in the contract .
provide the project manager with access to power disconnects and control equipment during this period .
num temporary traffic signals timing plans for temporary traffic signals must be prepared by professional engineer registered and licensed by the state board and must be submitted to the traffic services section for approval .
remove and retain ownership of temporary equipment unless otherwise specified in the contract .
the traffic services section or their approved designee will inspect the temporary traffic signals before their initial activation .
all access to any signal equipment in the construction zone shall be controlled by the signal contractor .
notify in advance the project manager and traffic services engineer of any modifications to a controller cabinet during construction .
if circumstances prohibit advance notification notify the project manager and traffic services engineer as soon as possible afterwards .
keep and maintain a log of controller cabinet access .
weekly send copies of the access log to traffic services for the entire length of the project .
payment for this activity will be incidental to the project .
num coordination of work with existing facilities keep existing signal and lighting systems in operation until the new material is installed and ready for operation unless otherwise specified in the contract .
do not start work that may cause the existing signals to become inoperative until materials for the new installation are on hand and the specified regulatory signing or temporary signals are in place and approved by the project manager and traffic services engineer .
schedule shutdowns in accordance with the construction traffic control plan .
notify the project manager and the maintaining agency in writing at least five num working days before a scheduled shutdown .
when the work requires additions or modifications to existing signal or lighting systems give the project manager and the maintaining agency written notice at least five num workings days before any interruptions .
allow the maintaining agency to inspect the work before and after reenergizing .
num salvage of existing material salvage the existing signal material including cabinets and cameras and avoid damage in handling .
disassemble and deliver salvaged material to the departments signal laboratory or to the contract specified location .
the department may require the contractor to recordvideo tape equipment prior to disassemble and packing .
this work will be considered incidental to construction .
the contractor shall coordinate with the local power company to remove salvaged lighting material .
if specified in the contract remove and deliver the material to the required location .
num final operations and acceptance requirements after the signal is in operation and before final acceptance ensure that the signal remains fully operational in accordance with section num acceptance .
if the signal malfunctions or is otherwise disabled notify the project manager the traffic services signal laboratory the lighting and signal engineer and the maintaining agency section num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems page num immediately and provide emergency repairs .
new signal and lighting systems or modifications to existing systems require a numday installation test in accordance with section num testing .
num responsibility for utility and maintenance ensure that the maintaining agency is the customer of record for the electrical and communications utilities .
the electrical energy and communications services cost maintenance and operational responsibility for existing signal and lighting systems undergoing contract modifications will remain with the maintaining agency unless otherwise directed in the contract .
continue maintenance of new signals and lighting systems until partial or final acceptance of the project .
the electrical and communication costs of the signal and lighting systems shall be borne by the contractor until acceptance of the system by the department after which the cost will become the responsibility of the maintaining agency .
the contractor will be reimbursed for actual energy and communication services costs and costs of permit transfer per section num .
submit an appropriate billing verification to the project manager .
after partial or final acceptance of the project the maintaining agency is responsible for the signal and lighting systems operations and maintenance .
num testing num wiring tests before the departments acceptance of the work perform the following tests on the lighting and signal circuits num .
continuity of each circuit num .
grounds or shorts in each circuit num .
functional test to demonstrate that all parts of the system function as specified or intended and num .
when requested conduct a megger test of each circuit between the circuit and ground including the insulation resistance for all vehicle loops direct burial wire or cable .
ensure that the initially applied voltage for the tests is num .
no greater than the rated voltage of the cables and num .
has a uniform rate of increase of not more than num in ten num s or less than num in num s. replace or repair faults in materials or in any part of the installation revealed by these tests as approved by the project manager .
repeat the same test until no fault appears .
perform the tests in the presence of the project manager andor signal laboratory personnel or both as directed .
provide all electrical power instruments and personnel required for the test .
num operation tests the department requires a numday operational test period which starts when the lighting system andor traffic signal are completely installed and fully operational including detection and communications .
submit a request for approval to start the numday operational test period in writing to the project manager and the traffic services engineer .
the department will grant partial acceptance of the system upon satisfactory completion of the numday operational test period and will grant final acceptance in accordance with section num acceptance .
shoptest the controllers in accordance with section num testing .
this special section num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems page num testing is in addition to the numday installation tests .
ensure that timing for signal controllers during the installation test period is as specified in the contract .
do not place a signal in operation until the traffic services engineer verifies the time settings and the correctness of signal indication outputs .
provide access to the signal controller for the inspector during the test period .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit signallighting system startup costs allowance furnishing and installing of traffic signal and lighting systems will be measured and paid for as provided in the applicable sections of these specifications for the work specified in the contract .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately allowed costs required for energy and communication service for the num day operating test period energycommunication permit fees and energycommunication permit transfer fees .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num signal and lighting service systems page num section num signal and lighting service systems num description this work consists of bringing electricity to the project power service installation providing and installing service poles service connections and lighting control cabinets .
num materials num service pole use timber poles treated in accordance with aashto m num .
provide normal service requirements for traffic signals and rest areas that are num v num cycle .
provide the lighting system service in accordance with the plans or as required by the servicing utility .
provide a circuit breaker type service switch or a type hd disconnect switch with fuses .
enclose the service switch in a nema raintight housing with a hinged cover .
ensure the cover stays in position when open and has a hasp for a padlock .
provide ulapproved switches and housings .
num service riser provide materials for service risers in accordance with section num service pole if installing electrical service on an existing pole .
num meter pedestal provide materials for meter pedestals in accordance with the nec and the following num .
provide meter pedestals made of numgauge hot dipped galvanized steel num aluminum or numd stainless steel num .
fully welded construction with welding material specifically designed for material used num .
all fasteners latches and hardware are made of stainless steel and all hinges are continuous interior or piano style num .
no exposed nuts bolts screws rivets or other fasteners on the exterior num .
fully framed side hinged cabinet doors equipped with neopreme flange compressed gaskets and numlb stress rated hasps num .
enclosure shall be factory wired and conform to required nema and ul numa standards num .
provide a meter socket with a minimum rating of num a or num a as required in the contract or the demand of the system num .
main breakers shall be num num or num poles num .
provide separate metered main lighting main disconnects as required num .
cable incable out circuit breakers standard num .
circuit breakers installed in a vertical position handle up for on handle down for off num .
circuit breakers are industrial grade full rated num .
all bussing is ul approved copper cable bussing fully rated num .
distribution panel with deadfront panel and ¼ turn latch num .
wiring will be nema iib standards showing connections to external equipment num .
control wiring is num strand num or num awg mtw num .
functions of circuit breakers switches and other components as required shall be clearly identified by engraved nameplates num .
asbuilt factory drawings enclosed .
section num signal and lighting service systems page num num service connection provide service connections to transformers and power sources in accordance with the plans and the nec .
num lighting control cabinet provide materials for lighting control cabinets in accordance with the plans the nec and the following num .
cabinets of numgauge steel with a corrosionresistant durable finish num .
groundmounted tamperproof lockable cabinets approved by the rural electrification administration num .
stainless steel cabinet hardware including the hinges num .
mounting brackets for attaching contactors photoelectric cells junction boxes and other auxiliary equipment .
num .
enclosure shall be factory wired and conform to required nema and ul numa standards .
num photoelectric controller provide a photoelectric unit that consists of a light sensitive element connected directly to an internal control relay without intermediate amplifications .
provide either the horizontal sensing or zenith sensing type of unit with turnon at num fc num fc and a turnoff at a maximum of num fc .
the minimum acceptable difference between turnon and turnoff is num fc .
the minimum acceptable load rating is num w hid load .
provide the unit base with a threeprong nema standard twist lock type plug mounting so that the unit mounts directly on luminaires or with an adapter base on pole tops or sides .
ensure that the controllers normally work in conjunction with external auxiliary load relays for handling the required lighting loads .
ensure that the supply voltage rating is the same as the system voltage specified in the contract .
the minimum operating temperature range is from num f to num f. ensure that the power consumption of the controller is less than num w. ensure that the lighting load turns on when the north sky illumination in the area falls to a preset value .
provide a potentiometer that is easily accessible for adjustment to vary the turnon value within the operating range .
incorporate a time delay into the circuit to prevent streetlights from turning off at night when transient lights are focused on the controller .
ensure that the controlled lighting load remains on or becomes energized if any functional failure occurs in the electronic circuit .
equip the controller with a lightning arrestor capable of handling num v at num a .
num auxiliary contactor ensure that the auxiliary contactor has the following properties num .
works in conjunction with a photoelectric controller and the specified lighting loads num .
is normally open and double pole num .
is the electrically held type designed to withstand lamp load inrush current and to carry full rated current on a continuous basis .
provide a threeposition switch to permit manual operation of the lighting circuit with an indicating nameplate reading photooffmanual .
use a toggle or rotary type switch with doublepole triplethrow and centeroff position .
num construction requirements section num signal and lighting service systems page num num general the contractor shall pay the local power company for power service installation .
the contractor shall obtain a detailed estimate from the local power company .
the electrical service points shown in the contract are approximate .
obtain the exact locations from the electric utility .
obtain approval of the final location from the project manager before beginning the service installation work .
if a major change in location from that specified in the contract is necessary the project manager will determine the final location and adjust the service run .
obtain the necessary permits and schedule electrical inspections required for service attachment .
obtain the approval of the project manager before hookup .
provide the electric utility with the name of the maintaining agency as the customer of record in accordance with section num responsibility for utility and maintenance .
num service pole installations attach the conduit to the pole as specified in the contract .
securely mount the conduit to the pole surface and bond it to the service pole ground system as required by the nec .
provide and install conduits covers gaskets switches fittings and necessary equipment .
refer to the contract for layout connections and mounting details of the various switches and associated equipment .
use rigid steel galvanized conduit of the specified size for above ground service installations .
where rigid steel conduit is coupled to rigid pvc conduit used for the underground portion of the service run join the conduits underground at a depth of from two num inches to ten num inches below the surface .
provide and install meter sockets required by the serving utility company as specified in the contract .
the serving utility company will supply and install the meters .
num service riser install service risers on existing poles at the required locations in accordance with section num service pole installations .
install service risers on the quadrant of the existing pole directed by the service utility company .
num meter pedestal install meter pedestals at the locations specified and in accordance with the contract .
install the pedestals at least ten num ft from the service pole .
num service connection install the service connections at an existing service pole service riser meter pedestal lighting control cabinet or at a location specified in the contract .
provide service connections at no additional cost to the department .
num lighting control cabinets install the lighting control cabinets at the locations specified in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
install the cabinets plumb on a concrete foundation with necessary grout or caulking to provide a weatherresistant dusttight installation .
num method of measurement power service installation will be paid for complete in place .
section num signal and lighting service systems page num num basis of payment pay item pay unit service pole____type each service riser____type each meter pedestal____type each lighting control cabinet each power service installation allowance for power service installation the contractor shall be paid the actual amount charged by the local power company for the work .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately all materials required for a complete installation including meter sockets and disconnect switches if required .
concrete pads for lighting control cabinets .
service connections and power service installation coordination will be considered as included in the cost of the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num signal and lighting standards page num section num signal and lighting standards num description this work consists of providing and installing traffic signal and street lighting standards .
if the contract specifies standards provided and installed by others this work only consists of the installation of anchor bolts .
num materials a standard consists of the following num .
shaft with base num .
anchor bolts num .
mast arms if required and num .
other hardware supporting the traffic signal and highway lighting apparatus .
provide structures in accordance with nmdot standard serials and designed in accordance with the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals current edition .
num type i standard a type i standard is a pedestaltype support for traffic signals controller cabinets and splice cabinets .
provide a threaded pole pedestaltype support with a threaded female square cast aluminum base and collar assembly with set screws and ground lug .
provide an aluminum base approximately num inches high with a covered hand hole at least eight num inches num inches .
fabricate the pole from four num inches nominal diameter spun aluminum pipe as per the standard drawings .
provide a type i standard designed to support a post topmounted traffic signal controller or splice cabinet weighing num lb .
design a type i standard four num ft high or less for a projected area of five num ftnum .
design a type i standard ten num ft high or more for a projected area of num ft num .
num type ii standard a type ii standard is a mast arm traffic signal support .
provide standards either with a monotube single member arm design fabricated from steel or a trombone truss arm design fabricated from steel .
provide standards in accordance with the member attachment and size details specified in the contract to ensure interchangeability and standardization between fabricators .
num design requirements provide a standard installation designed to support traffic signal heads back plates dampers and signing attached rigidly to the end of the arm .
use a designprojected area of num ft num each and a design weight of num lb each .
num shaft provide steel shafts fabricated from a weldablegrade hot rolled steel having a yield point after fabrication of at least num psi and a numinch minimum wall thickness .
provide a round or octagonal cross section shaft tapered at a constant rate .
after fabrication hotdip galvanize the steel shaft in accordance with astm a num and clean to provide a uniform and stain free surface .
provide a design for octagonal cross sections with a taper rate of numinchft .
section num signal and lighting standards page num provide a shaft with a removable pole top cap or mast arm hand hole with cover to allow access for pulling cable through the shaft .
num arm provide monotube single member arms fabricated from steel and trombone truss arms fabricated from steel .
for the shaft provide steel members with a minimum thickness of num inch .
num transformer base provide steel transformer bases fabricated from hot rolled mild steel with a yield point of at least num psi and a sidewall thickness of at least a no .
num u.s. std .
ga. num inch .
galvanize the steel transformer base after fabrication in accordance with astm a num .
provide bases with a height of at least num inches and in one num side a hand hole with cover at least eight num inch num inch .
provide transformer bases designed to allow the shaft to rotate a full num and to align irrespective of anchor bolt placement .
num hardware provide either steel or stainless steel hardware .
provide steel hardware in accordance with astm a num galvanized in accordance with astm f num .
provide stainless steel hardware in accordance with aisi series num stainless steel .
num anchor bolts provide anchor bolts in accordance with section num anchor bolts .
thread the top of each type ii standard anchor bolt at least eight num inches and hotdip galvanize the full thread plus six num inches .
num type iii standard type iii standard is a combination mast and traffic signal and roadway luminaire support .
provide type iii standards fabricated from steel in accordance with section num type ii standard .
provide type iii standards that support a luminaire with a shaft extension and arm .
provide arms designed to support a luminaire of num lb and a projected area of num ftnum .
provide shaft extensions in accordance with section num shaft except that steel shaft extensions may have a minimum thickness of num inch .
num reserved num type v standard a type v standard is a mastarm luminaire support .
provide type v standards of tapered shafts with davittype mastarms .
provide breakaway bases in accordance with section num breakaway bases .
num design requirements provide arms designed to support a luminaire weighing num lb and a projected area of num ft num .
ensure pole straightness is in accordance with table num type v standard pole straightness tolerances .
section num signal and lighting standards page num table num type v standard pole straightness tolerances total mounting height ft straightness inch num num num num num num num num num num num num ¾ limit dead load deflection in accordance with aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals current edition subsection numb numa .
num fabrication requirements fabricate standards using spun aluminum or galvanized steel .
num spun aluminum standards num shaft provide shafts of onepiece seamless tapered tubes of alloy num tnum in accordance with astm b num and having num .
wall thickness of at least num inch for mounting heights of equal to or less than num ft num .
wall thickness of at least num inch for mounting heights of from greater than num ft to num ft num .
wall thickness of at least num inch for mounting heights greater than num ft and num .
no longitudinal welds and only two num circumferential welds located at the joint between the shaft and the anchor base .
secure a onepiece cast aluminum anchor base of alloy numtnum in accordance with astm b num to the base .
finish exposed edges of the plate that makes up the base assembly smooth and furnish each base with four num bolt covers .
provide a rotary sand polished shaft wrapped for protection during handling and shipping .
num mast arm provide mast arms of seamless aluminum tubing alloy numtnum .
assemble arms with a slip fitter onto the main shaft and hold with through bolts and set screws .
num hardware provide stainless steel hardware .
num welding perform welding in accordance with the aluminum design manual published by the aluminum association .
num galvanized steel num shaft provide steel shafts with a yield strength of at least num psi after fabrication and a minimum wall thickness of no .
num u.s. std .
ga. num inch .
for shafts with an after section num signal and lighting standards page num fabrication yield strength of num psi or greater the contractor may provide shafts with a minimum wall thickness of no .
num u.s. std .
ga. num inch .
provide a round cross section shaft tapered at a constant rate .
ensure the shaft is a onepiece section attached by two num circumferential welds to a base plate .
provide a base of either onepiece steel casting or fabricated from steel plate with a minimum yield strength of num psi .
num galvanizing and finishing ensure exposed welds except fillet welds are ground flush with the base metal .
fully galvanize steel poles after fabrication in accordance with astm a num .
after galvanizing clean poles to provide a uniform and stainfree surface .
num mast arm provide arms fabricated from the same material as the shaft and with a wall thickness of at least no .
num u.s. std .
ga. num inch .
assemble arms with a slip fitter onto an adapter casting fixed to the main shaft and held with through bolts and set screws .
num anchor bolts thread the top of the anchor bolts for approximately nine num inches and galvanize for a minimum of num inches .
provide each anchor bolt for type v standards with nuts and washers as required for a breakaway base or one num nut washer and shims if an anchor type base is required .
num breakaway bases provide type v standards designed to meet the requirements for dynamic performance under vehicle impact and strength tests in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals current edition .
use type v standards located behind barriers bridge railing or sidewalks requiring anchor bases for direct rigid mounting .
the contractor may use breakaway couplings or a steel slipbase system for type v standards .
the contractor may use either an integral aluminum base or breakaway couplings for aluminum standards .
if the total weight of the standard and the luminaire assembly exceeds num lb or if requested by the project manager provide test data obtained in accordance with the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals current edition .
provide breakaway couplings designed for placement between the anchor bolts and the pole base composed of a frangible material that breaks away under impact shear .
ensure that the tensile and compressive strengths of the coupling equal or exceed those required for the design wind loading of the furnished type v standard .
include a sheet metal skirt base cover for the coupling installation as specified .
num type vi standard a type vi standard is a high mast luminaire support .
provide structural steel for type vi standards anchor bolts base plates shafts and suspension arms in accordance with the applicable aashto astm or military specifications .
identify the aashto astm or military specifications for each member on the shop drawings and in the design calculations .
ensure that all structural steel used in base plates and shafts more than num inch thick is in accordance with aashto specifications for the charpy v notch toughness in zone num .
fabricate transport and erect type vi standards in accordance with section num construction requirements .
base the design on a wind velocity of num mph with a num gust factor .
section num signal and lighting standards page num num design design the installation to support luminaires weighing num lb each with a projected area of num ft num each .
base the design on the number of luminaire positions specified in the contract assuming one num luminaire in each position .
submit eight num copies of the design calculations and shop drawings to the project manager for review and approval by the state bridge engineer .
do not begin fabrication until the state bridge engineer approves the design calculations and shop drawings .
num slipfit design provide shafts consisting of round or multisided telescoping tapered sections designed to create a minimum overlap of sections of num times the outside diameter of the female sections .
mate sections and matchmark before shipment to the job site .
do not allow the centerline alignment of an assembled shaft to vary from the theoretical centerline of the joining base and tip by more than three num inches .
num hand hole provide a minimum num inch num inch hand hole reinforced with a flange plate for each shaft located near the base of the shaft .
design the reinforcing so that the original strength of the shaft is maintained .
provide the shaft with a weatherproof door and provisions for hand locking .
provide stainless steel securing hardware .
num weld joint details use full penetration welds .
ensure that longitudinal welds other than in the slip joint area have num minimum weld surface penetration .
test and inspect all circumferential welds joining shaft sections longitudinal welds in the female slip joint area suspension arm to shaft connection welds and pole to base plate connection welds using ultrasonic techniques .
use magnetic particle or visual inspection on all other welds .
num protective coating provide galvanizing in accordance with the requirements of aashto mnum .
ensure that galvanized coatings are uniform and bright .
fabricate standards completely before galvanizing .
ensure that no embrittlement warpage and distortion occur in accordance with astm a num and astm a num .
num base plate integrally weld the base plate to the pole shaft with a backing ring using an aws prequalified num penetration weld .
provide a hole with at least a numinch diameter in the base plate to allow insertion of a lowering device into the hole through the base plate .
num anchor bolts provide anchor bolts for each type vi standard according to astm f num grade num steel or aashto mnum .
provide one num leveling nut one num holddown nut and washers for each anchor bolt top and bottom .
galvanize the threaded ends of the bolts nuts and washers in accordance with astm a num .
space the anchor bolts in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num luminaire frame and lowering device the luminaire frame and lowering device consist of a head frame a luminaire ring a winch a hoisting assembly a circuit breaker a portable power unit and other necessary appurtenances including wiring to mount operate lower raise and test luminaire fixtures .
section num signal and lighting standards page num provide design of frame and lowering device to the state bridge engineer for approval .
num head frame the head frame structure supports the hoist cable sheaves symmetrically spaced and the power cable sheave placed midpoint between two num hoisting cable sheaves .
cover the head frame with a firmly attached copper free aluminum cover .
fabricate the structure from numinch astm a num steel plate that is hotdip galvanized in accordance with astm a num .
attach the head frame to the pole with a steel slipfitter and secure with stainless steel set screws .
provide pressfit oilimpregnated sintered bronze bushings at the hub for all sheaves .
provide keepers to prevent the lift and power cables from riding out of the sheaves or roller assemblies during erection and operation .
provide design of the head frame to the state bridge engineer for approval .
num luminaire ring construct the luminaire ring of six num inches numpound singlepiece channel with the appropriate number of two num inch nominal steel pipe mounting arms symmetrically mounted .
hotdip galvanize after fabrication .
prewire the ring with a suitable number of conductors having a currentcarrying capacity of the total load with a maximum voltage drop of three percent num and with numc type seo distribution cable .
provide a protective roller system for the inner portion of the lowering ring to permit the ring to contact the pole shaft during raising and lowering operations to prevent damaging either the ring or the pole .
use rollers consisting of waterresistant nonmarking material with oilimpregnated bronze bushings on stainless steel shafts .
provide three num highvisibility reflector indicator flags for the luminaire rings visible from the ground after mounting .
ensure that the luminaire ring properly engages the head frame so the flags trip to signal the operator .
provide design of the luminaire ring to the state bridge engineer for approval .
num hoisting cable support the luminaire ring with three num numinch diameter stainless steel num num strand nonrotating aircraft cables military spec .
milwnum with a minimum breaking strength of num lb .
anchor the ends of the cables in the standard to the top of the suspension bracket .
pass the lift cable up through the pole shaft over the head frame sheaves to the luminaire ring lead through guides and a compression spring and terminate with a collect type device .
prevent twisting and eliminate torsion developed during the initial installation of the hoisting cable system .
provide design of the hoisting cable to the state bridge engineer for approval .
num safety mechanism latching device provide a safety mechanism that allows disengagement of the winch assembly in the base of the pole consisting of two num multipoint safety chain and hook assemblies to maintain the tension on the transition assembly .
galvanize the chain and hooks .
secure each chain to a plate welded to the inside of the pole shaft .
ensure that the safety mechanism is selfcontained within the pole and independent of the pole foundation .
provide design of the latching device to the state bridge engineer for approval .
as an alternate to the above safety mechanism the contractor may provide a top latch returning system as recommended by the manufacturer .
submit the shop drawings and section num signal and lighting standards page num design calculations for the lowering device to the project manager for preapproval of the system by the lighting and signal engineer .
do not begin fabrication until the lighting and signal engineer reviews and approves the design and shop drawings .
fabricate the safety mechanism cams and all hardware on the support ring of stainless steel .
num winch provide a wormgear reducer type winch with a selflocking reduction ratio in both raising and lowering operations .
provide a winch drum prewound with stainless steel num num strand numinch diameter aircraft cable military spec .
milwnum .
provide manufacturing details load ratings anticipated winch loadings and winch specifications to the state bridge engineer for approval .
ensure that the winch has an ultimate strength of five num times the lifted load if measured with the appropriate number of layers of cable on the drum .
provide a transition design to prevent twisting of support cables to ensure smooth winding of the cable on the winch and to prevent binding on the inside of the tower shaft .
provide a winch cable of sufficient length to maintain at least four num complete wraps on the winch drum once the system has been lowered to its lowest point .
num electrical use numc num awg numc if threephase circuit is specified type so portable power cable for the main power cable unless otherwise specified in the contract .
securely connect power cables to a weathertight wiring box on the luminaire ring and terminate on a numvolt terminal block .
provide a twist lock power receptacle to allow testing of the luminaires in the lowered position .
provide a breaker complete with a nema num enclosure accessible through the hand hole in each standard .
size the breaker as follows num .
twopole num a for num v singlephase .
num .
twopole num a for num v singlephase .
num .
threepole num a for num v threephase .
provide the type of service specified in the contract .
provide design of the electrical system to the state traffic engineer for approval .
num hardware fabricate all miscellaneous fittings fastenings or hardware for the support head frame and luminairemounting ring of aisi series num stainless steel with approved means for locking nuts .
provide hardware design to the state bridge engineer for approval .
num portable power unit incorporate the drive motor torque limiter drive shaft and electrical controls in the portable power unit .
provide a power unit that one num person can install operate and remove .
provide a drill motor controlled by a reversing switch connected by a num ft remote cord .
use gaskettype cord grips to prevent damage to the flexible cords .
provide design of the power unit to the state traffic engineer for approval .
num anchor bolts for type vi standards provide anchor bolts in accordance with section num type vi standards .
fabricate anchor bolts of sufficient size and length to support the structure with the design loads .
use highstrength steel bars with a guaranteed minimum yield strength of num psi or steel in accordance with astm fnum .
section num signal and lighting standards page num provide one num leveling nut and one num holddown nut with each bolt .
provide each anchor bolt with nuts and washers as required .
num statefurnished materials if specified in the contract the department will provide the standards and mast arms at specified locations .
num construction requirements num general installation includes erection of completed standards leveling of standards required grouting between standard bases and foundations and the installation of anchor bolts in foundations .
retap and seal threaded holes and hubs with heavy grease or another type of preservative to prevent rust .
drill the required fieldmade holes such as for mounting pedestrian push buttons neatly .
do not use a cutting torch .
if torque values are specified in the contract for anchor bolt nuts breakaway couplings or slip bolts make all adjustments with an approved torque wrench .
do not use alternate torque values unless approved by the project manager .
num galvanized steel standards repair scratches caused by erection and handling in the field with num zincrich paint .
num type ii standards installation requirements ensure that the length and position of arms are in accordance with the contract .
attach the arms securely to the shafts .
num type v standards installation requirements install davit arms in accordance with manufacturers recommendations to prevent rotation under wind loads .
drill the through holes for bolts in the top pole tenon in the field .
if the arms rotate after erection lower the type v standard reassemble the arm and reinstall the type v standard with the arm in the proper position .
num type vi standards field assembly for a slipfit design submit the proposed method for field assembly of standard sections to the project manager for approval .
perform field assembly of the standard sections and the assembly of the lowering device under the supervision of a representative of the manufacturer trained experienced in field assembly and knowledgeable of the operation and construction of the material supplied .
num system training provide a field representative to train the departments personnel and local utility personnel for one num day in the systems operation lowering the devices changing luminaries etc ..
submit the complete training program to the project manager and the lighting and signal engineer for approval at least num working days before scheduling the system training .
include the following in the training num .
working outlines of presentations num .
specification manuals num .
videotape num .
handouts and section num signal and lighting standards page num num .
other materials to be distributed during the training .
num new foundations for signal and lighting standards construct new foundations for signal and lighting standards in accordance with section num foundations for signal and lighting installations .
num relocation of existing signal and lighting standards do not remove existing signal and lighting standards until placement of new foundations accepted by the project manager .
notify the project manager traffic services signal laboratory and the maintaining agency at least num working days before removing and resetting specified signal and lighting standards .
the department will provide all shop drawings and other documents of record on the existing inplace signals and lighting standards .
provide all work and materials required for rewiring relocated signals and lighting standards as included in this work .
supply the new foundation for relocated existing signals and lighting standards .
num removing and resetting highmast standard and luminaire when specified in the contract construct new foundations for the existing type vi standards .
remove the existing type vi standards and the luminaires and relocate the standards and luminaires to the new foundations .
num removing and resetting roadway standard and luminaire when specified in the contract construct new foundations for the existing type v standards .
remove the existing standards and luminaires and relocate the standards and luminaires to the new foundations .
num removing and resetting traffic signal and mast arms when specified in the contract construct new foundations for the existing type i ii and iii standards .
remove the existing type i ii and iii standards traffic signals and mast arms .
relocate the standards traffic signals and mast arms to the new foundations .
num statefurnished standards mast arms and roadway luminaires if specified in the contract load haul and install statefurnished lighting standards mast arms and roadway luminaires .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit type____ standard ____ ft each type____ standard ____ft arm each remove and reset high mast standard and luminaire each remove and reset lighting standard and luminaire each remove and reset traffic signal and mast arm each install statefurnished standards mast arms and roadway luminaires each high mast lowering device each the department will pay for foundations in accordance with section num foundations for signal and lighting installations .
section num signal and lighting standards page num num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. anchor bolts b .
hardware c. protective coatings and d. conductors for type v and type vi standards and training and technical services for type vi standards .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num foundations for signal and lighting installations page num section num foundations for signal and lighting installations num description this work consists of constructing reinforced concrete foundations for support of traffic signal standards luminaire standards and control cabinets .
num materials num concrete use class a concrete for traffic signal standards type i and control cabinet foundations in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
use class g concrete for traffic signal standards type ii and iii and luminaire standards foundations in accordance with section num drilled shafts .
num steel reinforcement provide steel reinforcement in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num construction requirements num general place foundations on firm ground .
if the excavation conflicts with existing underground or overhead utilities the project manager will determine a new location or provide a new foundation design or utility relocation .
restore the ground surface to its original elevation if relocation is necessary .
construct foundations with final elevations no more than one num inch above the final pavement elevations or nearest top of curb elevation .
in sidewalks provide flush top standard foundations level with the surface of the sidewalk and place expansion material between the foundation and the sidewalk .
num castinplace requirements securely brace rigid castinplace forms true to line and grade .
thoroughly moisten the forms and ground before placing concrete .
place the concrete for each foundation in one num operation .
after placement and before the concrete sets raise and lower each anchor bolt to properly align distribute concrete aggregate and remove air voids .
give exposed surfaces of concrete foundations a smooth and straight finish free of form marks .
num control cabinet foundations provide groundmounted flushtop type control cabinet foundations four num inches above finished grade or existing ground unless otherwise specified in the contract .
properly locate and place cabinet anchor bolts during concrete placement .
place a class a concrete base pad in front of and behind control cabinet foundations .
construct the concrete pad in accordance with the contract .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit structural concrete class a cubic yard the department will pay for traffic signal standards type ii and iii and luminaire section num foundations for signal and lighting installations page num standards foundations installations in accordance with section num drilled shafts .
the department will pay for steel reinforcement used in foundations for signal and lighting installations in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately excavation backfill compaction and additional excavation backfill and encasing of existing utilities due to utility line conflict and foundation relocation .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num rigid electrical conduit page num section num rigid electrical conduit num description this work consists of providing and installing rigid electrical conduit .
num materials num nonmetallic conduit nonmetallic conduit shall be highimpact pvc .
schedule num conduit and elbows are manufactured to nmea tcnum ul num specifications .
conduit and fittings shall comply with requirements of ul standards publication ul num and carry respective ul listings and labels .
num metallic conduit provide galvanized rigid conduit in accordance with ul num ansi cnum and federal specification wwcnume or intermediate metallic conduit imc in accordance with ul num and federal specification wwcnume .
hotdip galvanize imc .
provide watertight fittings of the same material as the conduit .
provide approved watertight expansion couplings for metallic conduit as recommended by the manufacturer and designed to compensate for linear thermal expansion of a run of metallic conduit .
num liquidtight flexible conduit provide liquidtight flexible conduit consisting of an extruded polyvinyl jacket over a flexible hotdipped galvanized core type uag ul listed and in accordance with the nec .
num construction requirements num general run electrical cable and wire in conduit except inside poles unless otherwise specified in the contract .
where wire is not installed a tracer wire must be installed for line locating .
use nonmetallic conduit for underground installations .
use metallic conduit for bridge decks and railings .
the contractor may encase conduit in concrete bases .
use metallic conduit for above ground installations .
the contractor may use larger size conduit than specified in the contract at no additional cost to the department provided the larger size is used for the entire run from outlet to outlet .
the department will not allow reducing couplings .
when using existing underground metallic conduit in a new system clean with a mandrel and blow out with compressed air .
blow out existing nonmetallic conduit with compressed air .
if the existing conduit contains excessive amounts of deleterious material flush conduit with water and blow with compressed air as directed by the project manager .
provide pull boxes at the locations specified in the contract .
num conduit routings the project manager may change conduit run routings specified in the contract to avoid section num rigid electrical conduit page num underground obstructions .
keep accurate records of any change from conduit locations specified in the contract on asbuilt drawings and submit the details to the project manager before the departments final acceptance of the project .
num excavation and backfill plan the trenching and conduit placement operation to minimize overnight open trenches and exposed conduit .
excavate trench and backfill conduit trench in accordance with section num backfill materials and section num excavation and backfill .
num conduit placement depth lay conduit at least num inches below the following num .
finished surface in street and driveway areas num .
top of curb in sidewalk areas and num .
natural ground line in unpaved areas .
if approved by the project manager the contractor may place the conduit from num inch to num inch deep in the following areas num .
unpaved median num .
open natural ground where the department plans no future development and num .
where underground utility conflicts occur at the num inch depth .
num conduit terminations terminate stub and cap conduit as required .
thread metallic conduit ends and cap with standard conduit caps until wire placement begins .
provide insulated metal ground bushings for threaded ends when caps are removed and electrically connect them in accordance with the nec .
cap nonmetallic conduit ends until wiring begins .
extend conduit terminating in poles cabinets or pedestal bases from two num inches to four num inches vertically above the bases .
terminate conduit that enters a pull box from one num inch to three num inch inside the box wall and from two num inch to three num inch above the top of gravel sump and slope it to facilitate convenient pulling of wires or cables .
to ensure pull boxes are uncluttered run conduit into the pull box bottom at the nearest wall .
allow for expansion and contraction of the conduit .
install conduit terminations with bushings to prevent wire insulation damage during installation .
num conduit bends make conduit bends except factory bends with a radius of at least six num times the inside diameter of the conduit .
ensure bending radii and the number of bends in accordance with the nec and local codes .
use factorymade bends or bend conduit without crimping or flattening using the longest radius practical .
use metallic bends for difficult or long conduit runs .
num nonmetallic conduit straight cut nonmetallic conduit square and trim ends after cutting to remove rough edges .
use solvent weld connections in accordance with the conduit manufacturers section num rigid electrical conduit page num recommendations .
if connecting nonmetallic conduit to metallic conduit use threaded couplings .
run a solid bare no .
num or larger awg copper conductor continuously in nonmetallic conduit except in conduit containing only communication cables .
install expansion couplings according to the manufacturers diagrams and instructions .
num hdpe conduit extruded over conductors if allowed by local electrical codes for lighting and service run conduit the contractor may use hdpe conduit that is continually extruded over the wire or cable specified in the contract .
prevent adhesion between the wire or cable and the conduit .
obtain approval for this method from the electrical inspecting authority and provide proof to the project manager before installation .
num bending of nonmetallic conduit bend nonmetallic conduit using one num of the following methods num .
apply an even heat not to exceed num f to a portion of the conduit wrapped in aluminum foil until attaining the desired flexibility .
minimize charring of the conduit .
num .
use of a thermobender suitable for bending nonmetallic conduit .
num installation under existing pavement install metallic conduit under existing pavement by approved jacking or boring methods .
if using drilling mud the contractor may install nonmetallic conduit by machine pulling through a directionally bored hole .
do not machine pull nonmetallic conduit through dry holes made by hole hog or other dryexpansion methods .
place jacking or boring pits at least two num ft from the edge of any type of pavement measured from the side of the pit nearest to the pavement .
only use metallic conduit if jacking conduit .
the department will not allow the excessive use of water in the installation of conduit under existing pavement .
project manager may approve relocation of conduit runs or pavement cutting where insufficient room exists for jacking or boring pits or if underground obstacles are encountered .
repair existing pavement sidewalks driveways and landscaped areas to original or better condition at no additional cost to the department .
num conduit for structures and foundations cap conduit stubbed out for future use from structures or foundations .
rustprotect metallic conduit to a minimum of six num inches inside concrete structures or foundations .
the department will not require rust protection for nonmetallic conduit .
seal conduits running to soffits walls or light fixtures below the elevation of the pull box with an approved sealing compound .
also seal light fixtures located below the elevation of the pull box .
num bridge structures use metallic conduit embedded in concrete for abutments piers or bridge decks .
securely attach conduit to the reinforcing steel by approved methods at intervals not to exceed four num ft .
section num rigid electrical conduit page num use galvanized malleable iron clamps or other approved methods to secure conduit runs on structure surfaces spaced no more than five num ft apart .
num expansion fittings install expansion fittings where conduit crosses a structure joint using tubing the same size as the conduit .
provide expansion fittings with a bonding jumper of no .
num awg flexible wire or approved equivalent .
if use of expansion fittings or flexible tubing is not feasible as determined by the project manager install the conduit in a watertight metal sleeve .
ensure a clearance between the outside of the conduit and the inside of the metal sleeve of from num inch to one num inch .
num liquidtight flexible conduit the contractor may use liquidtight flexible conduit between structure sections to accommodate movement if specified in the contract .
the contractor may use liquidtight flexible conduit within a concrete pour if approved by the project manager .
num method of measurement the department will measure rigid electrical conduit parallel to the centerline of the installed conduit .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit rigid electrical conduit ____inch dia .
foot num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately hardware for conduit installation excavation backfill boring jacking and compaction protective coatings bare no .
num awg copper conductor for nonmetallic conduit installation and cutting of pavement and replacement of surfacing .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num pull boxes and splice cabinets page num section num pull boxes and splice cabinets num description this work consists of providing and installing pull boxes and splice cabinets and constructing traffic signal manholes .
num materials num general provide electrical pull boxes num .
for use in nondeliberate traffic areas pull boxes and covers shall comply with all test provisions of ansiscte num num specification for underground enclosure integrity .
provide metal pull boxes num .
for use in bridge decks railing and other areas subject to deliberate vehicular traffic provide enclosed watertight metal pull boxes that support in place an aashto h num loading num lb single axle over a num in x num in area unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num nondeliberate traffic rated polymer concrete pull box nondeliberate traffic areas pull boxes shall be made of polymer coated concrete with fiberglass reinforcement .
the box shall have continuous fiberglass cloth reinforcement on the inside and outside perimeter .
the covers shall have a minimum of two num layers of fiberglass cloth reinforcement .
pull boxes shall comply with all test provisions of ansiscte num num specification for underground enclosure integrity .
all nondeliberate traffic pull boxes shall be tested and certified by ul numwf underwriters laboratories or a nationally recognized third party independent test lab and reverified every year to meet all test provisions of the ansiscte num num specifications for underground enclosure integrity .
num deliberate traffic rated pull boxes provide metal pull boxes in accordance with the following num .
of closedbottom type external recess flanged designed for flush mounting in concrete num .
designed for deliberate vehicular traffic aashto h num loading and num .
fabricated from cast iron with a hotdipped galvanized finish .
num general pull box cover requirements all pull box covers shall be designed for the required loadings and shall meet or exceed the rated loading of their corresponding pull box .
pull box covers shall be sealed with a neoprene gasket providing a nema num water tight enclosure .
all nondeliberate traffic pull box covers shall comply with all test provisions of ansiscte num num specification for underground enclosure integrity and shall meet tier num application .
markings showing the tier num rating shall be embossed on the top surface of the cover .
all nondeliberate traffic pull boxes shall comply with all test provisions of ansiscte num num specification for underground enclosure integrity and shall meet the tier num application .
markings showing the tier num rating shall be labeled or stenciled on the inside and outside of the box .
all nondeliberate traffic pull boxes and covers shall be made of polymer coated concrete section num pull boxes and splice cabinets page num with fiberglass reinforcement .
the box shall have continuous fiberglass cloth reinforcement on the inside and outside perimeter .
the covers must have a minimum of two num layers of fiberglass cloth reinforcement .
all deliberate traffic rated pull boxes and covers must be made from matched metal tooling to ensure product uniformity .
all covers must be secured to pull box using ½numunc s.s. penta head bolts .
fasteners must be capable of withstanding a torque of num ftlbs and a pull out strength of num lbs .
the pull out test must be performed with the cover in place and fasteners torqued to num ftlbs .
fasteners inserts and cover must not be damaged by the performance of this test .
covers must have a nonskid surface with recessed lockdown locations for penta head bolts and pry bar slots .
the nominal dimensions of the opening in which the cover sits must be the same as the cover dimensions except the length and width dimensions must be num or greater .
provide cast iron covers for concrete pull boxes where concrete pull boxes are specified in the contract .
fabricate no .
num bare copper ground clamps to attach grounds to cast iron or steel covers where used on pull boxes without grounding provisions unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num pull box cover inscriptions inscribe or emboss pull box covers with the words traffic signal or lighting as specified in the contract .
glue in logos shall not be permitted .
on deliberate traffic rated pull boxes use a bead weld or other type of permanent lettering approved by the project manager to identify the specific circuit as follows num .
lighting lighting and rest area electrical num .
ts traffic signal and num .
sc sprinkler control .
if using a bead weld on a galvanized box coat the affected area with zincrich paint .
num splice cabinet provide a nema num enclosure ul listed industrial control panel in accordance with ul num .
num concrete and reinforcing steel provide class a concrete cement air entrainment admixtures water and aggregate in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide steel reinforcement in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num drainage geotextiles provide class b drainage geotextiles in accordance with section num soil and drainage geotextiles .
num traffic signal manhole num concrete collar provide class a concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
section num pull boxes and splice cabinets page num num steel culvert pipe provide corrugated metal pipe culvert in accordance with section num pipe culverts .
dip steel culvert pipe in coal tar enamel or coat with polymeric coating approved by the project manager .
provide a three num mil thick coating in accordance with aashto m num .
num manhole covers provide traffic signal manhole covers in accordance with section num manholes .
num construction requirements num general install each pull box flush with the curb or sidewalk grade with no part of the box or attaching screws protruding above the surface .
if no grade is specified place pull boxes slightly higher than the surrounding ground to provide drainage away from the pull box .
pull boxes should not be installed within the ada ramp area .
install metal pull boxes in bridge decks and pavement flush with the pavement surface .
install electrical pull box extensions to provide additional volume as necessary or as specified in the contract .
if necessary to facilitate the work for the contractor convenience install more pull boxes than shown in the contract at no additional cost to the department .
provide each pull box with a class a concrete collar placed around the pull box separated by a num inch felt expansion joint .
if placing concrete collar in an area to receive colored concrete match the pull box concrete color with the colored concrete .
num deliberate traffic rated pull boxes make conduit entrances in metal pull boxes with a hole saw or as approved by the project manager .
num pull box sumps provide sumps in pull boxes consisting of two num inch maximum size rock fill surrounded by drainage geotextile .
with the exception of metal pull boxes installed in concrete provide an num inch deep sump below pull boxes .
if using pull box extensions with pull boxes to provide extra depth make sumps num inches deep .
excavate holes to allow a minimum six num inch clearance on the sides of the boxes and extensions .
provide rock fill around outside walls .
place class b drainage geotextile between the backfill and rock fill .
num traffic signal manhole install each traffic signal manhole so that the cover is flush with the curb or sidewalk grade and no part of the manhole protrudes above finish grade .
if the contract does not specify a grade place covers slightly higher than the surrounding ground to provide drainage away from the manhole .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment section num pull boxes and splice cabinets page num pay item pay unit electrical pull box standard each electrical pull box large each electrical pull box extension each metal pull box each splice cabinet each traffic signal manholes each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
hardware b. excavation backfill and compaction c. reinforcing steel d. concrete and e. materials for pull box and traffic signal manhole sumps .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num wiring page num section num wiring num description this work consists of providing and installing wiring for traffic signal and highway lighting systems .
num materials num general provide wire and cable in accordance with the appropriate sections of the international municipal signal associations imsa wire and cable specifications and the new mexico electrical code num nmac and that carries the ul label .
use only copper conductors of the specified trade size .
num multiconductor provide polyethylene insulated pvc or polyethylene jacketed solid wire signal cable multiconductors in accordance with imsa specification num or num .
provide special multi conductor cable for direct burial or selfsupporting applications as specified in the contract .
provide color code conductors in accordance with imsa specification num or num section num table ii for unpaired conductor cables .
provide no .
num awg size copper conductors or conductors as specified in the contract .
provide molten dyed polyethylene tracer color coextruded with the base color .
num single conductor provide moisture and heatresistant thermoplastic insulated electrical cable for single conductors rated at num v for installation in conduit and pipe .
provide no .
num awg size or smaller solid copper conductors in accordance with astm b num .
use uncoated wire unless otherwise specified .
provide no .
num awg size or larger stranded conductors in accordance with astm b num class b .
provide solid no .
num awg minimum for ground wires .
num insulation num compound provide thermoplastic high heat resistant nylon coated thhn or thermoplastic heat and water resistant nylon coated conductors in accordance with ul num .
num thickness ensure that insulation thickness is in accordance with astm d num and nec table num .
num testing provide conductors factory tested to ensure compliance with ul num .
num identification provide conductors with distinctive permanent markings on the outer surface for the entire length showing manufacturer type of insulation size of conductor and voltage rating .
provide solid color or basic colored insulation with a permanent colored stripe the entire length of the conductor .
section num wiring page num num communication cable provide a paired polyethyleneinsulated polyethylenejacket communication cable with electrical shielding rated num v in accordance with imsa specification no .
num or rural electrification administration specification penum or penum suitable for use in underground conduit .
provide a conductor of no .
num awg copper unless otherwise specified .
num ground rods provide ground rods from harddrawn highconductivity electrolytic copper fluted rods or bare round harddrawn coppercovered steel rods per nec .
num construction requirements num general install wire in accordance with the nec state and local requirements .
neatly arrange and lace wiring within cabinets pull boxes and pole bases .
the contractor may use cable pulling lubricant for inserting conductors into conduit .
install bushings on metallic conduit ends before pulling wire .
for each conductor or cable leave a minimum of four num ft of slack at each signal or lighting standard and a minimum of two num ft of slack at each pull box .
wire nut ends of spare conductors .
num identification identify the phase or function of signal cable conductors with the insulation colors specified in the contract and the following num .
black insulation for lighting circuit and signal service conductors num .
black or red insulation for two num ungrounded multiple lighting circuits and num .
white insulation for neutral and common wiring .
install identification tags at cabinet pull box and pole locations where two num or more conductors or cables for different functions have the same insulation colors .
use permanent fiber or pvc tags for tagging wires .
place the lowvoltage circuits for pedestrian push buttons in a separate multiconductor cable from numv function conductors and identify all conductors at each splice point .
num terminals secure cable wires to screwtype terminals in traffic signal heads pedestrian push buttons and traffic controllers using spades or as specified in the contract .
spade tongue type connectors shall be affixed to conductors using a pigtail connector or a tool specifically designed for connecting connectors to conductors .
num splices the contractor may use conductor splices for traffic signals only inside cabinets and transformer bases with wiring access .
do not use splices in pull boxes except in those for signals in medians .
the contractor may use conductor splices for lighting installations inside cabinets transformer bases or pull boxes .
make wiring connections at the appropriate terminals .
loop detector wire or video camera power and data cables as specified by the manufacturer .
do not splice suspended cable used on span wire installations .
section num wiring page num do not use soldered connections for splicing except for connection of loop lead in cable to loop detector wire .
weatherproof the entire splice .
wrap splices with allweather plastic electrical tape .
tape cable ends to exclude moisture while pulling cables into conduit .
keep ends taped until completing splices or attaching terminal appliances .
use communication cables for signal interconnect systems with splicing at terminals or as specified in the contract .
the department will not allow other splicing .
for signal installations use only springtype connectors for splicing num v conductors .
for lighting installations make underground splices waterproof using an nec approved method .
num springtype connector join the wire ends with an insulated springtype connector without soldering .
provide a twocomponent selfcuring epoxy resin in a doublecompartment plastic envelope .
to make the splice insulation thoroughly mix the components in the envelope and after cutting open one num end of the envelope insert the wire connection into the epoxy resin and tape the envelope shut .
provide sufficient epoxy resin to completely cover the connector and exposed bare wires at the connector .
num fused splice connector install a fused disconnect splice connector of the breakaway type at each ungrounded conductor in type iv and v standard bases between the line and load sides on multiple lighting circuits .
provide an integral unfused connection in the connector providing similar and simultaneous disconnect between the load and line sides on the neutral if a neutral is used .
the contractor may use fused splice connectors with either single or dual housings .
make connectors readily accessible from the standard base hand hole .
provide a fully selfinsulated and waterproof splice connector .
provide line and load side housings of an elastomeric material capable of meeting the impact and dielectric voltage withstand test in accordance with ul numd for an assembled connector .
integrally mold line and load side housings with cable sealing boots providing a defined series of cylindrical bores to receive and provide a waterproof seal on appropriately sized insulated conductors .
do not use tapes or other sealing compounds .
design fusedsplice connectors to disconnect at a maximum tension of num lb for each conductor attached to the load side .
ensure that the fuses or neutral pin contact is securely retained on the load side when disconnected .
provide lineside housings with a thickness of at least num num inch .
use inline type buchanan numdnum fused splice connectors or an approved equal with fuse housings for all phasephase type connections requiring one num or two num fuses .
use polarized dual connectors dnum or equivalent that provide simultaneous disconnect of both phases assuring no exposure to energized electrical contacts .
use numdnum pn connectors or an approved equal for circuit designs of the phaseneutral type connection .
provide polarized dual connectors dnumpn or equal with two num compartments .
fit one num compartment with fuse contacts and the opposite compartment with a solid neutral pin contact .
fit the neutral side with a white marker to indicate the neutral side .
rigidly crimp splice connector terminals onto line and load connectors using a tool recommended by the connector manufacturer .
insulate and waterproof terminals in accordance with the connector manufacturers recommendations .
use standard midget ferrule type fuses .
use num a fuses for num w or num w lamps .
num tap splices make tap splices in pole bases are to be as specified by the service utility provider .
section num wiring page num splice each circuit conductor in the pole base inserting the feeder conductor and the continuing run conductor into the double end boot of the connector and securing each into the respective set screw terminal .
use no .
num awg copper type thermoplastic heat and water resistant insulated wire rubberized heat and water resistant insulated wire or approved equal insulation for the tap conductor feeding the fused splice connector .
do not use thhntype insulation .
feed the tap conductor through the tap boot as specified in the manufacturers instructions and attach under the center set screw .
mark neutral conductors with white marking tape .
num bonding and grounding mechanically and electrically secure metallic cable sheaths metal conduit service equipment and metal poles and pedestals to form a continuous system .
effectively ground the system .
bond with copper wire or copper strip of at least the same cross sectional area as no .
num awg .
use solid no .
num awg at minimum for grounding jumpers .
use a bonding strip attached to the lower portion of the shaft or base to bond standards and pedestals .
for nonmetallic conduit systems run a bare copper wire of no .
num awg or larger through conduit runs pull boxes and to poles .
splice these wires at termination points and tie into neutral bars at service facilities or control cabinets .
install a ground rod electrode at each multiple service point each traffic signal standard each cabinet foundation and each luminaire foundation .
provide num inch nominal diameter ground rods .
install so that at least num ft of the ground rod length is in contact with the soil and in accordance with nec specifications .
bond service equipment to the ground rod by a no .
num awg copper wire .
where encasing portions of ground rods in concrete wrap with three num layers of pipe insulation tape num inch minimum thickness or place through a one num inch diameter pvc conduit .
where a metallic conduit system parallels or crosses a permanent water system in accessible areas install grounding jumpers at intervals not exceeding num ft .
the department will not allow grounding to a metallic water system at or near a service point in lieu of driven ground rods .
use insulated grounding bushings and bonding jumpers to bond metallic conduit in nonmetallic pull boxes .
use lock nuts to bond metallic conduit in metal pull boxes .
use one num lock nut inside and one num lock nut outside of each box when the box is not threaded .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit multiconductor cable____number foot single conductor____awg number foot communication cable____number pair foot num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. splice connectors b .
ground rods and grounding conductors c. hardware section num wiring page num d. weatherproofing and e. tape .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num signal assemblies page num section num signal assemblies num description this work consists of providing and installing traffic and pedestrian signal assemblies on signal poles and attaching base plates and directional louvers to traffic signals .
num materials num traffic signal assembly provide standard num inch lens size signal faces .
a list of approved signal assembly equipment is available on the departments approved products list .
ensure that signal assemblies meet the requirements of the latest edition of ite publication adjustable face vehicular traffic control signal heads .
provide adjustable colored light vertical or horizontal type signal assemblies with the number and type of lights faces specified in the contract .
ensure that the signal assemblies adjust num about a vertical axis .
fabricate signal assemblies housings and doors of either aluminum or polycarbonate resin material .
if using polycarbonate resin material ensure its capability to withstand an impact of num lb per foot without fracture or permanent deformation .
design signal assemblies to accept mounted back plates .
num optical units ensure that an optical unit consists of a lens a reflector and a lamp holder with lamp in accordance with ite standards and ansi d num .
provide circular lenses with visible diameters of num inch that produce an outward and downward light distribution with a minimum of light distributed above the horizontal .
provide true color lenses as specified in the contract of best quality glass or polycarbonate resin material free from imperfections and of highillumination transmission .
provide onepiece alzak aluminum reflectors .
provide an opening in the back of each reflector for the lamp holder designed to eliminate dark spots cast on the lens .
ensure that reflectors lenses and hoods reduce sun phantom to a minimum .
provide heatresistant molded phenolic housings for lamp holders designed for a numw standard anum traffic signal lamp .
ensure that the holder allows lamp positioning at the exact focal point of the reflector and proper lamp filament orientation without affecting lamp focus .
num housing signal housing consists of an assembly of separate sections without tie rods substantially secured in a watertight manner to form the number of units required .
each section houses an individual optical unit .
provide a onepiece housing for each section made of a polycarbonate resin material with sides top and bottom integrally molded .
ensure ribbed polycarbonate housings have at least a minimum thickness of num inch .
ensure that the housing passes the ite windload testing .
include a onepiece hinged door in each section with mounting for the lens and other parts of the optical system watertight gaskets and a simple corrosionresistance doorlocking device .
mount the optical system so that its parts are readily accessible or removable .
provide interchangeable sections constructed for easy removal or addition .
provide a round opening in the top and bottom of each head for a num num inch supporting pipe frame .
section num signal assemblies page num hinge each door and secure to the body of the housing with two num stainless steel hinge pins eyebolt washer and wing nut .
use corrosionresistance screws and fasteners where exposed to the elements .
make interior screws and fasteners from zincplated brass .
integrally cast or mold a locking boss with num teeth into the signal housing at both openings .
make the angle of the teeth num and the depth of the teeth num inch .
ensure that the locking boss provides positive positioning of the entire signal head to eliminate rotation or misalignment .
hold the reflector and lamp holder in place by an aluminum reflector ring pivoting independently of the door allowing lamp replacement without the use of tools .
seal the inside of the lens and reflector from dust and moisture with weatherresistant neoprene gaskets .
mount a terminal block in the back of the middle section of the signal assembly .
at a minimum provide a fourposition eightterminal barriertype strip terminal block for signal assemblies .
attach the signal section leads to the left of each terminal block and leave the opposite terminals for the field wires .
provide two num coded leads with nema quickdisconnect tabs for wiring from each lamp holder .
connect a white wire to the shell of the lamp holder and a black or colored wire to the bottom or end terminal of the lamp holder .
for identification colorcode leads with the appropriate red yellow or green yellow or green tracer for arrow indications .
if using black wires permanently mark the terminals to identify the leads where they attach .
provide no .
num awg size type tff leads .
num visors provide each signal section with a num inch nominal length tunnel visor of numhnum corrosionresistant aluminum alloy sheet a minimum of num inch thick in accordance with astm b num .
encircle the lens with tunnel visors for num with a four num inch open slot on the bottom .
provide the visor with four num twiston attaching ears for installation to the signal door by four num corrosionresistant screws .
provide the vertical outer face of the door with four num threaded holes equally spaced around the circumference of the lens opening and num from the horizontal or vertical axis to allow vertical or horizontal installation of the signal assembly .
num framework and mounting brackets provide mounting brackets consisting of assemblies of num num inch nominal size standard steel pipe and malleable iron ductile iron or brass pipe fittings .
securely assemble members to provide plumb or level support .
conceal conductors within framework poles and signal assemblies .
provide cable guides that support and protect conductors that enter assemblies from poles .
coat threads with grease during field assembly .
num finish when making the signal assembly of aluminum completely impregnate the inside and outside surfaces of the signal housing and door with the resin material .
do not allow scratches that expose uncolored material .
when making the signal assembly of polycarbonate resin material completely impregnate the required color into the resin material .
do not allow scratches that expose uncolored material .
finish the visor and the outside surfaces of framework and mounting brackets with two num coats of bestquality infrared ovenbaked paint as follows num .
signal housing and door inside and out num .
signal housingfederal yellow num .
signal doorflat black section num signal assemblies page num num .
visor inside and out num .
first coatbaked epon primer zinc chromate or equal num .
second coatflat black urea baked enamel having zero glass reflectance .
minimum dry film thickness of num inch .
num .
use special finishes for special applications and as specified in the contract .
num geometrically programmed louver num general provide a louver with the following features num .
fit all manufacturers num inch signal visors num .
retrofit into existing num inch signal visors num .
provide a full round ball display with minimum slat effect throughout the selected view range num .
provide an absolute exact visual cutoff num .
allow the view angle within each signal section to be adjusted to a designated area num .
have a minimum glow outside the view range num .
allow for controlling either the horizontal or vertical view range within the signal visor num .
lightweight not to exceed num lbs num .
maintenance free .
num housing the housing design shall allow the baffle positions to be changed in order to adjust the view angle .
num baffles num .
provide baffles identical in design and interchangeable within the housing .
num .
the plane of each baffle shall be num to the centerline axis in the housing .
num attaching hardware provide num black selfthreading screws with each louver assembly for attaching the louver to the signal section .
num installation kit provide an installation kit suitable to be utilized as an aid in installing the louver assembly .
num traffic signal assembly led num optical units design light emitting diode signal modules that do not require special tools for installation as retrofit replacements for optical units of standard traffic signal sections .
light emitting diode signal modules must fit into the existing traffic signal section housings built in accordance with the requirements in the ite publication stnumb vehicle traffic control signal heads vtcsh without modification .
removal of material in the traffic signal section excluding the optical unit components lens gaskets lamp lamp socket and reflector are not required during the installation of light emitting diode signal modules .
install light emitting diode signal modules to fit securely in the doorframe and be weather tight .
section num signal assemblies page num use terminal block connections in the signal face or utilize an adapter that screws into the medium base lamp socket .
splices will not be allowed .
integrate the lens of the light emitting diode signal module with the unit .
fabricate the convex lens with a smooth outer surface from ultraviolet stabilized plastic or glass .
the lens is required a minimum exposure of num months to direct sunlight ultraviolet without deterioration .
if a polymeric lens is used use a surface coating or chemical surface treatment to provide front surface abrasion resistance .
the operating temperatures range for light emitting diode signal modules are from num f to num f. protect light emitting diode signal modules against dust and moisture intrusion in accordance with the requirements in nema standard num for type num enclosures .
use a single selfcontained light emitting diode signal module not requiring onsite assembly for installation into existing traffic signal housing .
integrate the power supply for the light emitting diode signal module into the unit .
manufacture the light emitting diode signal module assembly to withstand mechanical shock and vibration .
conform the minimum initial luminous intensity values for light emitting diode signal modules to the requirements in section num of the vtcsh at num f. provide light emitting diode signal modules that after num months of continuous use over the temperature ranging from num f to num f are at least num percent of the standard light output values specified in the vtcsh .
ensure that the measured chromaticity coordinates of light emitting diode signal modules are in accordance with section num and figure num of the vtcsh over the temperature ranging from num f to num f. take luminous intensity measurements over the temperature ranging from num f to num f. measure color requirements while operating throughout the temperature ranging from num f to num f. operate light emitting diode signal modules over a voltage range from num v ac num v to num v num v ac num v to num v num v dc num v to num v at a frequency of num hz num hz .
prevent perceptible flicker over the specified voltage range using the light emitting diode circuitry .
voltage fluctuations shall have no visible effect on the luminous intensity of the indications .
use wiring and terminal blocks conforming to the requirements in section num of the vtcsh .
provide two num secured color coded jacketed wires num v num awg minimum in accordance with the nec rated for service at least num f for electrical connection for each light emitting diode signal module .
include voltage surge protection to withstand highrepetition noise transients in accordance with section num of nema standard tsnum for the light emitting diode signal module onboard circuitry .
ensure that light emitting diode signal modules are operationally compatible with currently used controller assemblies solid state load switches flashers and conflict monitors .
provide and install light emitting diode signal modules and associated onboard circuitry in section num signal assemblies page num accordance with federal communications commission fcc regulations concerning the emission of electronic noise num c.f.r .
num et seq ..
provide a power factor of at least num while operating light emitting diode signal modules throughout the temperature ranging from num f to num f. ensure that light emitting diode signal modules are compatible with the controller unit conflict monitor and load switch .
num pedestrian signal provide oneway pedestrian signals in weatherproof vandalresistant dusttight housings designed to display the alternating symbol messages hand in portland orange or walking person in lunar white .
provide incandescent assemblies as specified in the contract .
num screens visors provide each signal with one num of the following types of screens visors num .
zcratetype screen consisting of a minimum of num straight horizontal louvers and num horizontal louvers formed in a zigzag pattern .
reverse every other formed louver to form cells one num inch num rotated num from the horizontal diamondshaped cells .
bisect each diamond by insertion of a straight louver interspersed between each pair of formed zigzag louvers .
where each apex of each formed louver contacts a straight louver chemically weld the entire length of the joint provide num inch nominal thick black polycarbonate plastic with a flat finish on both sides .
enclose the screen in a num inch minimum thickness polycarbonate plastic frame num num inch deep containing mounting holes for insertion in the doorframe num .
eggcratetype screen num inch minimum thickness aluminum made of num inch nominal thickness polycarbonate and num num inch deep .
mount the assembly on a polycarbonate frame of num inch minimum thickness provide spacing between horizontal members of num inch beginning near the top of the symbol supported by a minimum of num vertical members .
num finish finish the inside and outside surfaces of the housing and doors and the outside surfaces of the mounting brackets in accordance with section num finish or as specified in the contract .
use screws with a flat black finish .
num fasteners use aisi type num stainless steel screws and fasteners where exposed to the elements .
use interior screws of corrosionresistance material or material protected by cadmium plating .
num pedestrian signal incandescent provide an incandescent signal having the same appearance as an led pedestrian signal .
provide an optical system consisting of a twosection message lens double parabolic reflector lamps and lamp sockets and a sunscreen .
locate the lens at least num num inch from the closest extremity of the lamp .
provide ansi a num traffic signal lamps num w. provide num inch minimum thickness polycarbonate plastic lens material with pattern texture on the outside or num inch minimum thickness .
paint the symbol areas of the inside faces of each message section with an appropriate transparent color to produce a portland orange hand symbol and a lunar white walking person symbol when illuminated .
paint other areas black .
section num signal assemblies page num use a neoprene gasket to seal the perimeter when the reflector lens door frame and case are properly mated .
center and prefocus each molded heatresistant lamp socket in its respective section of the reflector .
prewire the sockets to a threeterminal pair screwtype terminal block provided in the housing .
form a singlepiece double parabolic reflector from num inch minimum thickness polycarbonate plastic sheet .
vacuum deposit an aluminum coating on the lamp side for texture and reflectability and protect with a hard wearresistant coating .
divide the two num sections with a fulldepth aluminum divider that properly mates with the message lens .
vent both sections with proper vent holes .
num pedestrian signal led design light emitting diode pedestrian signal modules that do not require special tools for installation as retrofit replacements for optical units of standard pedestrian signal sections .
light emitting diode signal modules must fit into the existing pedestrian signal section housings built in accordance with the requirements in the vtcsh without modification .
the led signal module consists of a double sidebyside message combining the symbols of a hand and walking person .
arrange the leds in a manner to form an outline of the symbols .
the shape of the outline must conform to the standard symbols for pedestrian signals .
ensure that the measured chromaticity coordinates for the lunar white walking person and the portland orange hand are in accordance with section num and figure num of the vtcsh .
ensure that the chromaticity measurements remain unchanged over the input line voltage range from num v ac num v to num v num v ac num v to num v num v dc num v to num v. distribute the leds evenly along the message outline .
do not vary the distance between each led more than ten percent num .
ensure that the hand or walking man symbols are at least hw ten num inch num inch .
interconnect the individual led light sources to minimize the loss of no more than num leds or num percent of the signal light output when a catastrophic failure of single led occurs .
the display face consists solely of leds mounted on a black printed circuit board mat .
provide an led signal module that is rated for use in operating temperature ranging from num f to num f. completely seal the led module against dust and moisture intrusion in accordance with nema standard num section num and section num for type num enclosures .
use a single selfcontained led signal module device not requiring onsite assembly for installation into existing traffic signal housing .
manufacture the led signal module assembly to withstand mechanical shock and vibration from high winds and other sources .
do not exceed the maximum rating for dc current recommended by the led manufacturer used by the driver board to drive the leds .
use the driver board to regulate the led drive current on both the hand and walking man messages to compensate for line voltage fluctuations over the range of num v ac num v to num v num v ac num v to num v. ensure that the luminous output does not vary more than ten percent num over the voltage range and that it is not perceptible to the human eye .
use drive circuitry that includes voltage surge protection to withstand highrepetition noise transients and lowrepetition highenergy transients in accordance with section num nema standards tsnum num .
provide onboard circuitry in accordance with fcc regulations concerning the emission of electronic noise num c.f.r .
num et seq ..
ensure compatibility in the circuitry proper triggering and operation of the load switches and conflict monitors in signal controllers currently in use by the procuring traffic authority .
design the led signal modules to reduce the intensity of light output in response to section num signal assemblies page num diminished ambient light levels .
ensure that the dimming circuit has a num s delay to prevent interference .
provide a switch or jumper connector to allow the user to disable the dimming feature .
num back plates provide back plates as follows num .
for signal faces with vehicular signal indications if specified in the contract num .
of onepiece polycarbonate num .
of a size that provides a five num inch border around the perimeter of the signal and num .
louvered .
num directional louvers submit actual louver angles to the traffic services engineer for approval before ordering .
num traffic signal lamps provide clear ansi a num horizontal with medium base num h minimum rated life traffic incandescent signal lamps for signal assemblies .
use num w num average minimum initial lumens lamps for num inch signal assemblies .
provide incandescent pedestrian signals with num w num average minimum initial lumens lamps .
design each lamp socket and lamp to position the lamp filament accurately within the reflector .
light center length num w num num inch num w num inch .
num pedestrian sound unit install a sound unit for blind persons on walk and dont walk pedestrian signal assemblies if specified in the contract .
num material provide a pedestrian sound unit consisting of a weatherproof audio signal device operating continuously during the protected walk interval of the corresponding visual pedestrian signal .
obtain the operating voltage num v ac for the pedestrian sound unit directly from the walk terminal in the visual pedestrian signal .
ensure that the output volume of the pedestrian sound unit automatically adjusts to the ambient noise level in the intersection .
provide a programmable unit set to produce a peeppeep electronic bird chirping for eastwest crosswalks and a cuckoo electronic bird chirping for northsouth crosswalks .
face the pedestrian sound unit toward the crosswalk and attach to the visual pedestrian signal in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
provide pedestrian sound units in accordance with the americans with disabilities act of num ada num u.s.c.s .
num et seq .. num construction requirements cover vehicular signal assembly faces after installation until the controller and intersection signals are put into operation .
ensure that the covering does not permit any misunderstanding by the general public that the signal is in operation .
make signal faces plumb and adjust them to proper direction .
make faces and frameworks plumb and level symmetrically arranged and secure after alignment .
mount overhead mast armmounted traffic signal assemblies horizontally unless the contract specifies mounting an overhead signal assembly vertically to a mast arm or span wire .
section num signal assemblies page num install back plates and directional louvers on signal assemblies in accordance with the recommendation of the manufacturer .
num installations and training install led signal assemblies per the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure all materials are new .
num warranties and maintenance num .
obtain and assign to the department all manufacturers and producers guarantees or warranties for items and materials incorporated into the work .
if the manufacturers or producers guarantee is absent a guarantee from the contractor is necessary for six num months after acceptance by the department .
include the following in this guarantee num mechanical and electrical equipment and material incorporated into the work are free from any defects or imperfections num repair of any malfunction or defect in any such equipment or material which develops is at no additional cost to the department num .
supply installation guides and user manuals to the department for the equipment incorporated in the project num .
provide the department with a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer in accordance with the requirements in these specifications .
include a copy of applicable test reports on the light emitting diode signal and pedestrian modules in the certificate .
num method of measurement the department will measure signal assemblies signal assemblies led pedestrian signals led pedestrian countdown signals led back plates directional louvers and pedestrian sound units by the number of sections required and by type specified if applicable .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit ____number section traffic signal assembly each ____number section optically programmed signal assembly each pedestrian signal neon each pedestrian signal incandescent each ____number section back plate each directional louver each pedestrian sound unit each ____number section traffic signal assembly led each pedestrian signal led each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately all materials required for a complete installation including hardware and lamps .
section num detectors page num section num detectors num description num vehicle detection system this work shall consist of furnishing and installing a vehicle detection system that detects vehicles on a roadway via processing of images andor objects and provides detector outputs to a traffic controller .
num emergency vehicle optical detector system this work consists of providing and installing an emergency vehicle optical detector evod system at signalized intersections using optical communication to identify the presence of priority vehicles and instruct the traffic signal controller to find and hold a desired traffic signal display .
num vehicle and pedestrian detectors this work consists of providing and installing vehicle detectors in roadways and pedestrian push buttons on signal standards .
contact the state traffic services engineer for a list of approved equipment and manufacturers .
num materials num video vehicle detection system provide a system with the following performance requirements num .
complete intersection detection num .
automatic incident detection num .
freeway detectionmanagement num .
freeway ramp control num .
vehicle countingclassification num .
collection of traffic statistics num .
turning movement analysis num .
wrongway detection num .
enforcement num .
queue length analysis and num .
critical incidents in real time for traffic management .
provide a system with the following equipment installation and support requirements num .
a video processor vp including the following num .
all necessary cables num .
harnesses num .
materials num .
fittings num .
field programming unit fpu as specified in the contract num .
all field assistance during installation if specified in the contract num .
software num .
training during installation num .
followup training num .
technical support after installation and section num detectors page num num .
any miscellaneous components detailed in the contract necessary to provide a complete and operating video detection system at signalized intersections .
num .
zoom lens closed circuit television cctv cameras at each intersection as specified in the contract with focal length and zoom determined by the manufacturer to optimize performance num .
zoom lens camera ptz for motorized pan and tilt operation with mounting assembly at each intersection with ptz control receiver and driver when called for in the contract num .
video hardware system as specified by the manufacturer consisting of components necessary to maintain the quality of video signal num .
video power cable compatible with the system num .
video coax cable compatible with the system .
num video processor provide a vp system that detects vehicles in multiple traffic lanes using a minimum of num userdefinable detection zones .
provide a system with interactive graphics that allows a user to define or redefine detection zones .
ensure the vp calculates traffic parameters in real time and provides local nonvolatile data storage for later downloading and analysis .
provide a vp system that is capable of simultaneously processing information from a minimum of four num synchronous video sources including cctv video cameras and video players .
the video sources may be synchronized or line locked .
ensure the system digitizes and analyzes the video at a rate of num times per second .
provide a vp system that detects the presence of vehicles in a minimum of num detection zones within the combined field of view of the cameras .
provide a system that allows selection of different detector types and detector logical functions using software .
detector types include the following num .
counting num .
presence num .
directional presence num .
speed capable of reporting vehicle classification based on length with software that allows a user to define three num length categories num .
station and num .
input .
provide a vp system that a user can disconnect after set up using the fpu .
ensure the vp is capable of the following num .
detecting vehicles as a standalone unit num .
calculating traffic parameters in realtime and num .
storing traffic parameters in its nonvolatile memory .
provide a system with userselectable time intervals or time slices of num s num s num s num min num min num min num min num min or num min .
provide a flash memory within the vp to retain time interval data for later uploading to the fpu for analysis .
provide a system that allows retrieval of data stored in the nonvolatile memory of the vp via a serial communications port or ethernet port .
make provision for downloading data via a modem and dialup telephone lines dsl ethernet private cable or fiber optic network and direct cable connection to another computer .
include the capability to capture a video image snapshot from a selected image sensor input and transmit the image to the fpu for display in the vp .
ensure the system can section num detectors page num compress the captured video image to minimize the time needed to transmit the image .
num detection zone placement provide a video detection system that allows flexible detection zone placement anywhere and at any orientation within the combined field of view of the cameras .
lines placed across lanes of traffic or lines placed inline with lanes of traffic when preferred or recommended by the manufacturer .
provide a system where a single detector line can replace multiple conventional detector loops connected in series .
ensure that the system allows overlapping of detection zones capable of implementing logical functions including and or nand n or m and delayextend timing .
num detection zone programming locate and place the detection zone with a fpu capable of showing images of the detection zones superimposed on the video image of traffic .
provide a system that changes the color or intensity of the detection zone on the monitor when a vehicle is detected verifying proper operation of the detection system .
the system may use color changes to indicate detection delay and extension timing .
num optimal detection the video detection system shall reliably detect vehicle presence when the camera is mounted num feet or higher above the roadway or as recommended by the manufacturer and the length of the detection area or field of view is not greater than num times the mounting height of the camera .
the department will not require the camera to be mounted directly over the roadway as specified by the traffic services engineer .
provide a system that allows a single camera placed at the proper mounting location with the proper lens to monitor from six num to eight num traffic lanes simultaneously .
provide a video detection system with an overall performance comparable to inductive loops .
ensure that the system detects vehicle presence with num accuracy under normal conditions day and night and num accuracy under adverse conditions fog rain snow etc .
using standard camera optics and in the absence of occlusion .
num vp mounting the vp shall be shelf or rackmountable and be able to fit in a conventional traffic signal controller cabinet .
num vp environment the vp shall num .
operate reliably in the adverse environment found in the typical roadside traffic signal controller cabinet num .
meet the environmental requirements of nema tsnum and nema tsnum and num .
withstand operating temperature of from num f to num f at num to num relative humidity noncondensing .
num vp electrical provide a vp modular in design with current micro processing technology .
use gold plated din connectors for the bus connections used to interconnect the modules of the vp .
provide a power supply for the vp that provides and automatically adapts to the following input power levels section num detectors page num from num v tonum v ac num hz single phase .
allow for surge ratings in accordance with nema tsnum and nema tsnum .
provide controller state information for detection and extenddelay timing functions with nema redgreen inputs for up to num phases .
provide an approved connector on the front of the vp for the inputs .
equip the vp with national transmission standards committee ntsc color composite video inputs so signals from four num cameras or other synchronous or non synchronous video sources process in realtime .
do not process the video from this auxiliary video input for detection .
use an approved connector on the front of the vp for all video inputs .
num field programming unit system when called for in the contract provide a field programming unit having communication capabilities as specified in the plans as needed for setup and viewing of vehicle detections .
the equipment manufactures shall contact the departments traffic signal design engineer for approval prior to bidding .
this unit shall be considered incidental to video vehicle detection system .
the field programming unit shall be capable of driving an external current industry standard monitor shall be capable of both battery and ac operation and shall include required batteries chargers protective carrying case and system software .
num closed circuit television cctv cameras provide a video detection system that uses mediumresolution closed circuit detection ccd cameras as the video source for realtime vehicle detection as required by manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that each camera meets the following minimum requirements num .
uses medium resolution from ¼ inch to ½ inch color cameras with a minimum of num lines of resolution and an autoiris motorized zoom lens selected uniquely for each site to optimize performance num .
uses ntsc or ccirvideo signals num .
each camera shall be house as a minimum in nema num waterresistant dustproof andor gas filled enclosure num .
uses a single industry specificationconnector for interconnection to video and power cables .
provide optional video and power cable configurations if requested num .
securely mounted to minimize sway and motion in the field using a bracket or pedestal mount andor pan and tilt unit and with a fieldadjustable zoom to provide optimal field of view num .
equipped with a video surge protection device a ground wire and an inline junction of the coaxial cable .
fasten this device securely and wrap in watertight material num .
field video cables terminate in the traffic signal controller cabinet on each vp camera interface panel .
ensure that the panel provides lighting protection innovative technology inc. or approved equal and terminating junctions between the field and each vp .
provide terminal strips lighting protection and a ground buss for power cables from the cabinet to the cameras num .
equipped with a weatherproof lockable steel junction box for installation on the structure used for camera mounting per the contract .
ensure the junction box contains a terminal block for terminating power to the camera connection points for coaxial cables from the camera and from each vp and a ground fault interrupt outlet num .
when the connection between the camera and each vp is coaxial cable the coaxial cable used shall be a low loss num ohm precision video cable suited for outdoor installation such as belden num or west penn pnum as specified .
section num detectors page num num video hardware system auxiliary equipment provide a digital numframespersecond fullmotion video driverequalizer video hardware system that allows sending and receiving of standard baseband video signals of from num hz to num mhz over twisted pair copper wire or coaxial cables .
provide a broadcastquality color television picture in accordance with ntsc standards highresolution picture up to num scanning lines at num hz .
provide a video hardware system consisting of video drivers video equalizer amplifiers video equalizer amplifierdrivers and multiplexers to maintain the quality of the video signal for extended distances .
the type and size of wire used determines if the system requires one num or more video equalizer amplifierdrivers .
install power service as specified in the contract .
provide watertight enclosures for outdoor use .
ensure that a manufacturers representative for the video hardware system is onsite to assist in the installation and to meet with department staff for a oneday training session to explain the installation operation and maintenance of the video hardware system .
num radar presence detector rpd the radar presence detector rpd is an fmcw frequency modulated continuous wave radar device that provides accurate vehicle detection at the stop bar and has the following features num .
reports realtime presence of both moving and stopped vehicles num .
operating frequency of num num ghz kband .
kband provides the widest allowable bandwidth .
this larger bandwidth provides a higher resolution signature with greater accuracy num .
real time presence data in num lanes num .
the availability of num zones and num channels with user selectable zone to channel mapping zones can be linked together using or and and logic num .
failsafe mode to put the intersection into recall in communication to the rpd is lost and num .
no cleaning or adjustment necessary to maintain performance .
num mounting and positioning num .
each rpd sensor shall be mounted on the backside of the opposing approaches mastarm unless a special circumstance exists that prevents this mounting placement .
num .
each rpd sensor will be mounted at a height of num ft num ft .
the mounting height will be no more than num ft and no less than num ft. num .
each rpd sensor shall be capable of being mounted at a minimum of a num ft offset from the nearest lane of interest .
num .
each rpd sensor shall be aligned so that the area of detection begins five num ft. downstream of the stopbar and continues upstream for num ft. num .
each rpd sensor will be mounted on a six num inch two numaxis heavy duty sensor mount that will be attached to the mastarm by at least two num bandit straps .
num .
a num awg stranded wire will be tapped to the pole and connected to the rpds grounding lug .
num connections and cabling num .
a cable with a brass milspec connector will be connected to the sensor and run down the pole into a junction box mounted to the backside of the signal pole or section num detectors page num located per signal lab direction .
num .
silicon dielectric compound will be applied to the connection point between the sensor and the connector on the cable .
num .
bulk cable will be terminated into the supplied junction box .
the junction box will be located in the mast arm through the hand hole on the mast arm upright or outside the pole at a minimum of num .
the bulk cable will be run from the junction box in the mast arm pole thru conduit to the traffic signal cabinet .
num .
bulk cable will be terminated into terminal blocks on a preassembled back plate located in the traffic signal cabinet .
num traffic cabinet components num .
each rpd system will have a preassembled backplate installed into the traffic cabinet which will include acdc power conversion surge protection terminal blocks for cable landing and communication connection points .
num .
the rpd shall use contact closure input file cards with num or num channel capabilities .
the contact closure input file cards for the rpd shall be compatible with industry standard detector racks .
num number of rpds per intersection num .
there shall be one num rpd for each approach of the intersection requiring stopbar detection .
num electrical num .
the rpd shall consume less than numw .
num .
the rpd shall operate with a dc input between num vdc and num vdc .
num .
the rpd shall have onboard surge protection .
num communication ports num .
the rpd shall have two num communication ports and both ports shall communicate independently and simultaneously .
num .
the two num communication ports will allow remote communications without interrupting the operation of the rpd and its interface to the contact closure cards and traffic signal controller .
num configuration num .
the rpd shall have a method for automatically defining traffic lanes stop bars and zones without requiring user intervention .
this autoconfiguration process shall execute on a processor internal to the rpd and shall not require an external pc or other processor .
num .
the autoconfiguration method shall not prohibit the ability of the user to manually adjust the rpd configuration .
num .
the rpd shall support the configuring of lanes stop bars and detection zones in one num ft numm increments .
num .
the rpd shall include graphical user interface software that displays all configured lanes and the current traffic pattern using a graphical traffic representation .
num evod system provide a system that uses optical communication to identify the presence of designated priority vehicles and causes the traffic signal controller to advance or hold a desired traffic signal display selected from normally available phases .
provide an evod system with a matched set of components that identify the presence of section num detectors page num signal from priority emergency vehicles and instruct the traffic signal controller to find and hold a desired traffic signal display .
ensure that this communication is effective to the optical detectors at or near the intersection over a lineofsight path of at least num ft .
provide an evod system that operates on a firstcome firstserved basis or on a selected priority basis and is designed to yield to other priority demands such as railroad crossings .
interface the evod system with existing traffic signal controllers without compromising normal operation or existing safety provisions .
provide an evod system that consists of an optical emitter optical detectors optical detector cable and phase selectors .
ensure desired performance of the evod system by providing matched system components proven through integrated testing and extensive functional experience .
provide matched system components that offer compatibility with all types of traffic signal controllers for example electromechanical or solidstate and provide future system compatibility of priority control elements .
num evod optical emitter assembly evod optical emitters shall be a lightweight weather resistant user addressable light emitting device with internal regulated power supply .
ensure that the optical emitter assembly produces precisely timed crystalcontrolled optical energy pulses of highintensity light from a single source at a rate of from num hz or num hz depending on the emitter control switch used .
num evod optical detector provide lightweight weatherproof adjustable single or dualdirectional evod optical detector assemblies .
provide internal circuitry that transforms optical energy from the optical emitter assembly into electrical signals for delivery to the phase selection equipment through optical detector cable up to num ft .
it shall be programmable to detect addressable emitter .
provide a highimpact polycarbonate unit constructed with noncorrosive hardware designed for simple mounting at or near an intersection on mast arm pedestal pipe or span wire and operating over an air temperature range of from num f to num f. ensure the unit is responsive to the optical emitter at a distance of at least num ft and is capable of providing the necessary electrical signal to the phase selector through up to num ft of optical detector cable .
num evod optical detector cable provide durable evod optical detector cable with the necessary electrical characteristics to carry power to the optical detector from the phase selector and to carry the optical detector signal to the phase selector .
provide three num conductors awg num num x num stranded and an individually tinned drain wire cable to provide signal integrity and transient protection .
use copper cable conductors shielded with aluminized polyester .
overlap the shield wrapping num to ensure shield integrity following conduit and mast arm pulls .
ensure the cable delivers the necessary quality signal from the optical detector to the phase selector over a nonspliced distance of num ft and sufficient power to the optical detector over a nonspliced distance of num ft .
provide cable with an insulation rating of at least num v and a temperature rating of at least num f. provide colorcoded cables as follows num .
orange for delivery of optical detector power section num detectors page num num .
blue for optical detector power return or optical detector signal num .
yellow for optical detector signal num .
bare for optical detector power return .
num evod phase selector assembly interface the evod phase selection assembly between the optical detectors and the controller unit .
do not compromise the existing controller units failsafe provision and provide sufficient power for up to three num optical detectors per channel .
ensure the assembly provides suitable sensitivity to the optical detector signal via adjustable range settings .
provide a plugin two num or fourchannel dualpriority assembly device intended for installation directly into the input file of control cabinets equipped with priorityphase selection software .
power the assembly from ac mains and ensure the assembly contains an internal regulated power supply to power optical detectors .
ensure the assembly is capable of recognizing the following pulse rates as delivered by the optical detectors num .
num hz num hz as frequency i .
num .
num hz num hz as frequency ii .
provide an assembly that delivers signals to the controller to cause selection of the desired phase green display for the approaching vehicle .
provide a test switch for each channel to deliver frequency i or frequency ii signal pulse rates to verify proper function at both optical emitter flash rates firstcome firstserved operation and frequency ii override capability .
provide a selectable call dropout time of num s or num s num to num .
provide a modular microprocessor controlled twochannel fourphase highpriority phase selector expandable to a fourchannel eightphase dualring controller .
ensure the phase selector continuously monitors all green walk and pedestrian clearance displays for a smooth transition from controller to phase selector interval timing .
num evod reliability ensure that equipment supplied as part of the optical priority remote traffic control system intended for use in the controller cabinet meets the electrical and environmental specifications of the nema standards .
ensure that all equipment supplied as part of the priority control system intended for use in or on emergency vehicles operates properly in air temperatures of from num f to num f in air with relative humidity of from num to num and a vehicle battery voltage of from num v to num v. num loop vehicle detector provide a selfcontained electronic sensing loop vehicle detector that registers the presence of a vehicle by recognizing inductance change in a loop of wire embedded in a roadway .
rackmount the detector in a traffic signal controller cabinet .
provide twochannel type detectors with independent channel controls .
if specified in the contract include a delayextension time function andor count function for each channel .
provide all loop vehicle detectors in accordance with nema tsnum part num nema tsnum section num detectors page num inductive loop detectors .
num loop detector wire use no .
num awg stranded copper wire crosslinked polyethylene xhhw insulation conforming to requirements of imsa specification no .
num for loop detector wire installations in pavement saw cuts .
num loop leadin cable connect the loop installed in the pavement to the loop detector unit installed in controller cabinet with no .
num awg copper polyethylene insulated twisted pairs shielded and enclosed within a polyethylenejacket leadin cable .
provide loop leadin cable in accordance with imsa specification no .
num .
num loop detector sealant use loop sealant as filler for loop saw cuts and to secure and protect the loop wire .
provide sealant of sufficient strength and hardness to withstand stress and abrasion from vehicular traffic while remaining flexible enough to provide stress relief under thermal movement .
the following are additional sealant properties num .
ability to bond to concrete and asphalt num .
rapid cure rate allowing pavement opening to traffic ½ h after installation num .
initial fluidity permitting installation in a narrow saw cut down to at least num f num .
moisture insensitivity allowing application to damp pavement effectively and num .
resistance to vehicular fluids and road salt .
provide only onepart sealant material for this application unless listed on the departments qualifiedapproved products list .
num ducted loop wire use ducted loop wire loosely encased in ¼ in outside diameter polyvinyl chloride pvc or polyethylene tube for insulation in pavement saw cuts or by directly overlaying with paving material .
provide ducted loop wire in accordance with imsa specification no .
num or use insulated pvc with a nylon jacket thhn or polyethylene xhhw for the interior no .
num awg stranded conductor .
num hottype applied loop detector sealant use a hotmelt rubberized asphalt compound sealant provided in bricks formulated specifically to be stiff nontracking flexible at low pavement temperatures and suited for use as a sealant for traffic loop cuts or as specified by the user agency .
provide thin freeflowing fluid sealant that pours easily penetrates fine cuts selflevels and allows easy application at application temperatures .
melt sealant and apply to pavements in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations using either pressurefeed melter applicator units or pour pots .
ensure that hotapplied sealants meet or exceed the property requirements in table num hotapplied loop sealant property requirements after curing .
table num hotapplied loop sealant property requirements test procedure specification penetration num f num oz .
num s astm d num num maximum section num detectors page num table num hotapplied loop sealant property requirements test procedure specification softening point astm d num num f minimum ductility num f astm d num num inch minimum mandrel bend num f nums num in diameter pass pour temperature num f minimum safe heating temperature num fnum f num coldapplied loop detector sealant apply sealant by conventional cartridge gun or bulk handling pump equipment .
ensure that the uncured wet material has a viscosity of approximately num cp at num f using a brookfield viscometer num spindle at num rpm and nonvolatile content solids of from num to num by weight .
provide material that cures at a rate such that it is dry to the touch within num h while being driven on almost immediately after installation .
provide nonshrink sealant that remains flexible at temperatures greater than or equal to num f. ensure that cold applied sealants meet or exceed the property requirements list in table num cold applied loop sealant property requirements after curing .
table num coldapplied loop sealant property requirements test procedure specification hardness astm d num num tensile strength astm d num num psi minimum elongation astm d num num minimum adhesion peel strength canvas to conc .
astm d num num lb minimum arc resistance astm d num num s minimum dielectric strength num hz astm d num num minimum num design provide loop detectors that use digital design throughout for threshold time and cycle calculations .
the contractor may use the following techniques to determine a change in inductance num .
period measurement num .
time elapsed per cycle num .
frequency measurement or num .
cycles counted in a set time interval .
ensure isolation of the channels with twochannel construction to eliminate cross talk between adjacent loops .
provide period measurement detectors using alternate scanning to accomplish this isolation .
provide a detector with a failsafe to call feature on each channel to provide a detect output if open circuit loops occur .
provide for a minimum composite loop inductive operating range of from num μh to num μh and allow up to num ft of loop leadin .
provide selftuning detectors with automatic tracking or detectors that require initial tuning with a minimum automatic drift compensation tolerance of five percent num after initial adjustment .
optically couple detector outputs .
provide a failsafe closed output in case of power loss .
section num detectors page num num testing before project manager acceptance send the loop vehicle detectors to the traffic services signal laboratory in santa fe for testing and approval .
the department will test the detectors concurrently with the controller testing in accordance with section num testing .
the department will inspect and test loop vehicle detectors as follows num .
visual inspection for compliance with the contract .
num .
sample tests in accordance with nema standards for the following num .
sensitivity num .
hold time num .
long detection and recovery num .
adjacent lane rejection and num .
pulse mode rephase .
the department will base acceptance on the satisfactory performance of the loop detectors for the test period in accordance with section num testing .
num operation provide digital switches on the front panel or software for making operational selections or adjustments .
provide a minimum selection of three num frequency ranges and three num sensitivity change in inductance ranges along with a presence or pulse output mode and a reset selector .
separate and repeat controls for each channel .
provide an led output indicator on the front of each channel .
num twochannel detectors provide active power inputs on both channels of twochannel detectors to allow independent operation of either channel without the remaining channel being connected .
ensure that connector terminal assignments are in accordance with nema standards part num .
rack mount detectors .
num lightning and transient protection provide detectors that meet nema requirements for transient testing .
accomplish this using metal oxide varistors for protection from voltage induced in loop leadin cables installed in the cabinet and flashover protection from internal circuit to ground .
num pedestrian detectors num pushbutton station provide cast aluminum pushbutton station housing of tamperproof construction .
ensure the assembly is weatherproof and constructed so there is no possibility of electrical shock under any weather conditions .
ensure that stations are in accordance with americans with disabilities act of num ada num u.s.c.s .
num et seq ..
shape the housing to provide a rigid installation that fits the curvature of the pole it attaches to .
provide a direct pushtype actuator button microswitch type or approved equal in the housing body .
fit the housing cover snugly on the housing that contains the pushbutton sign .
provide porcelain enameled sheet steel or sheet aluminum pedestrian pushbutton signs of num inch minimum thickness .
make the signs nine num inch num inch .
if using porcelain enameled steel signs provide each hole with a brass grommet .
round sign corners .
section num detectors page num use black enamel on white enamel background to show instructions and arrows on the signs .
show the instructions in accordance with the contract .
finish pushbutton housings with two num coats of powder coat or best quality infrared oven baked paint as follows num .
first coat baked epon primer zinc chromate or equal .
num .
second coat flat black or when specified federal yellow alkyd urea baked enamel matching federal standard num a color chip num .
num construction requirements num video detection system install the video detection system per the manufacturers recommendations and provide assistance from the supplier as described below num .
have the supplier of the video detection system supervise the installation and testing of the video and computer equipment .
have a factory representative from the supplier set up test program and adjust the system in the field at each temporary signal location and the final signal location .
have factory representatives conduct a oneday training and programming session in conjunction with the setup and test for each signal location if specified in the contract num .
during the warranty period ensure that the supplier provides technical support by tollfree telephone num h per day num days per year .
ensure factorycertified personnel answer department requests for support within num h num .
during the warranty period ensure that certified personnel from the supplier are on site within num h if the department requires num .
ongoing software support by the supplier includes updates of each central video processor cvp and the computer software .
provide these updates for a oneyear period after acceptance of the work num .
have the supplier maintain a program for technical support and software updates following expiration of the warranty period .
num radar presence detector rpd rpds shall be mounted on the specified supports as called for and detailed in the special provisions for rpds .
num physical properties num .
provide an rpd unit consisting of an enclosure of that conforms to the nema num standard for type numx enclosures .
num .
obtain the operating voltage num v ac for the preassembled backplate directly from the traffic signal cabinet .
num .
all external components of the rpd shall be ultravioletresistant corrosionresistant and protected from fungus growth and moisture deterioration .
num .
the rpd shall be able to withstand a fall of five num ft without compromising its functional and structural integrity .
num .
the rpd shall include a connector that meets the milcnum specification .
the milcnum connector shall provide contacts for all data and power connections .
num radar design num .
the rpd shall be designed with a matrix of radars .
num .
the circuitry shall be void of any manual tuning elements that could lead to human error and degraded performance over time .
section num detectors page num num .
the rpd antennas shall be designed on printed circuit boards .
num .
the rpd shall transmit a signal with a bandwidth of at least num mhz .
this bandwidth provides the greatest accuracy for distinguishing closely spaced vehicles and gives the highest possible resolution .
num .
the rpd shall provide at least num rf channels so that multiple units can be mounted in the same vicinity without causing interference between them .
num .
the rpd shall have a selftest that is used to verify correct hardware functionality .
num operating conditions num .
the rpd shall maintain accurate performance in all weather conditions including rain freezing rain snow wind dust fog and changes in temperature and light including direct light on sensor at dawn and dusk .
num .
the rpd shall be capable of continuous operation over an ambient temperature range of numf to numf numc to numc .
num .
the rpd shall be capable of continuous operation over a relative humidity range of five percent num to num noncondensing .
num warranty maintenance and support num .
the contractor shall obtain and assign to the department all manufacturers guarantees or warranties which are normally provided as customary trade practice for items and materials incorporated into the work .
in the absence of a manufacturers guarantee the contractor shall warrant that mechanical and electrical equipment and material incorporated into the work are free from any defects or imperfections in workmanship and material for a period of one num year after final acceptance of the project .
the contractor shall be responsible for repairing any malfunction or defect in any such equipment or material which develops during the one num year period .
num .
the contractor shall supply two num sets of installation guides and user manuals for the equipment incorporated in the project one num of which shall be submitted to the department with submittal of manufacturers shop drawings .
num evod optical detector system install evod optical detector systems in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
do not allow the equipment manufacturer to modify the existing traffic controller unit beyond adding the necessary hardware to the traffic controller cabinet .
num system training provide appropriate training and assistance to the departments personnel and emergency vehicle operators in troubleshooting maintenance and system operation for the duration specified in the contract .
submit the complete training program to the department for approval num working days before scheduling the training .
include in the training program submission working outlines of presentations and manuals handouts and other materials to be distributed during the training .
num loop detectors install loop detector consisting of two num distinct elements .
first install the loop inductive coil in the pavement at the location and geometry specified in the contract including a lowinductance leadin cable back to the control cabinet .
second install the loop vehicle detectorsensing unit in the control cabinet including wiring to output the presence of a vehicle .
the department will not accept loop detector total system installations until the installation accurately detects the presence of vehicles in accordance with the contract .
num loop detectors installation requirements and procedures section num detectors page num num saw cuts make saw cuts using an abrasive cutting wheel concrete saw .
make saw cuts from num¼ inch to num½ inch deep and approximately num inch wide .
use a ⅜ inch wide slot to install ducted loop wire .
if the contract requires new pavement or additional paving material overlay make the saw cut and wire installation at least below the last paving layer of ⅝ inch or greater thickness .
the department will not allow saw cuts in the final layer of surfacing .
in the case of pavement overlay make a saw cut a minimum of two num inches below the final surfacing elevation .
install piezoelectric detectors in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations which may require saw cutting of the opengraded friction course .
if the contract specifies heaterscarification pavement treatment make the saw cuts after completing this operation .
provide two num inch diameter holes drilled at angle points to the same depth as the saw cuts .
the department will allow num angle cuts made at corners instead of drilled holes .
the department will not allow sharp corners greater than num between overlapping saw cuts .
also drill cuts across concrete pavement expansion joints to allow wire slack .
overlap saw cuts by a sufficient length to provide a smooth bottom evendepth wire channel .
if there is more than one num loop terminating at a pull box provide each loop with a separate saw cut back to the box .
make these saw cuts no closer than six num inches .
before placement of the sealant and wire clean the saw cut of debris and standing water by blowing out with compressed air .
the department will allow the pavement surface to be damp to the touch .
ensure the inside of the saw cut is free of sharp protrusions from loose aggregate or uneven saw cuts .
num rigid electrical conduit entrance provide a separate one num inch rigid electrical conduit entrance at the pull box for each loop .
begin the rigid conduit at the end of the pavement saw cut and run under any curb and gutter and sidewalk .
leave slack in wire through the conduit entrances and seal the end of the conduit with a softsetting butyl rubber or asphalt joint sealer .
fill the remainder of the hole with the appropriate material and approved saw cut sealant .
num loop wire placement place a continuous run of loop wire in the saw cut and wind around the coil section the number of turns specified in the contract or directed by the project manager .
install no more than four num wires or turns in a single saw cut .
leave wire run through drilled corners and joint crossings slack .
encapsulate the slack portion of wire with a softsetting butyl rubber or asphalt joint sealer .
installation of ducted loop wire during a paving operation by securely attaching the loop in the proper shape to the pavement surface and overlaying with the next paving layers of two num inches or greater total thickness is allowable .
secure the loop before overlaying by placing the ducted wire in a slot cut in the pavement or by securing the corners using a method approved by the project manager then covering the wire by hand with a small amount of asphalt paving material .
do not bend the ducted loop wire to less than a one num inch radius .
num sealant application do not place sealant if the air temperature is below num f or if precipitation is occurring or impending .
place sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
place sealant in saw cut using a special nozzle .
fill the saw cut to within approximately ⅛ inch of the top .
do not allow spillover onto the pavement surface immediately strike off excess material .
num multipleloop systems if using a multipleloop system same channel wind adjacent loops with opposite rotations .
accomplish rotation reversal by reversing leads at the pull box .
mark the beginning section num detectors page num of the loop wire and the pull box before beginning the winding process to identify the direction of rotation .
connect multiple loops in series to the leadin cable at the pull box or splice point .
num loop leadin cable installation run loop leadin cable continuously from the loop wire splice to the terminal in the control cabinet .
the department will not allow splices in the leadin cable .
connect the drain ground wire in the leadin cable to earth ground at the cabinet end only .
neatly clip off the ground wire at the curbside pull box adjacent to the end of the outer jacket .
solder connections between the loop wire and the leadin cable .
do not use open flame torches for soldering .
make splices waterproof by stripping from ¼ inch to ½ inch of the insulation and inserting into a selfsealing epoxyfilled twiston connector in accordance with section num springtype connector .
use of a twopart sealant dbynumm num connector sealant or approved equal is allowable .
wrap num connector splices with a highquality allweather electrical tape or approved selfbonding tape by overlapping the wire insulation approximately one num inch and in layers equal to or greater than num½ times the thickness of the original wire insulation .
seal the outer jacket of the cable in a similar manner except overlap the tape on the outer jacket four num inches .
if using ducted loop wire apply sealant at the end of the tube portion and then wrap with tape to prevent water entry .
suspend the v splices formed high in the pull box to prevent immersion in water .
num integrity test check after completing loop installation in the roadway check each loop with a megger if required to ensure the integrity of the installation .
ensure that the resistance of each loop is greater than num mω .
if directed by the project manager check the completed loop detector system in accordance with section num testing .
num pushbutton stations mount pushbutton stations on the side of traffic signal poles with the arrow sign indicating the direction of pedestrian movement .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit cvp each video cable foot video camera each video hardware system each radar presence detector rpd each optical detector cable foot optical emitter each loop detector wire foot ducted loop detector wire foot loop leadin cable foot detector saw cut foot section num detectors page num phase selector rack ____channel each phase selector module each the department will pay for conduit for detector installations in accordance with section num rigid electrical conduit .
num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for radar presence detector rpd and will not be measured or paid for separately a. rpd sensor sensor mount sensor cable splice box preassembled back plate and two num channel detector card for interface to traffic signal controller .
b .
when the number of approaches has been established to create one num detection unit no additional payment shall be made for integration .
section num traffic signal controllers page num section num traffic signal controllers num description this work consists of providing and installing trafficactuated controllers special auxiliary control equipment and cabinets .
num materials num trafficactuated controller these standard specifications and the national electrical manufacturers association nema standards describe required features functions and test procedures for traffic actuated controllers .
provide tsnumtype itype num controllers for statemaintained signalized intersections .
provide plugandplay controller equipment .
do not modify controllers cabinets wiring harness and other equipment tested and approved by the state signal maintenance lab .
obtain state traffic services engineer and state signal maintenance lab supervisor approval of equipment in writing .
ensure controllers meet all requirements for a solidstate nema trafficactuated controller .
provide controllers that use the current designs employing microprocessors .
unless otherwise specified in the contract provide microprocessor controllers of a modular design .
provide controllers that consist of a main processor unit mpu inputoutput interface and a power regulator .
power transformer and capacitors may be rigidly fixed to the frame .
ensure modules are easy to remove .
provide multiterminal military specification milspectype plugs for standard and special function inputoutput electrical connections on the front of the controller in accordance with nema interface standards or departmentapproved controllers with rsnumc standard inputoutput ports .
provide rsnumc ports for communications and special functions .
equip controllers with a knum backup relay in the back panel .
provide battery or super cap backup in the same module for powerdown clock operation and battery or super capbacked randomaccess memory ram for nonprogrammed data such as message logs for a minimum of num hours .
provide controller ports with the following capabilities num .
direct interface with a personal computer for uploading and downloading program data and num .
direct interface with a dialup modem or ethernet for remote communications with a personal computer over telephone lines .
provide port connections that prevent interruption to signal operation .
the trafficactuated controller shall have the capability to report alarms to central computer remotely without assistance from a system master unit .
provide controllers with a keyboard and liquid crystal display lcd or touch screen on the front .
ensure the display has an adjustable contrast and backlighting .
ensure the controller design allows time based coordination and preemption programming through the controller keyboard .
provide controllers that can display alphanumeric timing status and programming information .
ensure each ring has a separate display for simultaneous dual ring display .
ensure the display has two num modes of operation the run mode current phase that displays interval and remaining interval time and the programming mode that displays the phase interval or programmable function and the time or value .
num programming requirements section num traffic signal controllers page num provide controllers with a keyboard for entering operator timing and functional data into nonvolatile memory and with a menudriven interface and to enter revise and display operator data using a minimal number of keystrokes .
ensure key functions are clearly displayed on the front of the controller .
ensure the controller is capable of storing operator data for at least num days after disconnecting the primary power .
provide controllers capable of being programmed in different patterns of phase sequences quadleft sequential or a combination of concurrent and sequential .
ensure the following num .
the controllers allow programming of inactive phases .
provide a controller that displays operatorentered times or values before entering into memory .
ensure the controller does the following num .
allows automatic sequencing through the programming num .
prevents unauthorized changes in the programming mode with a fourdigit numeric security code num .
allows access to view stored information .
num internal preemption provide controllers with internal preemption capable of railroad or emergencyvehicle preemption sequences .
ensure that the internal preemption feature allows for at least six num independent preemption programs .
make it possible to prioritize preemption delay before preemption cycle during preemption and hold phase assignments and provide for pedestrian clearance through initial clearance yellow .
ensure preemption intervals can be timed and operator data programmed through the controller keyboard .
ensure operatorentered preempt data is printable .
provide railroad preemption in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices current edition requirements and include a track clearance phase .
ensure returntonormal controller operation is in accordance with the planphasing diagram and place a detector call on phases as specified in the contract .
num internal coordination provide controllers with internal time based coordination .
provide synchronization and control functions for coordinating actuated signalized intersections without the use of interconnecting cables .
ensure coordination can be made on a time of day day of week and week of year basis .
provide a coordinator that functions as a standard signal system coordinator using force offs holds and phaseped omits outputs and phase green inputs capable of supervising the controller .
ensure that the coordinator maintains the accuracy of the ac line frequency and without line voltage to an accuracy of at least num .
provide battery or super cap backup capable of maintaining real time and memory for at least num hours .
provide a time clock that keeps track of time of day in seconds day of week and date and programmable automatic daylight savings time changes .
if a power disruption occurs ensure that the coordinator will automatically restart itself once line voltage returns .
provide a coordinator capable of num program changes selectable on the minimum basis of num daily program groups num weekly programs and num exception days holidays .
ensure that the program change selectable to at least a minute on or off of any single function .
provide coordinators with minimum selectable system options of four num cycles four num splits per cycle three num offsets per cycle three num permissive periods per split one num pedestrian permissive period per split and three num forceoffs per split .
ensure that the coordinator has selectable cycle settings from num s to num s in onesecond increments or as a percentage of the cycle length .
offsets permissive periods and forceoff points may be programmable from num s to num s in onesecond increments or as a percentage of the cycle length .
provide selectable offset seeking for dwell or add only or smooth offset transitions .
ensure manual selection of any program .
provide for selectable coordinated phases programmed as required in the contract .
ensure that displays show the current time of day section num traffic signal controllers page num date cycle countdown current plan in effect hold forceoff sync outputs and all programmed data as they occur .
num general design requirements num components provide timing circuits consisting entirely of solidstate electronic circuitry that use state ofthe art largescale integration lsi circuit techniques .
provide cross reference and data sheets showing the parameters of all solidstate devices used .
ensure that all switching functions operate using solidstate electronic circuitry .
do not use electromechanical devices such as timebreak relays or rotary stepping or lineswitches for switching functions .
provide printed circuit board assemblies consisting of surface mount technology that meet nema requirements for traffic signal controllers .
cover currentcarrying traces with a solder mask material .
coat boards containing components with a humidity sealant .
in addition clearly mark circuit reference designations immediately adjacent to each component .
derate all components with regard to heatdissipating capacity and rated voltage so that in operation under maximum air temperature and maximum applied voltage there is no life shortening of the material or shift in values .
ensure the design life of components operating num h a day is at least five num years .
num constancy of intervals provide a controller designed so that the length of any interval portion period or unit extension may be set to two num significant digits and will remain within that accuracy level through an air temperature range of from num f to num f with a line frequency of num hz num hz .
this performance includes cold and hot starts obtained without the use of a power consuming heating or cooling apparatus .
num power provide controllers and associated equipment that use num v numcycle singlephase ac power .
num mechanical construction provide controllers housed in either aluminum or steel sheeting or in a department approved housing with a durable finish .
plug printed circuit boards into receptacles within the controller and provide with fastening devices to prevent loss or loosening during transportation or handling .
provide controller assemblies interchangeable with those of the same manufacturer and series .
num environmental interface and functional requirements provide controllers in accordance with current nema standards tsnum or the latest nema standards .
num controller requirements provide internal programmed nema overlaps within the controller .
provide keyboard operator programming .
num phase timing section num traffic signal controllers page num provide timing intervals for each traffic phase .
ensure the interval and minimum range of adjustment of the timing intervals is in accordance with table num timing intervals and minimum range of adjustment .
table num timing intervals and minimum range of adjustment interval timing range s maximum resolution second increments initial or minimum num num extension gap num num yellow change num num red clearance num num maximum max num num num maximum max num num num walk num num pedestrian clearance num num red revert num num num phase control functions ensure each phase is capable of the following functions num .
max recall non act .
automatically returns the phase and extends green timing to that of maximum green .
in absence of an opposing phase demand the controller rest in green num .
ped recall non act .
automatically returns phase to walkped clearance and vehicle rightofway without vehicle and pedestrian demand num .
veh .
recall ext ..
automatically places a recurring demand for vehicle service without actual vehicle demand when not in its green interval num .
nonlocking memory off .
phase operates in fully actuated mode .
memory of vehicle demand is retained only when a vehicle is in the detection zone detector outputting num .
locking memory on .
phase operates in fully actuated mode .
memory of vehicle demand detector output is retained in the phase until that phase is served .
num operational requirements num timing requirements provide an initial interval control for each phase that determines the guaranteed minimum green period for that phase .
the minimum green period consists of the sum of the walk interval and the greater of the pedestrian clearance interval or minimum green interval with pedestrian or pedestrian and vehicle actuation .
ensure that each phase provides vehicles additional green time beyond the minimum green time by vehicle actuations by means of an extension interval control .
ensure that successive actuations cancel the remainder of the previous extension interval and initiate a new extension interval for the vehicle that provided the actuation .
should transfer of rightof way occur while an extension interval is unexpired ensure that the rightofway returns at the next opportunity in the cycle .
equip each phase with at least two num maximum green timing interval controls that set a limit on the time that continuous traffic during the rightofway phase can be extended after an actuation is registered for any conflicting phase .
maximum interval max num is for normal operation .
maximum interval max num is for external and internal input .
section num traffic signal controllers page num provide each phase with a clearance period consisting of a yellow change interval and a red clearance interval both of preset duration .
ensure that the presence of a pedestrian is registered upon actuation of a pedestrian push button during a pedestrian clearance interval or whenever the dont walk signal is displayed so that the walk signal occurs at the next assignment of rightofway to the phase .
ensure that the phase is capable of recycling and providing pedestrian and pedestrian clearance intervals when a pedestrian actuation is registered on a phase with no demand for pedestrian or vehicular rightofway on a conflicting phase .
the pedestrian clearance interval is the minimum and guaranteed pedestrian protection .
ensure that the dont walk display is steady during the remaining rightofway and clearance intervals .
num phasing requirements the department does not want the equipment to give the rightofway to any street without an actuation call .
in the absence of traffic or recall option the department wants the rightofway to remain on the street where it was last assigned unless the red rest option is implemented .
if the red rest option is used ensure that the controller cycles to all red and remains until a phase call .
provide controllers that operate in a concurrent phase timing dualring or sequential singlering configuration .
number and operate all phases in accordance with a nema dual ring quadleft configuration or sequential configuration .
provide controllers capable of operating at least eight num field phases .
provide controllers capable of assigning the rightofway to a single phase or any combination of nonconflicting phases .
specify phases skipped on each ring for no demand and recall functions for each phase for sequential controllers .
provide controllers capable of providing four num overlap phases in any phase combination and programmable on both a standard nema plugin overlap program board and operator keyboard entry .
num inputoutput features provide all controllers with all inputoutput features per phase ring and unit in accordance with nema functional standards .
wire any unused inputs or outputs to the controller and identify on the controller back panel per nema .
num initialization requirements provide controllers with an initialization control to start at the beginning of num .
the programmed green yellow or red interval of the selected phases num .
the application of power num .
the external start input and num .
as specified in the contract .
place vehicle and pedestrian calls on phases .
num traffic control systems ensure all systems meet the design operational and communication requirements specified in the contract .
num system master provide a trafficadjusted arterial or multisystem microprocessor design system master .
provide units that shelfmount in the controller cabinet with milspec or rsnumc type connectors and house in a metal cabinet in accordance with section num controller requirements .
num closed loop system section num traffic signal controllers page num provide a closed loop computer system that controls operates and supervises a traffic signal control system consisting of num .
a computer facility for uploading and downloading traffic data num .
a communications network num .
field equipment and num .
system training .
equip the system with software and peripheral equipment that is compatible with the existing controllers .
obtain preapproval from the lighting and signal design engineer for the proposed system components .
the department will reject the proposed equipment if shop drawings are submitted before obtaining preapproval of the lighting and signal design engineer .
implement timing plans if required .
peripheral equipment communication equipment and field programming unit are a part of timing plans if specified in the contract .
have a traffic engineering consultant collect the data for turning movements for each intersection and develop three num signaltiming plans for the system at peak morning hours peak midday hours and peak evening hours .
ensure that these plans outline the objective minimize intersection and overall system delays and indicate the tradeoffs between mainline optimization and side street operations including follow up timing adjustments andor fine tuning as required by the department .
num system training hire a traffic engineering consultant to train department personnel for two num days and assist in the following tasks num .
operation of program arterial master controller num .
uploading and downloading traffic data num .
intersection timing num .
volume occupancy and standard and custom reports num .
counting traffic through system detectors num .
troubleshooting num .
maintenance and num .
initial system operation for progressive traffic movement .
submit the complete training program to the lighting and signal engineer for approval num working days before training is scheduled .
include working outlines of presentations videotapes and all manuals handouts and other materials to be distributed during the training in the training program .
num controller interconnect systems provide controller interconnect systems in accordance with the contract .
num equipment approval the departments traffic services engineer will approve all equipment .
num delayextend operation if specified in the contract include a digital timer for delaying or extending detection outputs for each channel .
include switches to select delay extend or delay time extension or timer off operation for loop vehicle detectors .
ensure the minimum range and steps are num s to section num traffic signal controllers page num num s in onesecond increments for delay time and num s to num s in numsecond increments for extend time .
provide output indicators that display a difference in normal detection and delayextend interval by flashing during this period or by two num indicators per channel that separate call and detect .
provide an external input for each channel for the green indication of the associated phase .
ensure that delay timing disables when this green input is true and extension timing disables when false .
when detector logic inhibits times only on the application of external num v ac signal connect the external input to same phase red if the contract requires the extend operation .
num cabinets support equipment and wiring provide the components of the controller in a sturdy weatherproof metallic controller cabinet .
num general unless otherwise specified in the contract wire all cabinets for the full application of all phases pedestrian signals on all through movements and all normal overlaps for either four phase singlering operation or eightphase dualring operation .
provide wiring for all vehicle detection .
furnish the cabinet so that it is only necessary to add load switches vehicle detectors disconnect any jumpers and rearrange field conductors in order to implement any initially unused phases or functions .
unless specified in the plans all controllers and cabinets shall be assembled and tested at the controllers point of origin .
fabricate all groundmounted cabinets of aluminum that is at least ⅛ inch thick .
fabricate pedestal cabinets of aluminum at least ⅛ inch thick .
provide barrier type terminal blocks .
design and manufacture all cabinets for rigid mounting with no flexing .
provide lifting tabs for all cabinets .
ensure that the types internal components and wiring arrangements of controller cabinets for an installation provide a complete operating traffic control system .
num cabinet design design the cabinet with one num door in the front and one num door in the back and include a corbintumbler lock number num for each door .
provide an auxiliary door equipped with a treasurytype lock corbin number rnumgnum for a police key on the front cabinet door .
provide door handles that accommodate a padlock in the closed position .
provide a rain channel over the door openings to prevent liquids from entering the enclosure .
the cabinet door opening must cover at least num of the cabinets front surface .
weld a stiffener plate across the inside of the doors to prevent flexing .
slope the top of the cabinet toward the rear to prevent accumulation of water .
seal all seams with rtv sealant or equivalent material on the interior of the cabinet .
provide an indoor weatherproof and dustproof closed cell neoprene gasket seal for the main door and police door to close against .
provide louvered air entrances in the lower section of the cabinet door that satisfy the nema rod entry test for numr ventilated enclosures .
provide an air inlet at least num inch num inch .
secure a noncorrosive vermin and insectproof removable air filter to the air entrance .
fit the filter fit snugly against the cabinet door wall .
provide a onepiece continuous piano hinge for each door with a stainless steel pin that runs the entire door length mounted on the right side when facing the cabinet .
attach hinges without rivets or bolts .
num cabinet shelving section num traffic signal controllers page num support the controller and auxiliary equipment with metallic shelves or brackets .
provide at least two num shelves unless approved otherwise by the department .
support both ends of the shelves with angletype braces .
provide shelves strong enough to support the equipment weight without sagging .
num control cabinet equipment accommodation provide control cabinets large enough to num .
stand the controller assembly and associated equipment upright on the shelving num .
remove the controller assembly straight out without turning it sideways and num .
close the door without interfering with the wire harness running to the door .
do not place equipment on the floor of groundmounted cabinets .
ensure that it is possible to remove all equipment and wallmounted devices without relocating or unpacking devices .
do not allow cabinet wiring to obscure the front panels of control equipment .
num control cabinet dimensions size cabinets as shown in table num control cabinet dimensions requirements or as specified in the contract .
meet the space requirements of section num control cabinet equipment accommodation .
table num control cabinet dimensions requirements type of cabinet outside dimensions h x w x d inch use g num x num x num if specified on plans m num x num x num if specified on plans ms num x num x num numphase singlering operation p num x num x num numphase dualring operation r num x num x num if specified on plans num cabinet mounting hardware provide ground mount type cabinets with internal bolts for controllers unless otherwise required in the contract .
have anchor bolts and templates for cabinet installation on site before installing the concrete base for the controller .
num cabinet finish num .
cabinet finish per user agency or num .
for powder coating use the following two num coat finish a .
a four num stage iron phosphate coating and b .
a triglycidyl isocyanurate polyester powder coat paint matching federal standard numa color chip num with a minimum thickness of two num mm .
num cabinet wiring terminals and facilities provide wiring terminals and facilities within the cabinet in accordance with nema tsnum or the latest nema standards .
perform all field flash sequence programming at the field terminals using only a screwdriver or flash color plug .
do not debus the field terminal blocks for flash programming .
provide field terminal blocks wired with four num positions per vehicle or overlap phase green yellow red and flash .
ensure that all harness and cabinet wiring is neat firm and section num traffic signal controllers page num bound together with ty wrap or equivalent .
meet the gauge and color requirements in table num back panel wiring requirements .
table num back panel wiring requirements description wire color gauge greenwalk load switch output brown num yellow load switch output yellow num reddont walk load switch output red num cmu other than ac power violet num controller io blue num ac power panel to main panel black num ac main panel black num ac power panel to main panel white num ac main panel white num chassis ground power panel green num dc ground grey num flash programming orange num meet milwnum type bn num v numstrand tinned copper for num awg and thinner wire .
ensure that the wire has at least num inch thick pvc insulation with clear nylon jacket and rated to num f num v. secure all connecting cables and wire runs with mechanical clamps .
do not use stickon type clamps .
isolate logic ground and chassis ground from each other within the cabinet .
do not tie chassis ground and ac together within the cabinet .
hook or loop all wire around the eyelet or the terminal block post before soldering to ensure circuit integrity .
do not use lap joint soldering butt type connections or splices .
ensure that all cabinet wiring is continuous from its origin to its termination point .
permanently number and label all back panel d interface panel and detector panel terminal blocks .
make all pedestrian push button inputs from the field to the controller opto isolated or relayisolated to prevent transients and ac from entering the controller .
num back panel use a back panel and power bus panel to terminate all dc logic wiring .
locate this panel on the back of the cabinet below the equipment shelves and include the load bay and the flasherflasher relays .
ensure that all terminals and plugin units are accessible without moving any equipment .
permanently prewire the back panel to the controller harness conflict harness and detector inputs .
make dc wiring connections ¼ inch quickconnect tab type num v and num a rated .
mechanically strip the wire ¼ inch and solder or firmly crimp the tab covering the wire and insulation .
solder ac connections on the panel back and all connections to the load switchflasher receptacles .
bring all nema functions to the front of the panel with a screw type connector .
ensure that it is possible to program using jumpers such as clips or wires the signal outputs for all the types of phasing operations possible for the specified controller and to access all nema functions on the front for future auxiliary equipment .
clearly mark the terminal functions on the back panel with the appropriate nema designation .
when the auxiliary equipment logic is specified in the contract make connections on the front of the panel .
mount the panel with clearance between the cabinet wall and the panels back connections .
ensure that it is possible to drop the panel in the field access back wiring using section num traffic signal controllers page num simple hand tools .
rack mount the load bay including flasher .
adequately support the load switches and flasher after insertion to prevent falling out due to vibrations .
the minimum positions for plugin units are listed in table num load switchflasher unit positions .
table num load switchflasher unit positions type of cabinet load switch positions flash relay positions nema flasher phase single ring num num num numphase dualring num num num num power distribution panel locate the power distribution panel on the lower righthand side of the cabinet and fully enclosed to prevent accidental shock .
include the main power feed terminal barrier type the required ac protection from lightning edco spanum surge arrester or approved equal filter rfi mov to ground with a removable cover and any national electrical code requirements in the power panel .
num detector panel and rack provide a detector panel on the lefthand side of the cabinet .
provide terminal blocks barrier type with removable buss bars for all detectors and pedestrian pushbutton field conductors .
include the j pin conductor appropriately terminated for extenddelay operation on the detector rack .
provide detector rack positions in accordance with table num required detector rack positions table num numphase singlering operation numchannel detector rack order of positioning table num numphase dualring operation num channel detector rack order of positioning and table num numphase dualring operation additional detector rack .
the department will not require detector racks when video vehicle detection is used .
table num required detector rack positions type of cabinet detector rack positions detector terminal blocks numphase singlering num num numphase dualring num num numphase dualring up to num up to num table num numphase singlering operation numchannel detector rack order of positioning phnum phnum phnum phnumec phnum sdnum sdnum sdnum phnum phnum phnum phnumec phnum sdnum sdnum sdnum num numphase dualring operation numchannel detector rack order of positioning phnum phnum phnum phnumec phnum phnum phnum phnumec phnum phnum phnum phnumec phnum phnum phnum phnumec section num traffic signal controllers page num table num numphase dualring operation additional detector rack a dual lefts system detectors and preemption phnum phnum sdnum sdnum sdnum sdnum sdnum sdnum phnum phnum sdnum sdnum sdnum sdnum sdnum sdnum aprovide only additional channels required on plans provide connectorpin assignments num x num pin edge card connector with num in contact centers key slots located between b and c and m and n in accordance with table num connectorpin assignments .
table num connectorpin assignments connectorpin assignment a dc common num call delay inhibit channel num b dc power num call delay inhibit channel num c reset num and d loop num num and e loop num f output numa optocoupler collector h output numa optocoupler emitter num and j loop num num and k loop num l chassis ground s output numb accucount fet drain w output numa optocoupler collector x output numa optocoupler emitter y output numb accucount fet drain z output numc fail fet drain num output numc fail fet drain num d connector panel provide a d connector panel and harness with each cabinet assembly on the lefthand side of the cabinet and fully wired to provide all functions .
ensure the panel contains provisions for mounting two num num v ac relays for preempt inputs num a num a and ¼ a fuse for each relay .
num terminal labeling number and identify all terminals .
do not use the same nomenclature used on the controller assemblywiring diagram such as phase numbers .
num telemetry interface panels provide each cabinet assembly with a telemetry interface harness and printed circuit board interface panel to support and protect communications required .
provide the telemetry interface panel with a socketmounted communication line transient protection device wired in series with the telemetry communication circuit where copper is used .
match the communication line impedance with the transmitter output impedance to minimize line noise .
section num traffic signal controllers page num num wiring diagrams provide four num sets of wiring diagrams for each cabinet .
provide a plastic envelope in the cabinet to house two num cabinet wiring diagrams .
submit these wiring diagrams with the equipment to the department signal laboratory before testing begins .
show the connectors for all equipment and switches relays and flashers on the cabinet wiring diagrams .
num additional required terminals protection devices and switches provide the following additional terminals protection devices and switches for all cabinets num .
a ullisted num a circuit breaker for filtered ac power serving all solidstate devices including load switches num .
a separate num a circuit breaker for ac circuit serving the ground fault circuit interrupter gfci outlets fan and light num .
a separate num a circuit breaker for advance warning flasher if specified in the contract num .
copper ground strip mounted and ground to cabinet wall for connection of all common conductors num .
terminate all field signal output circuits on an unfused terminal block with a minimum rating of num a .
provide ac field terminals with a screw with diameter at least num inch num .
provide terminal blocks to terminate a special equipment harness .
locate these terminals on the righthand side of the cabinet above the power distribution panel num .
terminals for connecting interconnect cable tie points and intercabinet termination when required .
provide transient protection on all external lines num .
one num quad outlet for test equipment tools and lighting mounted on the upper left hand side of the cabinet .
a second duplex gfci convenience outlet mounted on the upper right hand side of the cabinet .
use nema type numr outlets num .
switches behind police auxiliary door including num .
main switch identified onoff wired to turn off signal light power when switched to off position and to deenergize the field lighting .
provide a num a minimum rated switch and connecting wiring num .
auto flash switch identified auto flash wired to keep controller energized and to place signals on flash when switched to flash position .
provide a controller with stop timing that applies when in the flash position num .
interior cabinet switches including num .
interior switches and convenience outlet .
combine on a single panel and mount on the inside of the cabinet door unless otherwise noted .
provide heavy duty and rated at least num a switches except for the main switch .
cover any exposed terminals or switch solder points with a nonflexible shield .
permanently label switch functions .
protect wire routed to the police door in door and test push button panel against damage from opening and closing of the main door num .
test switch .
a twoposition switch labeled auto flash wired to de energize the signal light power when switched to flash position and to allow the controller to cycle through its normal sequences while displaying flash indications on signals num .
controller onoff switch .
a twoposition switch labeled controller onoff wired to deenergize the controller and auxiliary equipment when switched to the off position num .
vehicle and pedestrian detector switches .
twoposition momentary switches labeled on test wired to each vehicle and pedestrian detector section num traffic signal controllers page num input to allow the substitution of manual call into each controller detector input .
identify switches as to phase or function num .
preemption test switches .
provide test switches to allow a manual preempt input .
provide each preemption phase with a separate switch with each phase that is appropriately identified num .
door ajaropen switch .
include a door switch for each cabinet to log an event to the system master that the door is open or ajar num .
led light door switch .
include a door switch for each cabinet that turns the cabinet led lights on when the cabinet door is open num .
load switches and flashers shall be discrete num .
radio line filter rfi for filtering ac lights and to control power for solidstate light control and controller operation and num .
pedestrian pushbutton isolation field circuit to protect solidstate devices from transient voltages to prevent transients from being induced in the open pedestrian pushbutton circuits by isolation transformers or by optoisolation .
num additional cabinet features provide the following additional cabinet features num .
cabinet fan .
mount a thermostatically controlled manually adjustable fan in the controller cabinet set to turn on at cabinet temperatures of from num f to num f. locate the fan near cabinet vent holes to direct the airflow over the controller unit .
cover the inside opening with a maximum ¼ inch mesh screen to prevent the operator from contacting the fan blades .
provide a filter for the cabinet intake fan vent num .
led light .
mount a led fixture in the cabinet over the door position to minimize damage when sliding equipment off shelves .
mount a led fixture on the bottom of the cabinet position to minimize damage .
secure led lights separately when transporting to avoid breakage .
provide a door switch for the led lights num .
door stops .
provide a stop for each controller cabinet door of num inch or greater width or num ftnum or greater area to lock the door opening at both num and num num .
provide the stop with a catch for the num position so it stays open until released .
num solid state signal and pedestrian load switches provide signal load switches external to the controller and carried in the back panel load bay .
provide signal control load switches in accordance with nema standards .
provide a signal control assembly consisting of a separate plugin unit containing the control circuitry for the operation of three num separate signal lamp circuits .
provide interchangeable vehicle and pedestrian control assemblies .
do not use any unused output of each control assembly for any other function or phase .
provide circuitry consisting of solidstate electronic components .
do not use mechanical relays for the opening and closing of signal light circuits or for any other purpose .
provide a design life of five num years or more for all components operating num h a day in their circuit application .
rate all load switches at least num a .
include three num led indicators on the face of each load visible through the door opening of the cabinet and connected to the input functions .
num solidstate flasher provide each controller cabinet with two num nema type num num a minimum per circuit dualcircuit solidstate flasher external to the controller and carried in the back panel load bay .
provide solidstate flashers in accordance with nema standards .
section num traffic signal controllers page num provide open multicontact plug type flasher transfer relays .
provide enough relays to allow any combination of flashing red or yellow indications .
wire one num rc network in parallel with each group of three num flash transfer relays and any other relay coils .
make all flash transfer relay sockets cinchjones numsb or equivalent .
ensure that it is possible to isolate the controllers dc signals to and from the load switches by the use of removable links .
the department prohibits modifications on the back of the main panel .
num malfunction management unit mmunum a malfunction management unit shall be furnished with each traffic signal controller cabinet .
all mmunume or mmunumle smart monitor with ethernet port where required units shall be the selfcontained shelf mounted type with the appropriate nmea ms port num sdlc rsnum and ethernet connectors .
the specification sets forth the minimum requirements for a shelfmountable sixteen channel solidstate malfunction management unit mmu .
the mmu shall meet as a minimum all applicable sections of the most current nema standards publication .
where differences occur this specification shall govern .
num .
monitoring functions the following monitoring functions shall be provided in addition to those required by the nema standard section num num .
dual indication monitor dual indication monitoring shall detect simultaneous input combinations of active green walk yellow or red dont walk field signal inputs on the same channel num .
dual indication monitoring sixteen switches labeled field checkdual enables shall be provided on the mmu front panel to enable dual indication monitoring on a per channel basis num .
gydual indication monitor gydual indication monitoring shall detect simultaneous inputs of active green and yellow field signal inputs on the same channel num .
field check monitoring sixteen switches labeled field checkdual enables shall be provided on the mmu front panel to enable field check monitoring on a per channel basis num .
field check monitor num .
field check status num .
recurrent pulse monitoring num .
external watchdog monitor the mmu shall provide the capability to monitor an optional external logic level output from a controller unit or other external cabinet circuitry num .
walk disable option the mmu shall provide the capability to exclude the walk inputs from the red fail fault detection algorithm when operating in the type num mode num .
type fault monitor num .
configuration change monitor num .
cvm log disable the mmu shall provide a means to disable the logging of cvm fault events num .
display functions the following display functions shall be provided in addition to those required by the nema standard section num num .
full intersection channel status display num .
fault channel status display num .
field check status display num .
recurrent pulse status display section num traffic signal controllers page num num .
type num mode indicator the type num indicator shall illuminate when the mmu is programmed for type num operation num .
type num mode indicator the dual indication indicator shall illuminate when a dual indication fault is detected num .
power indicator num .
port num receive indicator num .
port num transmit indicator num .
rsnum receive indicator num .
program cardcf indicator num .
yr clearance indicator num .
field check fail indicator num .
operating modes the mmu shall operate in both the type num mode and type num mode as required by the nema standard num .
hardware enclosure overall dimensions including mating connectors and harness shall not exceed num inches x num inches x num inches h x w x d. a .
the enclosure shall be constructed of sheet aluminum with a minimum thickness of num inches shall be finished with and attractive and durable protective coating .
model serial number and program information shall be permanently displayed on the top surface num .
electronics a microprocessor shall be used for all timing and control functions .
continuing operation of the microprocessor shall be verified by an independent monitor circuit which shall force the output relay to the deenergized fault state and indicate and error message if a pulse is not received from the microprocessor within a defined period not to exceed num ms. a .
high speed sampling techniques shall be used to determine the true rms value of the ac field inputs .
each ac input shall be sampled at least num times per line cycle .
the rms voltage measurement shall be insensitive to phase frequency and waveform distribution b .
in the interest of reliability only the prom memory device for the microprocessor firmware shall be socket mounted .
the prom memory socket shall be a precision screw machine type socket with gold contact finish providing a reliable gas tight seal .
low intersection force sockets or sockets with wiper type contacts shall not be acceptable c. all user programmed configuration setting shall be stored in an electricity erasable programmable readonly memory eeprom or front panel dip switches .
designs using a battery to maintain configuration shall not be accepted d. all num vac field terminal inputs shall provide an input impedance of at least numk ohms and be terminated with a resistor having power dissipation rating of num watts or greater e. all electrical components used in the mmu shall be rated by the component manufacturer to operate over the full nema temperature range of numºc to numºc f. all printed circuit boards shall meet the requirements of the nema standard plus the following requirements to enhance reliability num .
all platedthrough holes and exposed circuit traces shall be plated with solder section num traffic signal controllers page num num .
both sides of the printed circuit board shall be covered with the solder mask material num .
the circuit reference designated for all components and the polarity of all capacitors and diodes shall be clearly marked adjacent to the component .
pin num for all integrated circuit packages shall be designated on both sides of all printed circuit boards .
num .
all electrical mating surfaces shall be gold plated num .
all printed circuit board assemblies shall be coated on both sides with a clear moistureproof and fungusproof sealant .
num .
front panel connectors all displays configuration switches and connectors shall be mounted on the front panel of the mmu .
all mmu configuration inputs beyond those required by the nema standard shall be provided by front panel mounted dip switches and shall be clearly labeled .
configuration dip switches shall be provided for the following functions field check dual enables num a. gydual indication enable gy enable b. recurrent pulse test disable rp disable c. external watchdog enable wd enable d. walk disable type num e. configuration change fault enable cf enable f. cvm log disable .
num .
ms connectors num .
eianum port the eianum port shall be electricity isolated form the mmu electronics using optical couplers .
the connector shall be an amp numa or equivalent num pin metal shell d subminiature type with female contacts .
pin assignments shall be as shown in the following table pin functions num dcd num tx data num rx data num dtr data terminal ready num signal ground num dsr num dsr num cts num nc jumper options shall be provided to allow the connection of pin num to be made with pin num and the connection of pin num to be made with pin num and or pin num .
num .
event logging functions num .
monitor status report cs num .
previous fault log pf num .
ac line event log ac num .
monitor reset log mr num .
configuration change log cf num .
signal sequence log ssq num remove and reset signal controllers and controller cabinets section num traffic signal controllers page num if the contract requires the contractor to remove or reset signal controllers or controller cabinets use materials for new foundations in accordance with section num foundations for signal and lighting installations .
use new anchor bolts for resetting controller cabinets .
provide anchor bolts fabricated from high strength steel bars with minimum yield strength of num psi or steel in accordance with aashto m num .
num construction requirements num general if the contract specifies new trafficactuated controllers and controller cabinets provide controllers and cabinets from the same manufacturer .
if the contract requires a system master provide a system master and controller from the same manufacturer .
install traffic signal controller cabinets on concrete bases if specified in the contract or as directed by the project manager .
face the cabinet door away from the street unless otherwise specified in the contract .
upon installation of a groundmounted controller cabinet place the necessary grout or caulking between the cabinet and concrete base to create a weatherresistant and dusttight seal .
do not place conduit entries into the side of the cabinet .
num foundations install foundations and anchor bolts for control cabinets in accordance with section num control cabinet foundations .
num testing transport the controllers and cabinets and any specified auxiliary equipment to the traffic services signal laboratory in santa fe .
the controller cabinet including all associated internal components shall be assembled and tested at the manufactured point of origin .
documentation andor certification of tests performed at the factory shall be provided for each controller cabinet including make make model numbers and serial numbers .
controller cabinets and internal components shall be shipped as one num unit .
the equipment will have appropriate written documentation including project identification signal plan sheets and transmittal letters .
after receipt of all controller equipment and associated internal components with supportive documentation that satisfy the forementioned requirements nmdot signal laboratory personnel with begin testing of the controller cabinets for a minimum num day or maximum num day test .
the testing will be completed prior to the project managers acceptance of compliance with these specifications num .
visual inspection to ensure compliance with contract requirements for arrangement of equipment specified markings and workmanship num .
operational testing including num .
specified phasing num .
various timings num .
indicators num .
pedestrian phasing num .
auxiliary functions and interconnects num .
flash mode num .
possible conflicts for fail safe num .
preemption interruption with every function and phase when applicable num .
load switches at num w num .
interrupted power test num .
timings and operation at input voltage of num v and num v ac and num .
air temperature of num f num f for no more than num days .
section num traffic signal controllers page num the project manager will reject the controller if its operation or components do not pass these tests .
if a component fails all testing will stop and the department will require the removal and replacement or repair of the component and repair of the controller .
submit new equipment or resubmit repaired equipment for testing and the project manager will determine the length of this new test period which will not exceed num days .
once the lab test is completed and the equipment accepted transport the controller and cabinet from santa fe to the project site .
in addition to the lab test the project manager and signal lab technician will final accept of all controllers and cabinets in accordance with section num operation tests .
num turnon do not turnon controllers and auxiliary equipment after installation until the signal lab technician inspects and approves the entire signal system .
provide the project manager traffic services signal laboratory signal design engineer and the maintaining agency written notice at least five num working days before the anticipated turnon time .
personnel of the department signal laboratory signal design engineer and the maintaining agency must be present during the initial turnon .
if specified in the contract ensure that the qualified manufacturers representative is present at the turnon and conducts a training session for special controller equipment .
remove conflicting traffic control signing after turnon as directed by the project manager .
num modifications if the contract requires modifications or additions to an existing cabinet use a qualified signal manufacturers representative to perform this work .
cabinet wiring diagrams from the traffic services signal laboratory in santa fe are available .
return proposed modifications to these wiring diagrams to the departments signal design engineer and obtain approval before starting any cabinet modification work .
signal lab personnel or delegated representatives must inspect the work before the system is re energized .
num removing and resetting of signal controller if the contract specifies the removal or reset of a signal controller disconnect the existing controller from the cabinet remove the controller and relocate it to the new location and reinstall the controller in a new or used controller cabinet .
num remove and reset signal controller cabinet construct a new foundation at the specified location then remove the existing cabinet and relocate the signal controller cabinet to the new foundation using new anchor bolts .
reconnect field wiring including loop leadin cables power pedestrian pushbuttons signals and signal controllers to provide a complete and operational signal .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit trafficactuated controller each system master each _____type controller cabinet each closed loop traffic control system lump sum section num traffic signal controllers page num remove and reset signal controller each remove and reset controller cabinet each controller interconnect system each any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment .
section num beacons and temporary signal equipment page num section num beacons and temporary signal equipment num description this work consists of providing and installing intersection control hazard identification beacons and temporary signals .
the following items are included in this work num .
lamps num .
framework and mounting brackets num .
anchor bolts and num .
other material in accordance with the plans .
num materials num beacon assembly provide beacon assemblies of single section num inch lens traffic signal assemblies in accordance with section num traffic signal assembly .
provide beacon assemblies that normally display a flashing red or yellow indication in accordance with the contract .
num span wire installation provide span wire consisting of a set of poles and guy wire support system over a roadway normally used for flashing beacons .
span wire installations include poles guy wire down guys if required and miscellaneous hardware and turnbuckles .
num poles provide freestanding steel strain poles or guyed timber poles capable of supporting the span and specified attached equipment without noticeable bending .
num steel strain poles provide steel strain poles of round or octagonal tapered steel tube that is the length specified in the plans having a three num gauge wall thickness approximately num inch or thicker as required by the design span specified in the contract .
steel strain poles shall be designed in accordance with the num aashto specification utilizing an num mph isotach wind velocity .
provide steel with yield strength of num psi or greater .
provide strain poles that are galvanized inside and out in accordance with astm a num .
num timber poles provide treated timber poles in accordance with aashto m num .
num anchors design the anchor base to develop the maximum strength of the shaft .
provide anchor bolts that have a diameter of num num inch are five num ft long with minimum tensile strength of num psi unless otherwise specified in the plans .
provide two num leveling nuts and washers for each anchor bolt .
num guy strand wire provide guy strand wire numwire with an approximate weight of num lb per num ft and minimum breaking strength of num lb .
run electrical cable inside steel poles and exit the pole at the top in a weatherproof manner for wood pole installations protect the cables with imc conduit mounted on the poles .
num flasher controller section num beacons and temporary signal equipment page num provide a flasher controller assembly including a flasher cabinet and time clock .
the contractor may mount the assembly on the side of the pole or place it in a groundmounted cabinet .
provide a meter in accordance with the plans .
num flasher provide a flasher unit with an alternating twocircuit num v ac solidstate plugin type with a num a or greater rating per circuit .
design the unit to plug into a prenema electromechanical base numbanana jack female base type or num socket male base type .
ensure the units are interchangeable among the types used .
provide flasher units in a solid state with no moving parts .
provide units that use zero voltage switching with num on time and a flash rate of from num to num per minute .
provide flasher units designed to operate at full capability in air temperatures ranging from num f to num f. num polemounted beacon control cabinet provide a cabinet made of sturdy cast or sheet aluminum housing with a hinged main door equipped with a lock for a police key .
provide two num police keys with each cabinet .
provide a cabinet at least num inch wide ten num inch high six num inch deep or as required to house the specified equipment .
ensure switches and controls are accessible through the front door .
provide sideofpole mounting cabinets .
provide access to the cabinet through a hole located in the bottom and top drilled and threaded to accept a num num inch galvanized rigid conduit unless otherwise specified in the plans .
all cabinets inside and outside surfaces shall be finished as follows num .
cabinet finish per user agency num .
for powder coating use the following two num coat finish a .
a four num stage iron phosphate coating b .
a triglycidyl isocyanurate polyester powder coat paint matching federal standard numa color chip num with a minimum thickness of nummm .
provide neat and firm cabinet wiring .
lace or bind together wiring and harnesses with ty wrap or an equivalent .
number and identify terminals in accordance with a cabinetwiring diagram provided by the supplier .
ensure that the flasher cabinet includes the following terminals protection devices and switches num .
terminal barrier type for num v ac power feed num .
main power supply circuit breaker with at least a num a rating num .
one num terminal barrier type for each circuit for field conductor to beacons num .
signal shutdown switch that does not affect clock power num .
copper ground strip grounded to the cabinet for connection of common conductors num .
terminal barrier type for time switch opening and closing num .
radio line filter for filtering ac power and num .
lightning arrester for filtering lighting or high voltages to the ground for protection of equipment .
if specified provide a flasher controller including a time switch .
provide a time switch using a weekly time clock programmable for the onoff function up to eight num times a day and num times a week .
ensure the switchcontroller allows a user to vary or omit a day program .
provide time switches that a user can program with a keyboard andor digital switches .
provide an led display of the time of day and keyboard entered data .
num groundmounted beacon control cabinet section num beacons and temporary signal equipment page num provide nema numr and num raintight groundmounted beacon control cabinet electrically welded and reinforced where specified in the plans .
provide stainless steel nuts bolts screws and hinges .
provide phenolic nameplates .
mark control wiring at both ends with permanent wire markers and attach a plastic covered wiring diagram to the inside of the front door .
provide a factorywired cabinet in accordance with nema standards and bearing a ul num label .
num time clock provide a time clock with an automatic daylight savings time correction .
ensure the time switch allows the flashing field indications to be turned on or off manually or on a time of day basis .
mount the time clock unit on the backside of the door .
num construction requirements mount beacons and flasher controllers on the specified support .
provide span wire pole installation including erecting poles installing anchor bolts in a foundation and leveling the pole .
after raking place at least num inches of grout between the anchor base and the top of the foundation .
tension the complete span wire with the specified sag .
if the plans specify a temporary construction related span wire remove material after completion of the work .
removed temporary span wire material will become the property of the contractor unless otherwise specified in the plans .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit beacon assembly each flasher controller each flasher controller with time clock each span wire installation lump sum the department will pay for accepted temporary signal span at the bid item unit price when it is complete in place and operational for the period specified .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment .
section num luminaires page num section num luminaires num description this work consists of providing and installing luminaires on standards bridge structures or sign supports .
this work also includes lamps ballasts necessary mounting hardware and specified wiring .
install outdoor lighting in accordance with the new mexico night sky protection act nmsa num num et seq .
as detailed in the latest applicable ubc .
obtain the ubc from the state construction industries division .
num materials num roadway luminaire provide horizontalburning cobratype roadway luminaires with two num inch slip fitters on the house side for mounting on a type v standard .
provide the lamp type metal halide or highpressure sodium lamp wattage and line voltage in accordance with the contract .
provide ballasts prewired to the lamp socket may use quickdisconnect plugs requiring only connection to the power supply terminal block screw type .
provide a polycarbonatetype terminal block .
provide light distribution in accordance with illuminating engineering society of north america iesnaansi type mcoii or as specified in the contract .
submit photometric data in ies format to the project manager for approval .
num glassware provide flat borosilicate glassware .
num reflector and socket provide anodized aluminum reflectors alzak alglas or an approved equivalent .
provide highgrade porcelain sockets with both axial and vertical adjustment .
num mounting requirements mount the refractor in a doorframe assembly hinged to the luminaire at the house side and fastened at the street side with an automatic latch .
secure the reflector and lamp socket to the upper housing .
ensure the refractor and doorframe assembly are forced upward at the street side by spring pressure against a gasket seat when in the closed and latched position .
provide easily removable powerpack ballasts connected with quickdisconnect plugs .
provide a separate rear door allowing access to the ballast not disturbing the sealed optical system .
a single door allowing access to the ballast other electrical components and the optical system is acceptable if the ballast and other electrical components are removable with a screw driver .
provide the slip fitter capable of clamping on one num inch or two num inch pipe brackets without removing the clamping device .
also provide the slip fitter capable of leveling of the luminaire horizontally num .
provide gaskets of a breathing material capable of filtering and sealing the fixture capable of withstanding the temperatures created by the luminaire .
secure the gaskets in section num luminaires page num place .
provide diecast aluminum housings and refractor rings .
provide latch and exposed hinge parts of a noncorrosive material .
if on a bridge deck mount poles on vibrationdampening pads .
provide fixtures with lamp stabilizers to reduce the potential for damage from vibration and certified to withstand a numgvibration test .
num photocell controller if specified provide an individual photocell controller on the top of the housing mounted inside or outside .
provide a polycarbonate photocontrol receptacle .
num highmast luminaire provide area verticalburning type highmast luminaires for mounting above num ft. use luminaires consisting of weatherproof cast aluminum or formed aluminum ballast housing a cast aluminum slip fitter frame and a bellshaped optical assembly .
ensure that the lamp type lamp wattage and line voltage are in accordance with the contract .
ensure the slip fitter accepts a two num inch bracket and is adjustable num up or down .
provide a prewired terminal board to accommodate from no .
num to no .
num awg wire .
provide a mogul multiple prewired porcelain enclosed lamp socket with integral lamp grip that is adjustable to control the angle of maximum lumens .
provide anodized aluminum reflectors alzak alglas or an approved equivalent .
provide symmetrical light distribution with iesna type vfco full cut off .
if the contract specifies asymmetrical light distribution provide iesna type ii or iii fco .
provide other special required distributions as specified in the contract .
submit photometric data to the project manager for approval .
provide an optical assembly that allows mounting of an external shield if necessary .
unless otherwise specified provide open ventilated optical assemblies .
if required provide borosilicate glass for the bottom of the assembly .
if the contract specifies a closed type provide an optical assembly with a heat and shockresistant glass flat lens on the bottom with a silicone rubber gasket .
provide gaskets of a breathing material capable of filtering and sealing the fixture capable of withstanding the temperatures created by the luminaire .
provide a ballast easily removable from the top of the luminaire using bolts or latches and quickdisconnect electrical leads .
ensure exposed parts are of a noncorrosive material .
num area luminaire provide area luminaires that are decorativetype luminaires mounted on type iv standards or ornamental poles for rest areas or similar applications .
unless otherwise specified use luminaires that provide symmetrical light distribution .
num sign luminaire provide metal halide sign luminaires designed to illuminate a retroreflecting sign face from a horizontal position below the sign .
mount the sign luminaire with a one num inch pipe slip fitter .
provide a one num inch schedule num steel pipe support bracket securely welded to a num inch steel mounting plate designed to bolt directly to supports on the back of the sign .
section num luminaires page num contain the ballast in a weatherproof capsule designed to bolt to the mounting plate and wire to the luminaire through the support pipe .
where the additional weight does not require redesigning the detailed support the contractor may place the ballast inside the light fixture .
use a three num or four num bolt pattern where the fixture is mounted on the sign structure catwalk .
provide a luminaire with a maximum uniformity gradient of a num ratio of illumination of any one num ft num of sign face to any adjacent one num ft num .
provide a luminaire that consists of a diecast aluminum ballast housing an anodized aluminum reflector a tempered glass lens and a hinged door on reflector .
num underpass luminaire provide underpass luminaires that mount directly on a wall with surface wiring or over a recessed outlet box .
the contractor may use a flush outlet box stud or three num mounting bolts to mount the luminaire .
provide underpass luminaires that are weatherproof self contained units with integral ballasts .
provide luminaires that consist of a diecast aluminum base housing a borosilicate prismatic glass retractor and a hinged lens assembly using a manufacturers recommended gasket between the door and housing .
provide a reflector of anodized aluminum alzak alglas or approved equal .
mount aluminum reflector and socket rigidly to the housing .
provide highpressure sodium lamps in accordance with table num highintensity discharge lampballast requirements unless otherwise specified .
provide a castaluminum grid guard or a lexan shield over the refractor to protect against vandalism .
provide tamperresistant latches .
provide luminaries capable of illuminating an area equal to one num mounting height on either side of the fixture and two num mounting heights in front of the fixture .
num ballasts provide ballasts for highintensity discharge lamps for the primary current and types of lamps as specified .
unless otherwise specified the ballast shall be an integral part of the luminaire .
provide ballasts that are in accordance with the appropriate ansi standard see table num highintensity discharge lampballast requirements .
num metal halide lamp ballast provide constantwattage autoregulated ballasts for metal halide lamps with a voltage input range of ten percent num and a transient impulse level of num kv .
provide ballast of the high powerfactor design and with a lamp wattage regulation of ten percent num .
num highpressure sodium ballasts provide ballasts with isolated primary and secondary windings for num w and num w highpressure sodium lamps and a transient impulse level of num kv voltage input range of ten percent num and ballast loss of no more than ten percent num .
if using integrated circuit design ballast provide isolated primary and secondary lamp circuit windings and transient impulse level of num kv .
provide constant wattage autoregulation type ballasts for num w highpressure sodium lamps .
use ballasts having a transient impulse level of num kv a voltage input range of ten percent num and a ballast wattage loss of no greater than ten percent num .
section num luminaires page num num lamps provide hid lamps for luminaries in conformance with the requirements shown in table num highintensity discharge lamp requirements .
table num highintensity discharge lampballast requirements description watts ansi minimum initial lumens a minimum rated life h use metal halide num coated mnum num h num sign lighting num clear mnum num h num roadway num clear mnum num v num high mast sodium num clear snum num num underpass rest area num clear snum num num rest area num clear snum num num underpass rest area num clear snum num num roadway rest area num clear snum num num roadway rest area num clear snum num num roadway rest area num clear snum num num high mast avertical or horizontal bulb position indicated where different .
num construction requirements properly align and level luminaires in accordance with the manufacturers and contract design requirements .
include two num single conductors no .
num or as specified to the standard pole base or to the nearest splice point into main distribution feed for the installation of luminaires .
provide conduit and wiring to the nearest pull box splice point into the main distribution feed and necessary mounting devices for the installation of underpass luminaries .
place ornamental poles and luminaries in accordance with the contract requirements and the manufacturers recommendations as approved by the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit roadway luminaire type____ each area luminaire type____ each underpass luminaire each high mast luminaire type____ each ornamental pole and luminaire each the department will specify the luminaire type by lamp watts and lamp type abbreviations as follows mmetal halide ssodium example type nums specifies a luminaire with a numwatt highpressure sodium lamp .
num work included in payment section num luminaires page num the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a. wiring b. conduit c. mounting hardware and ballast and d. photocontrol units .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num vehicular impact attenuator units page num section num vehicular impact attenuator units num description this work consists of providing and installing vehicular impact attenuator units and sand barrel vehicular impact attenuator units .
num materials provide materials from the departments approved products list for vehicular impact attenuator units which the contractor may obtain from the state maintenance bureau .
use materials of the manufacturers latest approved design .
use materials of a uniform type and from a single manufacturer .
do not mix component parts .
suppliers of vehicular impact attenuator units proposed for including on the departments approved products list shall submit certification for approval to the traffic services engineer .
the certification shall be a signed and notarized statement prepared by the manufacturer stating that the materials proposed for use have met the testing requirements in accordance with nchrp report num .
submit manufacturers certificates literature and shop drawings to the project manager for approval before fabrication and installation of the units .
provide class a concrete if required by the contract for foundations and anchors in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide reinforcing steel in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num vehicular impact attenuator units num manufacturer identification and marking provide vehicular impact attenuator units identifying the type of unit permanently stamped on each unit .
the permanent stamp shall correspond with those shown on the shop drawings .
num sand barrel vehicular impact attenuators install sand barrel vehicular impact attenuators in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the traffic control plan .
num color provide yellow modules for sand barrel vehicular impact attenuators unless otherwise specified .
num sand provide wellgraded dry aggregate for filling ballast attenuator barrels .
provide sand in accordance with gradation limits of aashto m num unless otherwise specified on the plans or as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure the moisture content of the sand does not exceed three percent num .
num foundation pads place sand barrels in accordance with the following num .
on pallets of wood or wood composite construction that are not more than four num inches high .
ensure the lateral dimensions of the pallets are large enough to allow spacing and configuration of the sand barrels in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
on a hard dense and level surface no more than four num inches above adjacent section num vehicular impact attenuator units page num roadway grade or num .
as otherwise recommended by the manufacturer .
num reflective sheeting provide the sheeting in accordance with section num traffic signs and sign structures .
num construction requirements fabricate assemble and install vehicular impact attenuators in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the approved shop drawings .
if inplace components of impact attenuators are damaged by traffic before acceptance immediately repair or replace damaged impact attenuators .
obtain onsite assistance from the manufacturer during installation unless the contractor can prove previous experience with the installation of vehicular impact attenuator units .
ensure a manufacturers representative is present for final acceptance of the vehicular impact attenuator unit installation as directed by the project manager .
num sand barrel vehicular impact attenuator one num sand barrel vehicular impact attenuator unit consists of the number of sandfilled barrels as recommended by the manufacturer .
if using pallets place no more than two num sand barrels on each pallet .
unless otherwise specified sand barrel vehicular impact attenuators shall remain the property of the contractor .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit permanent vehicular impact attenuator unit each vehicular impact attenuator unit work zones each sand barrel vehicular impact attenuator unit each remove and reset each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately a .
hardware b. pallets c. sand d. concrete e. reinforcing steel f. bolts g. cables h. steel plates i .
foundation materials and j .
foundation preparation .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this section num vehicular impact attenuator units page num specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
section num pavement marking removal page num section num pavement marking removal num description this work consists of removing existing pavement stripes and markings .
num materialsreserved num construction requirements use equipment that is capable of completely removing pavement stripes num inch num inch deep and at least twice the width of the stripe .
remove temporary pavement stripes and markings when the project manager determines that they are no longer required for traffic control .
do not use nonreflective black removable marking tape or overpainting to obliterate temporary pavement markings .
provide traffic control in accordance with section num maintenance of traffic and section num traffic control management .
remove and dispose of debris as directed by the project manager .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment pay item pay unit removal of pavement stripe foot removal of pavement marking each num work included in payment the following work and items will be considered as included in the payment for the main items and will not be measured or paid for separately repair of damaged pavement .
any other items installed by the contractor for the installation of items covered by this specification shall be consider incidental to the items listed in section num basis of payment and num work included in payment .
division num page num division num construction staking and post construction plans division contents num construction staking by the contractor num num post construction plans num section num construction staking by the contractor page num section num construction staking by the contractor num description num general this work consists of construction staking essential for the control and completion of the project .
num departmentsupplied documents and services the department will provide the contractor with survey data sufficient to layout control and complete the project .
survey data includes but is not limited to the following num .
location notes num .
design grades num .
elevations num .
slopes num .
projected locations of slope stake catch points and num .
lines and grades .
the department will supply the data as printout sheets field books electronic files when available and at the discretion of the department right of way maps or plans .
contractor will locate and verify all data points .
num contractorsupplied personnel services provide qualified personnel who are experienced in highway construction staking to perform the staking .
per nmsa num public work a new mexico licensed professional surveyor is required to be in responsible charge of construction staking surveys for engineering and architectural public works projects with a construction cost of num or greater .
locate and establish control points with the data given in the plans .
verify departmentprovided survey data and submit changes or adjustments including recorded data to the project manager for approval at no cost to the department .
num construction requirements num general do not disturb cover or remove reference marks without providing written documentation of the disturbed covered or removed reference mark to the project manager for approval .
reference marks include the following num .
triangulation stations num .
benchmarks num .
corners num .
monuments num .
stake num .
witness marks or num .
other reference marks located within the construction limits including the limits of temporary construction permits or on the right of way line of this project .
coordinate the reestablishment of removed or destroyed markers with the department .
when directed reset destroyed reference markers at no additional cost to the department in accordance with num nmsa reference marks removal or obliteration replacement and section num construction staking by the contractor page num num nmac minimum standards for surveying in new mexico and the geodetic mark preservation guidebook as prepared by the national geodetic survey .
submit notes regarding the referencing of monuments to the project manager .
the department will charge the contractor num for each monument the contractor improperly referenced before disturbing covering or removing .
num constructionstaking documentation complete constructionstaking field notes and other documentation in accordance with the departments current nmdot survey handbook and accepted industry methods achieving required accuracy .
keep field notes in a standard field notebook in a clear orderly and neat manner consistent with professional surveying practices unless stated otherwise in the contract .
constructionstaking documentation will become the property of the department when the work is complete .
provide constructionstaking documentation to the project manager .
submit earthwork quantities slope staking surface extracted cross sections and earthwork calculations to the project manager for review before completing that phase of the work .
ensure a new mexico licensed professional surveyor or professional engineer stamps and certifies the quantities and all submittals .
the department will not accept earthwork quantities until the project manager reviews and approves these quantities .
submit earthwork quantity information in hard copy using doubleend area or prismoidal computations or using departmentapproved computer software .
num control points the contractor shall use the reference control points provided by the department or set by the contractors personnel to establish constructionstaking points and to layout and control the work .
notify the project manager of errors and omissions discovered in the control points before beginning affected work .
move and reestablish benchmarks control points or monuments belonging to agencies of the united states state or local governments in accordance with the accepted procedures of the respective agency .
if the project manager directs the contractor to perform this work the department will unless due to contractor operations or if detailed in the contract pay in accordance with section num extra work .
contractor will make every effort to preserve and reference the provided survey control points in such a manner that their location can be reestablished by the contractor in cases of weather related disturbances or vandalism .
contractor will perform necessary transformationcalibration utilizing the referenced control points provided by the department so that all survey work is in the coordinate system provided by the dot .
num accuracy requirements meet accuracy requirements dictated by the individual elements of the work .
num accuracy verification the project manager will spot check the accuracy of the construction stakes lines grades and layouts but will assume no responsibility for the accuracy or the final result .
the project manager will inform the contractor of discrepancies immediately .
section num construction staking by the contractor page num num nonspecified restaking and reestablishment of control the contractor shall perform restaking due to the following conditions at no additional cost to the department num .
errors or omissions by contractor personnel or num .
the contractors negligence .
the department will review restaking in accordance with section num significant changes in the character of work section num differing site conditions and section num extra work when due to the following conditions num .
resulting from errors or omissions by the department num .
at the departments request or num .
circumstances beyond the contractors control .
num construction staking num locations and elevations verify locations and elevations of control points and benchmarks provided .
establish as necessary .
num centerline establish necessary construction centerline project stationing and reference stakes for use in setting the grade and finishing stakes and reestablishing the construction centerline .
establish necessary right of way centerline project stationing and reference stakes for use in determining the location of the right of way for construction staking purposes and re establishing the right of way centerline .
num slope stakes initial ground topographic survey and clearing stakes set slope stakes and stationing at intervals no greater than num ft .
perform initial ground topographic survey before beginning construction .
num grade finishing stakes set grade finishing stakes blue tops to establish grade elevations and horizontal alignment at the top of subgrade top of base course and top of subbase .
set the finish stakes at intervals no more than num ft .
if the contractor uses automatic grade equipment the contractor shall provide equipment specifications that will allow interval adjustments as per manufactures recommendation .
num drainage structures survey and plot drainage structure locations and prepare structure drawings to verify the accuracy of the structure sections shown on the plans .
submit the plotted drainage structure profiles along with a revised structure list to the project manager for review and acceptance prior to drainage structure construction .
num bridges perform all bridge staking using the vertical and horizontal control points provided by the department .
stake plot and submit a profile grade for the roadway approaches departures approach slabs and bridges .
identify any necessary adjustments before submitting to the project manager .
num sign structures section num construction staking by the contractor page num stake all new sign locations .
stake and plot locations for extruded and overhead sign structures .
submit the plotted profile to the project manager for acceptance before submitting shop drawings for extruded and overhead sign structures and before ordering the materials .
num slope stake changes perform routine slope stake changes as needed to blend slopes into the existing terrain as approved by the project manager .
perform slope stake changes required to blend slopes into the existing terrain as approved by the project manager for additional work as defined per section num significant changes in the character of work section num differing site conditions and section num extra work .
num curbs and gutters perform staking using vertical and horizontal control points provided by the department .
num miscellaneous staking the contractor shall perform miscellaneous staking using vertical and horizontal control points provided by the department .
miscellaneous staking includes staking for the following num .
material and borrow pits required for contract payment num .
guardrails num .
riprap num .
construction signs num .
delineators num .
pavement markings num .
cattle guards num .
turnouts num .
ditches num .
fences num .
traffic control devices num .
permanent and major signs and num .
other miscellaneous work the project manager deems necessary to properly control the work .
num other staking changes perform unexpected work and construction staking changes as directed by the project manager necessary for the completion of the work .
num fence station markers provide a shopmade station marker every fifth station .
the marker shall be one num inch five num inch num inch black on white with three num inch stenciled numbers .
mount the markers on the fence or on an appropriate shopmade post four num feet above the ground .
num removal and disposal of stakes after project completion and before final acceptance remove and dispose of stakes and markers .
num method of measurement submit a constructionstaking schedule of values as part of cpm or monthly progress section num construction staking by the contractor page num schedule to the project manager for approval .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit construction staking by the contractor lump sum the department will make partial payments in accordance with the approved constructionstaking schedule of values .
the department considers slope stake changes and other staking changes as incidental to the completion of the work and will not measure or pay for it separately .
section num post construction plans page num section num post construction plans num description num general this work consists of providing post construction plans to show in detail increases or decreases in quantities and alterations in the details of the plans including but not limited to alterations in the grade or alignment of the road structures or both .
post construction plans shall be kept current and readily available at all times for the project manager to review .
the post construction plans including any revised plan sheets shall be neat legible and of the size let .
all revisions to the original plans shall be delineated in black ink located properly on the drawing legible and true to scale .
every post construction plan profile and cross section sheet shall be designated as such by note or stamp asbuilt in the upper right area in black .
num contractorsupplied documents and services provide qualified personnel to perform post construction plan updates and submittal in a professional timely and accurate manner .
ensure the personnel supervising the operation are knowledgeable and experienced in surveying and mapping of post construction plans .
if the contractor has been given electronic data for surveyingconstruction staking the submittal will be required to be both electronic paper copy .
if there is no electronic data submitted for survey the post construction plans will be paper copy submittals .
all paper copy submittals shall be num x num in size unless otherwise specified by the project manager .
num construction requirements num general the post construction plan submittal shall include but not be limited to the following num .
changes to the length of project in miles num .
changes to the b.o.p .
and e.o.p .
in stationing and milepost location num .
changes to the station equations all equations shall be listed num .
all structures as built and changes to major structures with structure number and span length shall be shown on the plan and profile sheets and structure sheets num .
typical section changes and station to station locations including subexcavation limits cut and fill limits with the in place depth of each type of surfacing subexcavation subbase base course hma etc .
on each plan and profile sheet num .
final quantities in appropriate columns on the plan set num .
changes to widths and locations of turnouts and median openings with radii indicated and changes to structures on plan and profile sheets num .
all line grade and super elevation rate changes on plan and profile sheets and structure location sheets num .
all fencing gates and cattle guards remaining and built on the structure quantity sheets .
specify types of fencing and width of gates and cattle guards num .
relocation and clearance of utility lines on utility sheets including casings offsets depths or elevations .
service lines to private property are not required num .
bridges all changes shall be shown on structure location sheets and detail sheets .
show the top elevation of the longest and shortest pile in each pier and abutment on the structure location sheet .
also show changes in bridge decks thickness num .
all build notes shall be edited identifying changes made .
build notes not requiring edit shall be check marked num .
verify all change order information excluding gross receipt tax change orders section num post construction plans page num has been transferred to the post construction plans and the proper sheets have been inserted and indexed and refer to the change order number num .
post construction plans should not use destructive binding should be bound in a manner acceptable by the project manager and num .
general notescall out sheets shall be edited changing the tense of each item to indicate what was done strikethrough of items not required or completed on the project shall be done retaining legibility .
num basis of payment pay item pay unit post construction plans lump sum division num page num division num quality criteria division contents num quality controlquality assurance qcqa num section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa definitions direct supervision .
the required supervision of a ttcp trainee by a certified ttcp technician who is on a project with the trainee and who is both signing off and is personally responsible for all of that trainees sampling and testing procedures results and reports .
qualified sampling and testing technician .
a technician who has been certified under ttcp to independently perform inspections sampling and testing in specified materials testing areas for either quality control or acceptance testing .
the term qualified and certified have the same meaning .
ttcp trainee .
a technician who has attended the appropriate ttcp training class and has a certificate of completion and is receiving required onthejobtraining under the direct supervision of a ttcp certified technician as such is eligible to take a particular ttcp certification exam .
validation .
a procedure using statistical methods to compare the contractors and the departments test results specifically the ftest to compare variances and ttest to compare means .
num inspections and testing of materials num general materials are subject to inspection sampling and testing before acceptance of the work .
references in the contract to test methods or specifications are to the latest versions as of the bid advertisement date unless otherwise noted .
test methods may be subject to modification at the discretion of the state materials bureau .
the departments current ttcp manual contains aashto and astm test method modifications .
testing frequency must be equal to or greater than the minimum testing requirements available here httpdot.state.nm.us the department will sample and test materials for acceptance unless otherwise specified in the contract .
the department will provide acceptance test results to the contractor within num working days after sampling but only after contractor qc tests have been received for the same sublot and will provide other test results to the contractor upon request .
department testing is not intended for quality control .
num technician certification ensure that testing is performed under the direct supervision of an individual certified by the state materials bureaus ttcp .
certification is based on demonstration of abilities for test methods and procedures and a written test .
the ttcp board of directors in conjunction with the state materials bureau and the state construction bureau will establish term and expiration date of certification and requirements for renewal of certification .
if the competence of a certified individual is questioned the question of competence must be documented in accordance with the ttcp manual .
the ttcp manual requires a written complaint be addressed to the ttcp administrator or the state materials engineer .
the state materials bureau will investigate the concern through the ttcp .
if this investigation substantiates the concern disciplinary action such as probation revocation or suspension of certification will be implemented in accordance with procedures established by the ttcp board of directors .
num acceptance sampling and testing the department will sample and test in accordance with table num minimum acceptance guidelines or at a lesser sublot size for acceptance purposes as determined by the project manager before production of material begins .
if material appears defective or if the project manager determines that a change in the process or product has occurred additional sampling and testing may occur .
when additional informational sampling and section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num testing is performed the results will be used only to determine if corrective actions need to be taken by the contractor and will not be incorporated into the quality level analysis .
the department will conduct acceptance testing independently from the contractors quality control testing .
if the departments acceptance testing validates in method and property to the contractors quality control testing the department will use both for acceptance and pay factor determination .
use of the contractors test results is dependent on the following conditions num .
the contractor uses quality control procedures as described in section num contractor quality control .
num .
the department validates the contractors test results against the departments test results using the ftest and ttest conducted at a level of significance of num .
num .
the contractor shall use all test results from the contractors random sampling plan as detailed in the quality control plan per section num quality control plan .
do not include informational test data obtained by test results beyond the contractors random sampling plan locations .
if a split sample is taken to determine deviations between contractor and department process only data obtained from a random sampling plan location can be utilized in the quality level analysis .
if a split sample is tested by the contractor and department for informational purposes and the location does not represent either the contractors or departments random sampling plan locations neither test data results are to be included in the quality level analysis .
if the department can not validate the contractors test data at any time during the project the project manager and quality control technician will investigate to determine why and make corrections if possible .
if the discrepancy can not be resolved then unless otherwise approved by the assistant district engineer for construction the department will determine the pay factor using the departments test values only for all characteristics .
num contractor quality control perform quality control sampling testing and inspection in accordance with table num minimum process control guidelines for aggregates and base course table num minimum process control guidelines for hot mix asphalt and table num minimum process control guidelines for portland cement concrete pavement .
num quality control plan provide a quality control plan to control the quality of the product .
at the pre construction conference be prepared to discuss quality control responsibilities for specific contract items .
submit the quality control plan to the project manager at least two num weeks before starting work .
itemize inspections testing procedures sampling and testing frequencies and corrective action strategies that the contractor will use to control the work .
develop the quality control plan using the departments contractor process quality control plan guidelines available from the project manager or state construction bureau .
do not begin work that requires quality control testing for acceptance without a quality control plan that has been reviewed and approved by the project manager and the district laboratory supervisor .
provide written certification that testing equipment is calibrated and meets the applicable specifications .
num quality control laboratory perform the quality control testing using a private testing laboratory or a contractor provided laboratory .
use a portable or permanent quality control type ii laboratory in accordance with section num field office equipment .
calibrate or check testing equipment in accordance with aashto r num and any time the equipment is moved .
maintain calibration documentation at the laboratory and provide this to the project manager upon request .
the project manager in conjunction with the district lab supervisor will determine acceptability of the quality control laboratory .
allow the department unrestricted access to section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num the laboratory .
the department will conduct independent inspection of the contractors field laboratory .
the project manager will provide the contractor a written accounting of laboratory deficiencies .
num plan administration and technician qualification identify the individual who will administer the plan .
the individual shall have full authority to take actions necessary for the successful operation of the plan .
quality control technicians qcts performing the actual sampling testing or inspection shall be ttcp certified as described in section num technician certification .
cease production if certified personnel are unavailable on the project .
num sampling the sampling plan shall contain a random sampling selection technique in accordance with specified department aashto or astm procedures as modified by the state materials bureau .
allow the project manager to witness all sampling and testing .
take additional samples if directed by the project manager .
the sampling plan shall be submitted as a component of the quality control plan .
num testing the department will use test results from the random sampling plan only in the quality level analysis for pay factor determination .
additional informational test results will not be used in the quality level analysis .
the contractor shall provide original quality control test results on approved forms including all original supporting handwritten worksheets and notes to the project manager within num working days of sampling .
the technician performing the testing shall sign and certify the results as true and accurate to the best of my belief and knowledge prior to providing the results to the department .
failure to provide the results within num working day of sampling may result in the project manager ordering the contractor to cease hma operations until said results are provided to the project manager .
num records maintain copies of the complete set of original quality control test records including supporting documents calculations scratch sheets internal forms etc .
and upon request make them available to the project manager within num hours .
no hard copy laboratory testing documentation shall be destroyed for any reason even after the data is entered into the computer spreadsheet for analysis .
if complete records are not provided as requested the department may determine the pay factor using the departments test values only for all testing characteristics .
maintain copies of test documentation for a minimum of three num years after the physical completion date of the project .
num control charts update departmentapproved test control charts daily on all tests in accordance with table num minimum process control guidelines for aggregates and base course table num minimum process control guidelines for hotmix asphalt and table num minimum process control guidelines for portland cement concrete pavement .
keep at a location approved by the project manager .
provide at least the following information on the charts num .
project number num .
contract item number num .
test number num .
each test parameter num .
upper and lower specification limit applicable to each test parameter and num .
the contractors test results .
section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num use the charts for identifying product and equipment problems and potential pay factor reductions .
notify the project manager of any identified problems within num hours .
num independent assurance testing ttcp certified independent personnel will perform independent assurance testing on split samples from quality control and acceptance programs to ensure that the contractor and department field personnel are using correct and accurate procedures and the proper equipment .
these personnel will not have direct responsibility for quality control or acceptance testing .
num evaluation of materials for acceptance the department will analyze lot acceptance test results collectively and statistically using the quality level analysis method .
quality level analysis is a statistical procedure for estimating the percent compliance with a specification it is affected by shifts in the arithmetic mean and by the sample standard deviations .
the department will use this analysis to estimate the total percent of the lot that is within specification limits .
the maximum pay factor per lot is num .
the department may accept a lot containing material below a pay factor of num at a reduced price in accordance with the following criteria num .
the composite pay factor is at least num num .
there are no rejectable individual criteria agency contractor or combined and num .
the project manager does not identify isolated defects i.e .
segregation or other construction related material defects .
the department will consider a written request to accept a material lot below the target value tv that does not meet the above criteria but at a composite pay factor not to exceed num .
the contractor shall include an engineering analysis showing expected material performance .
the assistant district engineer for construction will decide if the material may remain in place and determine the final pay factor for the material in question .
if less than three num samples are obtained at the time a lot is terminated they shall be incorporated in the prior lot .
if no prior lot exists the disposition of the material shall be decided by the assistant district engineer for construction after evaluating with nonqla criteria in accordance with section num .
the project manager may reject material that appears to be defective based on visual inspection .
num quality level analysis qla use the following steps to calculate the standard deviation num .
do not include test results for material not used in the work num .
calculate the arithmetic mean of the test results using the following equation n x x equation num where x is the arithmetic mean is the summation of x is the individual test value n is the number of test values num .
calculate the sample standard deviations using the following equation section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num num num n x x s equation num where s is the sample standard deviation is the summation of x is the individual test value x is the arithmetic mean n is the number of test values num .
calculate the upper quality index using the following equation s x usl qu equation num where qu is the upper quality index usl is the upper specification limit or tv plus allowable deviation above tv x is the arithmetic mean s is the sample standard deviation tv is the target value num .
calculate the lower quality index using the following equation s lsl x ql equation num where ql is the lower quality index x is the arithmetic mean lsl is the lower specification limit or tv minus allowable deviation below tv s is the sample standard deviation num .
determine pu the percent of test values below the upper specification limit which corresponds to a given qu from table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql .
if a usl is not specified pu is num .
num .
determine pl the percent of test values above the lower specification limit which corresponds to a given ql from table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql .
if an lsl is not specified pl is num .
num .
calculate the quality level the total percent within specification limits using the following equation num l u p p q equation num where q is the quality level u p is the percent of test values below the upper specification limit which corresponds to a given upper quality index qu section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num l p is the percent of test values above the lower specification limit which corresponds to a given lower quality index ql num .
using the quality level determine the lot pay factor from table num pay factors .
num .
calculate the composite pay factor for each lot using the following equation j j f f f f pf f pf f pf cpf num num j num num num num equation num where cpf is the composite pay factor f is the price adjustment factor specified for the applicable material j is the number of evaluated components pf is the individual pay factor determined for each component carry the numbers in the above calculations to significant figures and round them in accordance with aashto r num .
num method of measurementreserved num basis of payment the department will pay for contractor process quality control on qla projects as follows num .
num of the lump sum pay item or num of the total original contract amount whichever is less upon approval of the quality control plan and num .
the remaining lump sum prorated based on total job progress .
the department will withhold payment if the contractor does not provide test result documentation in accordance with the contract .
pay item pay unit contractor process quality control lump sum section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql pu or pl n num num num num num num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to x num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num table num quality level analysis by the standard deviation method upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql pu or pl n num num num num num num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to x num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note for negative values of qu or ql pu or pl is equal to num minus the table value for pu or pl .
if the value of qu or ql does not correspond exactly to a figure in the table use the next lower figure .
table num pay factors pay factor minimum required percent of work within specifications limits for a given pay factor pupl num n num num num num num num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num table num pay factors pay factor minimum required percent of work within specifications limits for a given pay factor pupl num n num num num num num num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject values less than those shown above note if the value of pupl num does not correspond to a pupl num value in this table use the next lower pupl num value section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num table num minimum process control guidelines for aggregates base course and rap qc item property testing frequency test method aggregate for base course hot mix asphalt warm mix asphalt pccp and open graded friction course sampling as specified aashto t num num gradation num per num ton aashto t num num num a fractured faces nmdot method ff num sand equivalent aashto t num c plasticity index aashto t num num moisture content as needed to control operations aashto t num rap recycled asphalt pavement used in hma wma and base course sampling as specified aashto tnum num gradation num per day on rap that is prepared for inclusion in the base course or hma aashto tnum num num asphalt content aashto tnum aggregates for hma wma los angeles wear soundness loss absorption as needed to confirm quality based on aashto tp num testing results aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aggregate for pccp sampling as specified aashto t num num gradation num per num ton aashto t num num sand equivalent aashto t num moisture content as needed to control operations aashto t num aggregates for base course sampling as specified aashto t num num moisture content num per num ton aashto t num density aashto t num gradation aashto t num num thickness b afor gradations to control crushing operations the contractor may at its own risk modify aashto t num to improve the test result timelines .
modified method tests will not be considered in acceptance determinations by the project manager .
btake measurements at a randomly selected location .
determine thickness by removing all of the inplace compacted material placing a straight edge tool i.e .
a survey lath across the hole measuring the thickness to the nearest num inch using a measuring tape and then replacing and recompacting the removed material .
cthis test will not be done for base course .
section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num table num minimum process control guidelines for hot mix asphalt and warm mix asphalt qc item property testing frequency test method hma wma sampling as specified aashto t num agency method asnum hydrated lime or anhydrite based material content daily totalizing weighing device flatelongated particles daily astm d num fine aggregate angularity daily aashto t num asphalt content num per num ton c aashto t num gradation aashto t num num num air voids aashto t num num num voids in mineral aggregate vma aashto r num voids filled with asphalt vfa aashto r num dust to binder ratio aashto r num gyratory tests aashto t num thickness a mat density cores b aashto t num num density nuclear as needed to control operations aashto t num temperature as needed to control operations atake measurement at a randomly selected location .
determine thickness by coring the in place compacted material and measuring the thickness to the nearest num inch using a measuring tape .
bdensity calculation will use the daily average of contractor and department maximum specific gravity as validated by ftest and ttest in the daily calculation .
cminimum of one num test per day and three num tests per sublot except for maximum specific gravity .
obtain a minimum of two num tests per day for maximum specific gravity .
if sublot size is reduced to num tons or less perform testing at a rate of num per num tons with a minimum of one num per day .
section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num table num minimum process control guidelines for portland cement concrete pavement qc item property testing frequency test method fresh concrete for pccp unit weight num per num yd num aashto t num air entrainment num per num yd num aashto t num slump num per num yd num aashto t num compressive strength num per num yd num aashto t num num num pccp in place thickness a num per num yd num b acomplete corrective work specified in section num surfacing smoothness requirements before determining pavement thickness bdetermine thickness by actual survey conducted before and after the construction of the pccp at fixed randomly selected locations .
table num minimum acceptance guidelines qa item property point of acceptance sublot size lot size test method base course sampling as specified aashto t num num gradation processed windrow num per num ton num tons aashto t num num thickness after compaction c density aashto t num num num hma wma sampling as specified aashto t num asphalt content behind laydown machine before compaction one tenth of the lot size f num to num tons aashto t num gyratory tests aashto t num gradation aashto t num num air voids aashto t num num num voids in mineral aggregate vma aashto r num dust to binder ratio aashto r num thickness after compaction d mat density cores a aashto t num num section num quality controlquality assurance qcqa page num table num minimum acceptance guidelines qa item property point of acceptance sublot size lot size test method fresh concrete for pccp air content deliver to grade num per num yd num num yd num aashto t num compressive strength aashto t num num num inplace pccp thickness b num per num yd num num yd num e adensity calculation will utilize daily average of contractor and department maximum specific gravity as validated by ftest and ttest .
the department will obtain a minimum of one num maximum specific gravity sample per day .
bcomplete corrective work specified in section num surfacing smoothness requirements before determining pavement thickness ctake measurement at a randomly selected location .
determine the thickness by removing all of the inplace compacted material placing a straight edge tool i.e .
a survey lath across the hole and measuring the thickness to the nearest num inch using a measuring tape .
dtake measurements at a randomly selected location .
at that location the thickness shall be determined by coring the inplace compacted material and measuring the thickness to the nearest num inch using a measuring tape .
edetermine thickness by actual survey conducted before and after the construction of the pccp at fixed randomly selected locations .
fa lesser sublot size for acceptance purposes as determined by the project manager before production of material begins can be established .
index page num index a acceptance num num num num final num partial num num work num num num num num num num act of god num addendum num admixtures num num num drilled shafts num flowable fill num nonshrink grout num portland cement concrete num num shotcrete num advertisement num num aggregate num alkalisilica reactivity num bridge joint strip seals num castinplace concrete pipe num concrete structure repair num concrete structures num flowable fill num minor paving num miscellaneous paving num mse retaining structures num open graded friction course num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num num portland cement concrete num num num num num precast concrete structures num pull boxes and splice cabinets num shotcrete num num num vehicular impact attenuator units num aggregate coarse concrete structure repair num portland cement concrete num prestressed concrete members num aggregate fine crack sealing num nonshrink mortar num portland cement concrete num num alkalisilica reactivity num num cement num flyash num precast concrete structures num aluminum num num num num num num num num aluminum panel signs num anchor bolts beacons and temporary signals num cementitiousgrouted num metal barrier num protective coating num num signal and lighting foundations num signal and lighting standards num steel structures num num num apparent low bidder num asphalt cold mill and inlay num culvert coating num num emulsified index page num treated subgrade num expansion joint filler num hot inplace recycling num minor paving num miscellaneous paving num opengraded friction course num prime coat num rejuvinating agent num num structural plate coating num num tack coat num asphalt content minor paving num num open graded friction course num asphalt painttraffic signs and structures num asphalt pavement detour num hot inplace recycling num retroreflective plastic pavement markings num sealingresealing concrete pavement joints num singlemachine hot inplace surface repairing num assistant district engineer ade num award num b back panel num backer rod num num num polymer bridge joint seals num backfill num num castinplace concrete pipe num num clearing and grubbing num conduit num major structures num mse retaining structures num num num num pipe culverts num num pull boxes and splice cabinets num signals and lighting num structural plate structures num num traffic signs and structures num bar graph num num num bar reinforcement num barrels num barricades num barrier num num num num num see posts barrier concrete wall penetrating water repellent treatment num barrier delineation num num base course num num approach slabs num construction staking num major structures num process place and compact existing pavement num recycled asphalt num baseline schedule num base posts num construction signing num num bases of payment num beacons num beams coating structural steel num num num placement num index page num prestressed concrete num profiling num bearing pads elastomeric num mse retaining structures num steel structures num surface preparation num bearing piles num drilled shafts num load testing num standards num bid num bid form num bid guaranty num num num num bid item num bid item price num bid item unit price num bid opening num num num num num num bid package num num num num num bid schedule num num num num bid submittal required documents for num num bidder num num num bituminous plants miscellaneous paving num open graded friction course num blasting num blasting requirements num num num num blending sand num num num num num minor paving num blotter material prime coat num bolts beacons and temp .
signal equipment num highstrength num luminaires num metal barrier num signal and lighting standards num num steel structures num num num structural plate structures num num traffic signs and structures num treated timber num num num bond num num num num num num num contract num num num num performance num num bondbreaker sealing concrete pavement joints num borrow num num treated subgrade num borrow pit num box culvert num num num num embankment and backfill num structural plate structures num breakaway num bridge num abutments num approach num num num bearing pad num num elastomeric num bearing pad seats num num num num concrete railing curing num index page num finishing num penetrating water repellent treatment num conduit num num construction staking num deck num num num num acceptance num concrete num num num num num num num concrete testing num crack sealing num cracking and sealing concrete pavement num curing num num num falsework num finishing num num num forms num num grooving num joints num metal forms num penetrating water repellent treatment num placement num preplacement meeting num reinforcement num water repellent num elastomeric compression joint seals num joint strip seals num luminaires num metal railing num coating num num num num piling num pull boxes and splice cabinets num rehabilitation num shop drawings num sole plates num num steel bolting num recoating num num substructure num superstructure num wingwall num business hours num c cabinet secretary num cabinets support equipment and wiring num calendar day num casing drilled shafts num num num num num prebored holes num castinplace pipe curing num cattle guard excavation and backfill num shop drawings num steel structures num cement alkalisilica reactivity num bearing piles dowel method num bonding concrete num castinplace concrete pipe num finishing num num flowable fill num num index page num fly ash see fly ash mix design num num num num approval num nonshrink grout num pull boxes and splice cabinets num reinforced concrete pipe joints num shotcrete num treated subgrade num certificate of compliance num coating of new structural steel num num crack sealant num num curing materials num fly ash num mse retaining structures num polymer bridge joint seals num prestressing steel num recoating structures num sign materials num sign structures and hardware num signal assemblies num structural steel num welding consumables num traffic paint num change order num channelization devices num see traffic control devices for construction chief engineer num chemical adhesive anchors num cementitiousgrouted dowelsanchors num equipmentmaterials num chill factor num num num num cinders num num claims num num num num num num cleaning coating of structural steel num recoating structures num repair of concrete structures num shotcrete num clearing and grubbing num closed circuit television cctv cameras num closed loop system num coating of structural steel num cofferdams dewatering num cold milling surface treatment num pavement surface restoration num coldapplied loop detector sealant num commercial material source num compaction backfill for major structures num num backfill for minor structures num base course rock cuts num bearing piles num blading and reshaping num bridge joint strip seals num castinplace concrete pipe num clearing and grubbing stump holes num concrete structures num cracking and seating of concrete pavement num embankment num index page num roadbed num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement num department acceptance num linear grading num miscellaneous paving num mse retaining structures num num bridge approaches num foundation num opengraded friction course num pavement surface restoration num pipe culverts storm drains and structural plate pipes num num prime coat num processing placing and compacting existing pavement num removal of ibeam footings num signals and lighting num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num num num num structural plate structures num superstructure concrete num traffic signs and structures num treated subgrade num num num completion dates num compliance with see specifications plans num num num num num num num num num num num num concrete see structures aggregate num num num batching num backfill num num bearing piles num load testing num openend pipe piles num prebored holes num splices num castinplace pipe dimensions num forms num joints num placement num cracking and seating pavement num curing num drilled shafts num integrity testing num placement num testing num elastomeric num mixing and placing num epoxy injection num flexible conduit num forms num num joints num latex modified num minor structures num mse retaining structures num pcc mix designs num pipe culverts num placement num polymer bridge deck overlay num portland cement concrete pavement diamond grinding and grooving num precast num handling storing and shipping num index page num quality control num shop drawings num testing num precast prestressed piles num prestressed members num finishing num forms num handling and storing num placement num testing num pull boxes and splice cabinets num num recycled pavement num reinforced concrete pipe num num num num joints num repair of structures num sealing pavement joints num structures num num num superstructure weather limitations num wave equation analysis num weather limitations num concrete pavement joint see sealant concrete plant num drilled shafts num precast concrete structures num prestressed concrete members num conduit bonding and grounding num intermediate metallic conduit num luminaires num pull boxes and splice cabinets num rigid electrical num signals and lighting num backfill num traffic signs structures num wiring num cones num constancy of intervals num construction maintenance easement cme num construction signing posts num signing num construction staking num documentation num construction zone num contract num award and execution of num bonds num cost proposal num num default of num failure to complete on time num failure to execute num intent of num termination of num num contractor num contract time num calender day num num num determination and execution of num failure to complete on time num notice to proceed num num index page num protest of num substantial completion num num num num num termination of contract time num traffic control management num control cabinet dimensions num controller portable changeable message sign num trafficactuated num controller cabinet num num beacons temporary signals num during construction num foundation num num lighting num num salvage num wiring num controller interconnect systems num controller requirements num coordination plans num coring by the contractor drilled shafts num hot mix asphalt and opengraded friction course num portland cement concrete pavement num shotcrete num coring ducts nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members num coring rock drilled shafts num corner posts num num num num num num num num num country num crack sealant hotpoured num cracking and seating pavement num cultural resource num num cultural resource professional num culvert num num num clearing and grubbing num concrete structures num num num num num excavation and backfill for num num flowable fill num metal box num pull boxes and splice cabinets num curb and gutter construction staking num curing num finishing num penetrating water repellent treatment num curb asphalt num curbs superstructure concrete num curing castinplace concrete pipe num cementitiousgrouted dowels and anchors num coating structural steel num num num cold weather concrete num concrete chemical anchors num concrete grooving num concrete mix design development num concrete structure repair num crack sealing num num cylinders num index page num epoxy injection num flowable fill num culverts num fogging system num grouted dowels and anchors num hotpoured crack sealant num mse retaining structures num nonshrink grout num nonshrink mortar num num opening bridgeapproach slabs to traffic num pavement markings num penetrating water repellent treatment num polymer bridge joint seals num polymer bridge joint seals concrete joint num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num portland cement concrete pavement num precast concrete structures num num prestressed concrete members num rcp joints num recoating structures num shotcrete num num num structural concrete num superstructure concrete num tack coat num treated subgrade num work bridges num curing compound concrete structures num fogging system num shotcrete num d damages liquidated num num day num debarment num num operaton num default of contract num delay num delayextend operaton num deleterious material num delineator posts num num num num num demolition hydro num density backfill castinplace concrete pipe num major structures num minor structures num structural plate structures num drilled shafts slurry num driven bearing piles num foundation traffic signs and structures num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement num minor paving num miscellaneous paving num mse retaining structures num num num pavement surface restoration num roadbed embankment num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num num index page num treated subgrade num num density and moisture control num major structures num department num detection zone placement num detector loop wiring num operation tests num vehicle num detector panel and rack num detectors num detour num num detour pavements num dewatering excavation and backfill for culverts and minor structures num excavation and backfill for major structures num num mse retaining structures num diamond grinding num num diamond grooving pccp num num superstructure num diary traffic control num differing site conditions restakingreestablishment of control num slope stake changes num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num disposal clearing and grubbing num cold milling num curing compound num detour pavement num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement num panel sign posts and footings num pavement markings num pavement surface restoration deleterious material num salvage steel num sealant material concrete pavement joints num shotcrete cleanup num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num slurry drilled shafts num expired num structural steel paint removalsurface preparation debris num unsuitable material castinplace concrete pipe num major structures num structural plate structures num unsuitableexcess material num disposal of stakes see removals district num district engineer de num ditches construction staking num culvert inletsoutlets num linear grading num paving num num divided highway num dowels grouted num precast concrete piles num index page num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel num protective coating of new structural steel num drill seeding num drilled shafts num concrete num dynamic testing num integrity testing num load testing num drip irrigation num drive pads num driven bearing piles num embankment num load testing num drop inlets num junction boxes num shop drawings grates num num num drums channelization num ducted loop wire num e earth anchor system num earth retaining structures mechanically stabilized num earthwork operations num elastomer bridge joint strip seals num elastomeric bearing pads num num num elastomeric compound concrete pipe num elastomeric compression joint seals num num concrete structures num elastomeric concrete num placement num elastomeric pads mse retaining structures num electrical and mechanical equipment guarantees signal assemblies num electrical conduit rigid num electrical requirements conduit num sign structures num signals and lighting num num num electronics num embankment num num num num num bearing piles num clearing and grubbing num culverts and minor structures num drilled shafts num major structures num num mse retaining structures num roadbed num treated subgrade num emergency vehicle optical detector system num engineer num entrance angle ea num environmental professional num environmental program manager num environmental resource num environmental specialist num epoxy polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num epoxy injection num epoxycoated reinforcement concrete vibration num num index page num equipment num bearing piles load testing num num blasting num bridge deck concrete num castinplace concrete pipe num num coating of misc .
structural steel num coating of new structural steel num cold milling num concrete placement num concrete pumping num num concrete structure repair num cracking and seating concrete pavement num drilled shafts num epoxy injection num force account num num diamond grinding and grooving of pccp num highstrength bolts num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement num num hotpoured crack sealant num latexmodified concrete num miscellaneous paving num mse retaining structures num nonshrink grout for posttensioned bridge members num pavement markings num pavement surface restoration num num pile driving num pile integrity testing num num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num num precast concrete structures num prestressed concrete members num prime coat num removal of pavement markings num rental rates blue book num num shotcrete num num singlemaching hot inplace surface repaving num num tack coat num treated subgrade num evod optical detector num evod optical detector cable num evod optical emitter assembly num evod reliability num evod system num examination plans num num num num excavation num castinplace concrete pipe num conduit num culverts and minor structures num major structures num mse retaining structures num pipe culverts num rock num num signals and lighting num structural plate structures num unclassified num num unsuitable foundation material num explosive blasting plan num blasting requirements num explosives index page num rock cuts num extra work num num num num num control points num excavation borrow and embankment num filing claims num payment for num restaking num slope stake changes num extruded panel signs num num f fabricator num falsework num num fence construction staking num posts num num num fertilizer num num num num num field laboratories and offices num num field programming unit system num field sheet num filler blending sand see blending sand joint see joint filler filler mineral minor paving num miscellaneous paving num filter fabric mse retaining structures num final acceptance num num num flexible traffic markers num num fly ash num num num num num num num num num num num num alkalisilica reactivity num flowable fill num num mix design num num prestressed concrete members num force account num num foundation concrete falsework num major structures num minor structures num mse retaining structures num piling num signal and lighting num signal and lighting standards num num traffic signals and lighting num traffic signs and structures num unsuitable material num vehicular impact attenuator units num fractured faces num opengraded friction course num portland cement concrete mix designs num french drain num num g gates num num headgates and flapgates num general office go num geotextile bridging embankment num mse retaining structures num index page num pull boxes and splice cabinets num num girders num num num concrete placement num finishing num placement num profiling num girders prestressed concrete num girders structural steel num coating num num num grading linear num diamond grinding setting of bearings num superstructure acceptance num grinding of pccp diamond num num grout dowels and anchors num posttensioned bridge members nonshrink num precast box girders num grubbing clearing and num excavation borrow and embankment num guarantees and warranties num num num signal assemblies num guarantee bid num num num num guardrail miscellaneous paving num h haul roads num hazardous materials num num highfloat emulsions insitu cold recycling num highmast luminaires num removing and resetting num highstrength bolts num metal railing num structural steel num num num num highway street or road num holiday num hotmix asphalt cold milling with hma inlay num hot inplace recycling num minor paving num miscellaneous paving num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num hotpoured crack see sealant hotpoured crack sealant num hottype applied loop detector sealant num hydrated lime num minor paving num miscellaneous paving num opengraded friction course num num mix design num pavement surface restoration num num treated subgrade num mixing num i ibeam posts posts num special coded signs num index page num traffic signs and structures num removal and replacement num impact attenuators num num independent assurance num initialization requirements num inputoutput features num incentivedisincentive provision num incidental num insitu cold recycling num inspection of work num inspector num num num departments shop num duties of num insurance num num automobile liability num certificate of num department as additional insured num liability num optimal num railroad num umbrella coverage num workers compensation num intent notice of noi num invitation for bids num num num irregular bid num irrigation ditches headgates and flapgates for num integrity test check num internal coordination num internal preemption num irregular num num j job mix formula jmf num minor paving num miscellaneous paving num ogfc num num num joint filler num num num num num num num joint seals elastomeric joint num num joint seals polymer bridge num joint strip seals bridge num joints castinplace concrete pipe num concrete sealing materials num concrete structures num concrete superstructure num hot inplace recycling of asphalt pavement num hotpoured crack sealant num pipe culverts num num polymer concrete bridge deck overlay num sealing and resealing concrete pavement num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num junction boxes traffic signs and structures num l laboratory num lamps beacons and temporary signal equipment num luminaires num num num index page num ballasts num signal assemblies num num num num traffic signals and structures num landscape architect num latex modified concrete num legal relations and responsibility to public num lighting and signal foundations num service systems num standards num lighting and signal engineer num lighting systems general requirements for num lime concrete cylinder bath num pavement surface restoration num lime slurry insitu cold recycling num num num treated subgrade num linear grading num liquidated damages num num failure to complete on time num livestock containment borrow pits num load testing bearing piles num drilled shafts num long span structural plate structures num num loop detector sealant num loop detector wire num loop leadin cable num loop leadin cable installation num loop vehicle detector num loop vehicle detectors num loop wire placement num low bid num luminaires num num num num num type iii standard num type v standard num num type vi standard num num foundations num num lump num m machine vision vehicle detection system num mailbox installation num maintaining agency num maintenance detour num signal assemblies num signals and lighting num traffic control num major contract item num mandatory completion date num mandatory prebid conference num malfunction management unit num manholes traffic signal num materials num measurement of see quantities mechanical construction num index page num mechanically stabilized earth retaining structures num median num membrane waterproofing num message signs portable changeable num num metal posts num num num num num num metal and concrete wall barrier num metal barrier num metal railings num method of measurement num mill test reports num milling cold num mineral filler hot mix asphalt num minor paving num miscellaneous paving num warm mix asphalt num minor structures excavation and backfill for num num reinforced concrete for num mix design castinplace concrete pipe num cold mill with hma inlay num concrete structures under water num drilled shafts num driven bearing piles num flowable fill num hot inplace recycling num insitu cold recycling num miscellaneous paving num mse retaining structures num open graded friction course num portland cement concrete num precast concrete structures num prestressed concrete members num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num mixing plants num num num see bituminous plants or concrete plants mobilization num modifications num moisture and density control culverts and minor structures num embankment num mse retaining structures num num treated subgrade num num mortar enriched concrete structure repair num num mortar nonshrink num cementitious grouted dowels and anchors num pipe culverts num prestressed concrete members num steel structure anchor bolts num ms connectors num mulch num num num num num num num multiple loop systems num mutcd construction traffic control devices num pavement markings num num traffic markers num num traffic signs and sign structures num num index page num n national environmental policy act of num num num new mexico public works mediation act num num new mexico taxation and revenue department num num new mexico uniform arbitration act num num new mexico water quality act num nmed num num nmsspwc num num num nominal maximum sieve num nonconformance num notice of intent noi num obliterating old road num termination not num notice to contractors num notice to proceed num num num num o observation angle num open graded friction course num num surface treatment num quality control num num operating modes num optimal detection num osha num num num overburden num num num num num overhead sign structures num p paint num num num num num num num num num num num num for tree surgery num steel coating num num num num num num traffic num num num num num panel sign aluminum num num extruded num num partial suspension num num pavement num detour num num num portland cement concrete pccp .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pavement markings num num num num num num see removals repair and replacement of unacceptable or damaged striping num temporary marking tape num num num pavement structure num pavement surface restoration surface treatment num pay adjustment num payment final num pedestrian signal num num num num num penetrating water repellent treatment num num num num concrete structures num finishing num crack sealing num repair of concrete structures num superstructure concrete num performancegraded asphalt binder num num phase timing num index page num phasing requirements num physical completion num num num num num pipe culverts num num see culverts pit agreement num pits num num num num borrow num plans num poles num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num polymer slurry requirements num portable changeable message signs num portable sign supports num portland cement concrete num num num num num num see concrete price adjustments num num num num num surface tolerances num post construction plans num num num posttensioning num posts num num num num num num num num num power num power distribution panel num prebid due diligence num preconstruction conference num num num num num num predeck conference num prefabrication conference num preparation of num num num num num num num num num num prepave conference num prequalification num num num presplitting num num prestressed concrete members curing num price adjustment num num num num num num num prime coat num num num num num num production blasting num num num professional service num profile grade num programming requirements num progress payment num project num project manager num num proposal num num num num protection of public utilities num protective coating of miscellaneous structural steel protection num num num protective num protective coating of new structural steel num punch list num pugmill see public pull boxes num pull boxes and splice cabinets num num num q qualifications welding num quality assurance qa num quality control qc .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num quality level assurance qla num quantities num num num num num r rvalue num railroad num num num num index page num raised pavement marker num num num num num num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap num recoating structures num recycled asphalt pavement num num num num num num recycling of existing surfacing num num num num reflective barrier delineator num num num reflective sheeting num num num num num reinforced concrete pipe rcp num rejection of num num num num rejuvenating agent num num num removals num num num num num num num num num num num num num removing and resetting traffic signs see removals repair of concrete structures num required documents for bid submittal num resource loading num responsible bidder num responsive bid num num retainage num retroreflective sheeting num num num num revegetation num right of way row num num num num fencing num maps num rigid electrical conduit num see rightofway rigid electrical conduit entrance num roadbed num num num num num num num num num num num surface tolerances num roadway num roadway luminaire num num roadway prism num num num num rock cuts num rock embankments num rollers num num num num num num num rvalue num num s salvageable timber num sand barrel vehicular impact attenuators num num scalping num num sealant num num num num num num num num num num sealant application num sealing emulsion num secretary num num seeding see revegetation select backfill num num num num sequential arrow display num shoulder num shotcrete num num num num num num num num num num sidewalk num signal and lighting service systems num signal and lighting standards num num num num signal assembly num signal assemblies num num num num num singlemachine hot inplace surface repaving num slurry num num num num num num small business num soil slopes num soil stabilant num num sole plates num num solidstate flasher num index page num span wire installation num num special provisions num num special surface num num num num num num specialty items num specifications num num num num specific intensity num num num num num num num splice cabinet num num wiring num standard num standard drawings num standard specifications num standard specifications for public works construction nmsspwc see nmsspwc state num state asphalt engineer num state bridge engineer num state concrete engineer num state construction engineer num state geotechnical engineer num state materials engineer num state transportation commission num state transportation commissioner num station num steel num num num steel bolts num num num num num num num steel posts num num steel reinforcement num num num num num num num num num num num steel structures see steel bolts stockpile num num num num num storage of materials num stripping num num num structural plate num num num structural plate pipe num num excavation and backfill for num structural steel num num num num num num num num num num num num num structures num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num overhead sign num num structures and obstructions see removals subbase num num num subcontract num subcontractor num subexcavation num num subgrade .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num surface tolerances num substantial completion num substructure num superintendent num superstructure num superstructure concrete num num num num num supplemental agreement num supplemental specifications num supplier num surety num num num num surface course num surfacing see removals surfacing pit num surfacing smoothness num num suspension num num num num of work num num partial num num suspension and debarment num index page num system master num num t tack coat num num num num surface treatment num taxes num num telemetry interface panels num temporary construction permit tcp num temporary marking tape num num temporary pavement markings see removals temporary reflective raised pavement marker num num temporary signal span num num termination notice of not num termini num tero num num num timing requirements num total bid amount num total original contract amount num town city or district num traffic cones traffic control devices for construction num traffic control devices for construction num traffic control management num num num num num traffic control systems num traffic lanes num traffic markers traffic control devices for construction num num num traffic services engineer num traffic services signal laboratory num num num traffic signal num num num num num num num num num num num num num traffic signal controllers num trafficactuated controller num traveled way num treated num num treated timber num see steel bolts tremies num tubular traffic markers num num trucker num twochannel detectors num u u.s. army corps of engineers num unbalanced bid num unclassified excavation num num underground storage tanks num unsuitable materials num num v value engineering cost proposal vecp num num num vehicle and pedestrian detectors num vehicle detection system num vertical panels traffic control devices for construction num num vibrating num num num num num num num num video hardware systme auxiliary equipment num video processor num video vehicle detection system num vp electrical num vp mounting num index page num w warm mix additive or technology num warm mix asphalt num warning lights num num traffic control devices for construction num warranty num num num num num num water quality control regulations num num weep holes num welding num num num num wire num num num wiring num num withdrawal of source approval portland cement concrete mix design num withdrawn bid num work num working day num working drawings num num num num num num num num num num z zinc coatings num
