pub num change num effective april num num www.penndot.gov view change packets preface num i change no .
num commonwealth of pennsylvania department of transportation publication num specifications preface contents publication num contains current construction specifications for penndot projects .
pub num is located on the penndot website .
on the web each new change will contain all previous editionchanges in their entirety with changed pages integrated .
the change pages for each new change is also located on the penndot website and may be printed from this location .
standard special provisions ssps and master construction items that apply to publication num ssps and master items are maintained in ecms engineering and construction management system and accessible on the web to both penndot business partners and public users .
this is the only access provided to these documents and lists to all users .
public users should go to the ecms website login as a guest and then navigate to construction projects resources .
resources provides access to both master items and ssps .
business partners can login before selecting construction projects resources if they want access to other more complete ecms data and information applying to penndot projects and schedules .
use of dimension values pub num is a single set of construction specifications that contains measurements in english values .
metric values may be shown for informational purposes andor generally accepted industry use .
dual values will not be indicated on design drawings renderings or in details and instructions that are project specific .
similarly there will not be a mixing of values in formulating calculations or in presentation .
in addition to provide clarification each project bid proposal will contain a special provision that will specify the dimension value to be used .
changes and their effective dates the web version will be updated with new pages during each semiannual change but only the hardcopy version subscribers will receive changes with separate copies of each new page for posting .
however each transmittal letter will indicate the most recent changes and will contain a list of the current changes and an index of changes listing all changes to date .
the full specifics of each change can be found within the section to this publication entitled change letters and indices to publication num .
effective dates are pub num initial edition pub numie projects let after april num num .
pub num change no .
num pub num projects let after october num num .
pub num change no.num pub num project let after april num num .
pub num change no .
num pub num projects let after october num num .
pub num change no .
num pub num projects let after april num num .
pub num change no .
num pub num projects let after october num num .
pub num change no .
num pub num projects let after april num num .
pub num change no .
num pub num projects let after october num num .
table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num general provisions page section from to num abbreviations and definitions of terms num num num num num bidding requirements and conditions num num num num num award and execution of contract num num num num num scope of work num num num num num control of work num num num num num control of material num num num num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num num num num performance and progress num num num num num measurement of quantities num num num num num payment num num num num num delay claims num num num num num project records num num num num section num earthwork page section from to num clearing and grubbing num num num num num total demolition or partial demolition of buildings and other structures num num num num num class num class numa and class numb excavation num num num num num class num class num and class num excavation num num num num num borrow excavation num num num num num placement and compaction of embankment and fill num num num num num blasting for rock cut slope excavation num num num num num special rolling num num num num num subgrade num num num num num geotextiles num num num num num temporary project air pollution control num num num num num sealing abandoned water wells and springs num num num num num geofoam lightweight fill num num num num num flowable backfill num num num num num geogrids num num num num num geocell load distribution mat num num num num section num base courses page section from to num plain cement concrete base course num num num num num cement treated permeable base course num num num num num superpave asphalt mixture design standard construction hma base course num num num num num crushed aggregate base course num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num base courses page section from to num superpave asphalt mixture design standard construction wma base course num num num num num crushed aggregate base course type dg num num num num num flexible base replacement num num num num num aggregatebituminous base course num num num num num aggregatecement base course num num num num num aggregatelimepozzolan base course num num num num num roller compacted concrete base course num num num num num cold recycled bituminous base course coldinplace num num num num num cold recycled bituminous base course central plant mix num num num num num full depth reclamation num num num num num subbase num num num num num asphalt treated permeable base course num num num num section num flexible pavements page section from to num evaluation of bituminous pavement ride quality and payment of incentive num num num num num evaluation of bituminous pavement longitudinal joint density and payment of incentivedisincentive num num num num num superpave mixture design standard and rps construction of plantmixed hma courses num num num num num superpave mixture design standard and rps construcion of plantmixed hma finegraded courses num num num num num superpave mixture design standard and rps construction of plantmixed wma courses num num num num num superpave mixtrue design construction of plantmixed hmawma num mm thin asphalt overlay courses num num num num num stone matrix asphalt mixture design rps construction of plantmixed hmawma wearing courses num num num num num pervious bituminous pavement system num num num num num manual bituminous patching num num num num num bituminous tack coat num num num num num bituminous prime coat num num num num num heavy duty membranes num num num num num asphalt joint and crack sealing num num num num num bituminous seal coat num num num num num bituminous seal coat using precoated aggregate num num num num num bituminous surface treatment num num num num num bituminous surface treatment using precoated aggregate num num num num num slurry seal num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num flexible pavements page section from to num polymermodified emulsified asphalt paving system micro surfacing num num num num num ultrathin bonded wearing course num num num num num removal of existing surface course num num num num num milling of bituminous pavement surface num num num num num profile milling of bituminous pavement surfaces num num num num num asphalt concrete pavement nummonth warranty num num num num section num rigid pavements page section from to num reinforced or plain cement concrete pavements num num num num num roller compacted concrete pavement num num num num num protective coating for cement concrete pavement num num num num num pavement relief joint num num num num num bridge approach slabs num num num num num reinforced or plain cement concrete pavements rps num num num num num evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive num num num num num longitudinal grooving of existing concrete pavement num num num num num pressure relief joint num num num num num longitudinal joint cleaning and sealing num num num num num joint rehabilitation num num num num num diamond grinding of concrete pavement num num num num num sawing and sealing of bituminous overlays num num num num num concrete pavement patching num num num num num transverse grooving of concrete pavement for retexturing num num num num num continuously reinforced concrete pavement patching num num num num num pervious concrete pavement system num num num num num transverse joint cleaning and sealing num num num num num ultrathin portland cement concrete overlay num num num num num concrete partialdepth spall repair num num num num num rubblizing of concrete pavements num num num num num dowel retrofit num num num num num concrete pavement crossstitching num num num num num longlife concrete pavement llcp num num num num num bonded concrete overlay of asphaltsurfaced pavement num num num num num bonded concrete overlay of concretesurfaced pavements num num num num num unbonded concrete overlay of concretesurface pavements num num num num num crack cleaning and sealing num num num num num milling of cement concrete pavement surface num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num incidental construction page section from to num pipe culverts num num num num num corrugated metal pipearch culverts num num num num num metal plate culverts num num num num num combination storm sewer and underdrain num num num num num endwalls inlets manholes and spring boxes num num num num num grade adjustment of existing miscellaneous structures num num num num num rebuilt miscellaneous structures num num num num num mobilization num num num num num inspectors field office and inspection facilities num num num num num pipe underdrain and pavement base drain num num num num num subgrade drains num num num num num stone backfill for miscellaneous drainage num num num num num subsurface drain outlets num num num num num end sections and slope pipe fittings num num num num num slotted drains num num num num num concrete collar for pipe extension num num num num num permanent impact attenuating devices num num num num num guide rail num num num num num metal median barrier num num num num num concrete glare screen num num num num num concrete median barrier num num num num num rightofway fence num num num num num cribbing num num num num num gabions num num num num num temporary barrier num num num num num reset temporary barrier num num num num num plain cement concrete curb num num num num num plain concrete mountable curb num num num num num bituminous concrete curb num num num num num plain cement concrete gutter num num num num num plain cement concrete curb gutter num num num num num temporary concrete barrier structure mounted num num num num num temporary concrete barrier structure mounted reset num num num num num paved shoulders type num type numf type nums and type numsp num num num num num paved shoulders type num num num num num num paved shoulders type num num num num num num paved shoulders type num type numf type nums and type numsp num num num num num paved shoulders type num num num num num num concrete shoulders num num num num num high friction surface treatement hfst num num num num num shoulder rumble strips num num num num num brick masonry num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num incidental construction page section from to num modular architectural block system num num num num num cement concrete paving for stream beds num num num num num precast cement concrete block slope wall castinplace cement concrete slab slope wall num num num num num stone slope walls num num num num num random stone slope wall num num num num num cement concrete sidewalks num num num num num selected material surfacing num num num num num permanent barricades num num num num num slab stabilization num num num num num waterproofing num num num num num slabjacking num num num num num construction surveying num num num num num microcomputer system num num num num num construction scheduling num num num num num shoulder relief joint num num num num num detectable warning surface num num num num num temporary impact attenuating devices num num num num num reset temporary impact attenuating devices num num num num section num material page section from to num cement num num num num num bituminous material num num num num num aggregate num num num num num cement concrete num num num num num joint material num num num num num concrete bonding compound num num num num num reinforcement steel num num num num num concrete curing material and admixtures num num num num num masonry units num num num num num precast concrete products num num num num num water num num num num num calcium chloride num num num num num sodium chloride num num num num num hydrated lime num num num num num pozzolans num num num num num lime pozzolan num num num num num bituminous paper num num num num num geotextiles num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num material page section from to num geomembrane num num num num num geocell num num num num num geogrids num num num num section num roadside development page section from to num stockpiling topsoil or topsoil mixture num num num num num topsoil furnished and placed num num num num num placing stockpiled topsoil or topsoil mixture num num num num num seeding and soil supplements num num num num num mulching num num num num num rolled erosion control products num num num num num plants planting and transplanting num num num num num sodding num num num num num tree trimming and selective tree removal num num num num num temporary protective fence num num num num num unforeseen water pollution control num num num num num rock construction entrance num num num num num rock lining num num num num num outlet protection rock num num num num num paved energy dissipator num num num num num temporary slope pipe num num num num num pumped water filter bag num num num num num rock barrier num num num num num concrete block revetment systems num num num num num geocell confinement system num num num num num sedimentation pond num num num num num storm inlet protection num num num num num cleaning sedimentation structures num num num num num diversion ditch num num num num num silt barrier fence num num num num num heavy duty silt barrier fence num num num num num compost filter sock num num num num num compost blanket and compost filter berm num num num num num sediment trap embankment num num num num num sediment trap riser num num num num num sediment basin num num num num num temporary baffle wall num num num num num temporary riser pipe assembly num num num num num concrete outlet structure num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num traffic accommodation and control page section from to num maintenance and protection of traffic during construction num num num num num maintenance and protection during temporary suspension of work num num num num num temporary bridge and approaches num num num num num highway lighting num num num num num sign lighting num num num num num post mounted signs type a num num num num num post mounted signs type b num num num num num post mounted signs type c num num num num num post mounted signs type d num num num num num post mounted signs type e num num num num num post mounted signs type f num num num num num structure mounted signs num num num num num delineation devices num num num num num distance markers num num num num num reset post mounted signs type a num num num num num reset post mounted signs type b num num num num num reset post mounted signs type c num num num num num reset post mounted signs type e num num num num num reset post mounted signs type f num num num num num steel sign structure num num num num num traffic signal supports num num num num num controller assembly num num num num num traffic signal systems and communications num num num num num electrical distribution num num num num num signal heads num num num num num detectors num num num num num hot thermoplastic pavement markings num num num num num cold plastic pavement markings or legends num num num num num waterborne pavement markings num num num num num pavement marking removal num num num num num epoxy pavement markings num num num num num preformed thermoplastic pavement markings num num num num num snowplowable raised pavement markers num num num num num remove post mounted signs type a num num num num num remove post mounted signs type b num num num num num remove post mounted signs type c num num num num num remove post mounted signs type e num num num num num remove post mounted signs type f num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num structures page section from to num cement concrete structures num num num num num reinforcement bars num num num num num dowel holes num num num num num piles num num num num num drilled caissons num num num num num preformed neoprene compression joint seal for bridges num num num num num pedestrian railing num num num num num aluminum bridge railing num num num num num steel bridge railing num num num num num protective barrier num num num num num protective fence num num num num num pressure mortar pointing and surfacing num num num num num removal of existing bridges or culverts num num num num num protective coating for reinforced concrete surfaces num num num num num tooth expansion dam with drain trough num num num num num armored preformed neoprene compression dam num num num num num steel bridge hand railing num num num num num aluminum bridge hand railing num num num num num modification of existing barrier num num num num num neoprene strip seal dam num num num num num timber structures num num num num num hardwood glulam timber structures num num num num num concrete bridge deck repair num num num num num scarification num num num num num latex modified mortar or concrete wearing surface num num num num num shotcrete num num num num num steel bridge superstructure num num num num num downspouting num num num num num metal curb drain num num num num num fabricated structural steel num num num num num shop painting structural steel num num num num num painting existing structural steel num num num num num spotzone maintenance painting of existing structural steel num num num num num prestressed concrete bridge superstructure num num num num num precast reinforced concrete box culvert num num num num num sound barriers num num num num num pa ht bridge barrier num num num num num pa type numm bridge barrier num num num num num pa bridge barrier num num num num num epoxy injection crack seal num num num num num epoxy protection for structural steel num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num section num manufactured material page section from to num highway lighting num num num num num sign lighting num num num num num traffic signing and marking num num num num num traffic signals num num num num num fabricated structural steel and aluminum num num num num num prestressed concrete bridge beams num num num num num posttensioning operations num num num num num guide rail and metal median barrier num num num num num rightofway fence num num num num num high load multirotational bearings num num num num num glued laminated hardwood timber members num num num num num plain and laminated neoprene bearing pads num num num num num thrie beam guide rail num num num num num temporary traffic control signals num num num num section num intelligent transportation system its devices page section from to num its devicesgeneral num num num num num atms its device integration num num num num num its communications num num num num num maintenance its devicesgeneral num num num num num closed circuit television camera num num num num num portable closed circuit television camera num num num num num maintenance closed circuit television cctv camera num num num num num maintenance portable closed circuit television pcctv camera num num num num num highway advisory radio subsystem num num num num num maintenance highway advisory radio har subsystem num num num num num dynamic message signs num num num num num portable dynamic message signs num num num num num maintenance dynamic message signs dms num num num num num maintenance portable dynamic message sign pdms num num num num num vehicle detector subsystem num num num num num maintenance vehicle detector subsystem num num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num appendix a metric si information page from to a general a num a num appendix b standard special provisions to publication num page from to b general b num b num appendix c designated special provisions dsp contained in publication num dsp page from to c general c num c num dspnum offset provision for state contracts cnum num cnum num dspnum contractor responsibility provisions cnum num cnum num dspnum provisions for state contracts concerning the americans with disabilities act cnum num cnum num dspnum diverse business db requirements for nonfederally funded costruction projects cnum num cnum num dspnum disadvantaged business enterprise dbe requirements for federallyfunded construcion projects cnum num cnum num dspnum f.a.r .
required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts fhwanum revised may num num cnum num cnum num dspnum special supplement antipollution measures cnum num cnum num dspnum nondiscriminationsexual harassment clause cnum num cnum num dspnum contractor integrity provisions cnum num cnum num dspnum executive order num with appendix a and b cnum num cnum num dspnum buy america cnum num cnum num dspnum enhanced minimum wage provisions cnum num cnum num general index page from to gi general index item section gi num gi num change letters and indices to publication num page chgs from to ie transmittal letter initial edition ie num num ie index of changes initial edition ie num num tlnum transmittal letter initial edition change no .
num num num iocnum index of changes initial edition change no .
num num num table of contents num toc num change no .
num change letters and indices to publication num page chgs from to tlnum transmittal letter initial edition change no .
num num num iocnum index of changes initial edition change no .
num num num tlnum transmittal letter initial edition change no .
num num num iocnum index of changes initial edition change no .
num num num tlnum transmittal letter initial edition change no .
num num num iocnum index of changes initial edition change no .
num num num num num num num change no .
num section num general provisions section numabbreviations and definitions of terms num meaning of termsthese specifications are generally written in the imperative mood .
in sentences using the imperative mood the subject the contractor is implied .
also implied in this language are shall shall be or similar words and phrases .
in the material sections the subject may also be a vendor fabricator or manufacturer who may be supplying material products or equipment for use on the project .
the word will generally pertains to decisions or actions of the department or its representative .
in these specifications or on the drawings the following words or similar words refer to actions of the department or its representative unless otherwise stated directed required permitted ordered designated prescribed .
also the words approved accepted acceptable satisfactory considered or words with similar intent mean by or to the department or its representative subject in each case to the final determination of the secretary and subject to further review as permitted by law or permitted elsewhere in these specifications .
in these specifications reference to a subsection of the specifications includes all general requirements of the section of which the subsection is a part .
in these specifications the words or equal referring to a product material or process mean equal as determined by the department or its representative .
in these specifications the words as indicated or indicated mean as indicated or indicated on the prepared contract plans .
num abbreviationsthe following is a list of abbreviations used in these specifications in the proposal and on the drawings .
the list includes the meanings along with the abbreviations .
aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america ai asphalt institute aia american institute of architects aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute aitc american institute of timber construction ansi american national standards institute api american petroleum institute ara american railway association area american railway engineering association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects asme american society of mechanical engineers asnt american society for nondestructive testing astm american society for testing and materials awg american wire gage awpa american wood preservers association aws american welding society awwa american water works association bdtd bridge design and technology division bopd bureau of project delivery bomo bureau of maintenance and operations cfr code of federal regulations num num num num change no .
num cbema computer business equipment manufacturers association cctv closed circuit television cmd construction and materials division crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute csa canadian standards association ctc concrete technology corporation dcnr pennsylvania department of conservation and natural resources dep pennsylvania department of environmental protection dmedmm district materials engineerdistrict materials manager dms dynamic message signs ebs electronic bidding system ecms engineering and construction management system eei edison electrical institute eia electric institute of america fcc federal communications commission fhwa federal highway administration u.s. department of transportation fss federal specifications and standards general service administration har highway advisory radio hdd highway delivery division hma hot mix asphalt icea insulated cable engineers association ieee institute of electrical and electronic engineers iec international electrotechnical commission ies illuminating engineering society imsa international municipal signal association ip internet protocol iso insurance services organization ite institute of transportation engineers its intelligent transportation system jmf job mix formula lts laboratory testing section bureau of project delivery pennsylvania department of transportation mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices fhwa nbfu national board of fire underwriters ncsa national crushed stone association nec national electrical code nela national electric light association nema national electrical manufacturing association nesc national electrical safety code nfpa national fire prevention association ntcip national transportation communications for intelligent transportation systems osha occupational safety health administration pca portland cement association pci prestressed concrete institute penndot pennsylvania department of transportation pei porcelain enamel institute incorporated ptm pennsylvania test method pvc polyvinyl chloride qa quality assurance qc quality control ram reclaimed aggregate material rap reclaimed asphalt pavement rps restricted performance specification rtmc regional traffic management center sae society of automotive engineers srl skid resistance level sspc society for protective coatings num num num num change no .
num tmc traffic management center ul underwriters laboratories incorporated unc unified national coarse u.s.c .
united states code wma warm mix asphalt num definitions acceptance certificatethe certificate of the department certifying that the project has been satisfactorily completed and accepted .
active work zone the portion of a work zone where construction maintenance or utility workers are on the roadway or on the shoulder of the highway and is adjacent to an open travel lane .
additional workwork of a type already provided by the contract and for which the contract has established a unit price .
advertisementthe public announcement required by law inviting bids for work to be performed or for materials to be furnished .
agency headthe secretary .
air temperaturethe measured temperature in the degrees fahrenheit f in the shade not in the direct rays of the sun and away from artificial heat .
awardthe departments written acceptance of a bid .
bidthe offer of a bidder using the internet to construct the project at the prices bid or predetermined .
bidderany individual firm partnership corporation or joint venture submitting a bid for the work contemplated and acting either directly or through an authorized representative .
bridgea structure including supports spanning and providing passage over a waterway a railroad a highway or other obstruction more than num feet long measured along the center of the roadway or railroad between the faces of abutments .
in the case of boxes or arches the length is measured between the faces of the sidewalls and in the case of multiple boxes between the inside faces of the outside walls .
bulletinspublications prepared by the department indicating requirements for material and processes listing approved material suppliers .
a list of these bulletins follows bulletin numaggregate producers publication num bulletin numqualified products list for construction publication num bulletin numspecifications for bituminous materials publication num bulletin numbituminous concrete mixtures design procedures and specifications for special bituminous mixtures publication num bulletin numproducers of bituminous mixtures publication num bulletin numproducers of readymixed concrete publication num business partneran individual firm partnership or corporation that has a valid registered business partner identification number issued by the department through ecms .
num num num num change no .
num calendar dayevery day shown on the standard calendar .
central officethe central office of the department in harrisburg pennsylvania .
chief bridge engineerthe engineer in charge of bridge design for the entire department or authorized designee .
contractthe written agreement between the department and the contractor for the construction of the project .
the contract includes the following proposal plans specifications agreement performance bond payment bond insurance certificates notice to proceed and all work orders and supplemental agreements that are required to complete the construction of the project .
contract item pay itema specifically described unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract .
individual units in the component item schedule of a lump sum payment item are not considered contract items .
contracting officerthe district executive .
contractorthe individual firm partnership corporation or joint venture awarded the contract acting directly through agents or employees or the surety in case of default or each participant in a joint venture .
cross sectionsgraphic representations of the original ground and the proposed highway at right angles to the centerline or base line .
culvertany structure not classified as a bridge that provides an opening under the roadway .
departmentpennsylvania department of transportation .
director of project deliverythe engineers in charge of all highway activities in the central office or authorized designee .
districtsgeographic divisions of the department for the purposes of management design construction and maintenance .
district executivethe engineer or administrator in charge of an engineering district of the department .
drawingssee plans .
ecms website www.dotnum.state.pa.usecms electronic fileany data digitally formatted e.g .
landxml .
engineeran individual licensed and registered under the laws of the commonwealth of pennsylvania designated by the deputy of secretary for highway administration acting directly or through a duly authorized representative acting within the scope of the particular duties assigned or the authority given .
expediteaashtos ebs software approved by the department for bidding .
extra workwork arising from changes that result in a significant increase or decrease in the cost of performing the work and work having no quantity andor price included in the contract that is determined by the district executive to be necessary or desirable to complete the project .
fabricatora firm company or individual supplying fabricated material for the project .
final settlement certificatethe certification made by the secretary to the state treasurer of the amount due in final payment and settlement of the contract after making all legal and equitable additions and deductions including the amounts previously paid .
num num num num change no .
num final inspectionthe inspection conducted by the representative to determine if the project or any substantial portion thereof has been satisfactorily completed according to contract requirements .
grade linethe profile of the finished roadway surface along the proposed construction centerline or base line .
highwaythe area between rightofway lines andor between limit of slope lines as ordained andor indicated .
hinge pointa slopestaking term for the point where cut or fill slope begins .
holidaysdays designated by the department as holidays which include but are not limited to new years day dr. martin luther king jr.s birthday presidents day memorial day independence day labor day columbus day veterans day thanksgiving day day after thanksgiving and christmas day .
inspectorthe person authorized and assigned by the representative to make inspections of contract performance and of material furnished .
inspectorinchargethe person authorized by the representative to be in immediate charge of inspecting the performance of work on the project .
invitation for bidsthe advertisement for bids for work or material .
the advertisement will state with reasonable accuracy the quantity and location of the work to be done the character and quantity of the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of bids .
in writingcommunication between parties delivered or sent and received in the form of a written letter e mail facsimile telegram or mailgram .
jobmix formulaa specific mixture of material established by test procedures then adhered to during construction using the mixture .
joint venturea legal association of contractors limited to three participants formed for the purpose of bidding and executing a common contract identified in ecms as joint venture prime and joint venture partner .
prequalification is required of each contractor as specified in section num .
joint venture primethe lead contractor in a joint venture .
laboratorytesting laboratories of the department or any other designated testing laboratories .
localizationa localization is a series of mathematical computations that transform world geodetic systemnum coordinates into local grid coordinates .
a localization typically consists of a horizontal and a vertical adjustment .
local trafficvehicular traffic that originates or terminates within the project limits .
lotan isolated quantity of specified material from a single source or a measured amount of specified construction to be produced by the same process .
manufacturera firm company or individual manufacturing material for the project .
major item of workany item having a unit of measure of other than lump sum call dollar or predetermined amount pda .
materialsubstances specified for use in the project construction .
materially unbalanced bida bid that generates a reasonable doubt that awarding a contract to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
num num num num change no .
num mathematically unbalanced bida bid containing lump sum or unit prices which do not reflect reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
milestone datethe date on which a specific portion of physical contract work is to be completed before the required completion date of all contract work .
multiple deficiencydeficiency in more than one characteristic within the same lot .
notice to proceed datethe date established in writing by the department on which work is to begin .
online bida bid submitted via the internet using the departments engineering and construction management system ecms .
pavement structurethe combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and to distribute the load to the roadbed .
payment bondthe approved form of security furnished by the contractor and the surety as a guaranty to pay promptly or cause to be paid promptly in full such sums as may be due for all material furnished labor supplied or performed rental of equipment used and services rendered by public utilities in or in connection with the work under contract .
penndots homepage httpwww.penndot.gov performance bondthe approved form of security furnished by the contractor and the surety as a guaranty on the part of the contractor to execute the work according to the terms of the contract .
plansthe approved documents or drawings or exact reproductions of them for construction of the project .
the plans show the location character dimensions approximate quantities and other details of the prescribed work including layouts profiles and cross sections plans also include cited standard drawings .
however subsurface soil and geological data e.g .
the soil survey report and profile and core borings are excluded from this definition .
prequalificationthe system for establishing a qualification rating determining the maximum amount of contract and one or more of the classified types of work on which a contractor will be eligible to bid or subcontract and the maximum amount the contractor may have under contract and incomplete at any one time .
printoutthe processed data issued in printed form by a computer .
profile gradethe elevation or gradient of a trace of a vertical plane intersecting the proposed surface usually along the longitudinal centerline or base line of the roadway .
projectall of the work described in the contract .
proposalthe documents designated by the department containing project requirements and other information upon which a bid for the project to be constructed is to be based .
the proposal includes the plans specifications special provisions referenced standard drawings addenda and all other documents referred to therein whether or not attached .
quality control qc plana contractors or vendors prepared plan submitted to and reviewed by the representative describing the proposed qc system .
this plan contains as a minimum an inspection schedule sample schedule testing schedule and required laboratory inspection reports .
quality control qc systema system of controls inspection and tests fully documented providing reasonable assurance that all materials products and completed construction submitted for acceptance conform to specifications .
representativethe authorized representative acting on behalf of the secretary .
num num num num change no .
num required completion datethe date on which all physical contract work including any authorized additional or extra work is to be completed .
the required completion date is the completion date shown in the contract plus any time extensions issued in writing by the representative less any time reductions issued in writing by the representative .
restricted performance specification rpsa presentation of required results statistically verifiable as meeting specified criteria and free of unnecessary construction limitations .
right of waythe area that has been secured and reserved by the department for highway purposes .
roadside developmentitems for seeding sodding mulching topsoiling planting of ground covers other planting and items for erosion control .
secondtier or lowertier subcontractorany individual partnership firm or corporation complying with the requirements of section num whowhich undertakes with prior consent of the department the partial or total construction of one or more items of project work under the terms of the contract with and reasonable to the prime contractor by virtue of an agreement with a subcontractor to the prime by virtue of an agreement .
secretarythe secretary of transportation or a deputy secretary of transportation of pennsylvania .
shop drawingssee working drawings .
single deficiencydeficiency in one characteristic in a lot .
skid resistance level srlthe friction rating of a surface course material .
special provisionsadditions and revisions to the standard specifications covering conditions pertaining to an individual project .
specificationsthis publication and all publications to which it refers .
also special provisions and bulletins referred to in or bound with the proposal together with all written agreements made or to be made pertaining to the method and manner of performing the work or to the quantities or qualities of material to be furnished under the contract .
site calibrationa site calibration is a series of mathematical computations that transform world geodetic systemnum coordinates into local grid coordinates .
a site calibration typically consists of a horizontal and a vertical adjustment .
standard drawingsapproved drawings showing standard details produced to be used repeatedly on projects .
statethe commonwealth of pennsylvania .
structuresbridges culverts storm sewer appurtenances slope and retaining walls sign support structures and other similar items .
subcontractorany individual partnership firm or corporation complying with the requirements of section num whowhich undertakes with prior consent of the department the partial or total construction of one or more items of project work under the terms of the contract with and responsible to the prime contractor by virtue of an agreement .
substructurethat part of the structure not deemed as superstructure .
superintendentthe contractors authorized representative in charge of the work .
superstructureall portions of the bridge above the bridge seat including bearings bearings and anchors num num num num change no .
num sunk in the substructure abutment backwalls cheekwalls shear blocks bridge drainage down to but not including the drain box and portions of the wings and appurtenances above the horizontal construction joint nearest the bridge seat .
suppliera firm company or individual supplying material for the project .
suretya corporate body which is bound with and for the contractor for the satisfactory performance of the contractors work and for the prompt payment in full for material labor equipment rentals and utility services as provided in the bonds .
traffic control plana developed method or scheme for safely and efficiently moving traffic through or around a highway work zone .
utility adjustment the act of placing setting replacing resetting relocating adjusting reconstructing altering or removing a utility infrastructure .
utility infrastructure a public or private facility or structure whether or not owned by a utility that is or will be in on under or over the project site or a waste or borrow area designated in the proposal and that either must be placed set replaced reset relocated adjusted reconstructed altered or removed in order for the contract work to be performed or otherwise interferes with the performance of the contract work .
value engineeringthe identification of the functions of a contract item establishing the cost of the functions considering life cycle costs and providing the required functions at the lowest cost with no reduction in required quality or performance .
vendora firm company or individual supplying material or services for the project .
workthe furnishing of material labor equipment and other incidentals necessary or convenient to successful project completion plus the fulfillment of all duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
working drawingsrequired shop drawings erection plans falsework plans stress sheets framework plans cofferdam plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel and any other supplementary plans or similar data all prepared by the contractor .
work orderan order signed by the representative authorizing the performance of additional or extra work or extra work on a forceaccount basis as specified in sections num and num .
work zone the area of a highway where construction maintenance or utility work activities are being conducted and which should have trafficcontrol devices installed according to title num of the vehicle code .
num num num num change no .
num section numbidding requirements and conditions num prequalification of contractors and subcontractors a general .
unless otherwise stated in the proposal contractors are required to prequalify before the date fixed for the opening of bids for state highway construction work .
to do so establish proof of competency and responsibility according to num pa code chapter num regulations governing prequalification of prospective bidders .
subcontractors are required to prequalify in the same manner if listed in the proposal or if they subsequently undertake the partial or total construction of one or more items of work .
to obtain a complete set of application forms either download them from the ecms website or contact the prequalification officer contract management section highway delivery division bureau of project delivery pennsylvania department of transportation harrisburg pennsylvania num. b business partner registration .
unless otherwise stated contractors are required to register with the department as a business partner .
to become a business partner go to the ecms website .
instructions for registration are available on the website .
num contents of proposalthe proposal will specify the place for delivery of a bid the date time and place of bid opening and the location and description of the project to be constructed .
the proposal will also show the approximate quantities of work to be performed andor material to be furnished the contract time in which the project is to be completed .
the proposal will include any special provisions and attachments pertaining to the project .
num issuance of proposalthe proposal and plans will be published on the ecms website .
the proposal will include any special provisions and attachments pertaining to the project .
any addenda will also be published on the ecms website .
these documents can be downloaded and printed .
copies of the proposal and plans can be purchased by contacting one of the printing partners listed under business partner search in ecms .
specifications or standard drawings listed or referred in the proposal are available for purchase upon request from the penndot sales store p.o .
box num harrisburg pa num telephone num .
num interpretation of approximate estimate of quantitiesthe estimate of quantities shown on the proposal and in the contract is approximate and is shown only as a basis for the calculation upon which the contract award is to be made .
the department does not assume any responsibility that the quantities will actually be required in the project construction nor will the contractor be allowed to plead misunderstanding or deception because of the quantity estimates or because of the character of the work the location or other conditions .
the department reserves the right to increase to decrease or to omit any of the quantities of work .
an increase or decrease of the quantities of the items will not be sufficient grounds for granting an increase in the unit prices bid except as specified in section num .
num examination of proposal plans specifications special provisions and site of workthe departments plans and specifications are complete and are prepared so any competent contractor is able to complete the proposed work .
the bidder is required to carefully examine the proposal plans specifications and project site before submitting a bid .
the submission of a bid will be considered proof that the bidder has made such examination and understands the conditions to be encountered the character quality and quantities of work to be performed the material to be furnished and the requirements of the plans specifications and proposal .
the department will make no allowance or concession for a bidders failure to make the required examination .
the proposed slope lines shown on the cross sections are approximate and are subject to revision and change by the representative depending upon the stability of material encountered during construction .
subsurface soil and geological information indicated is based upon soundings dug test pits andor test borings .
such information concerning the character of subsurface material is of an exploratory nature and has been obtained for the departments use as an aid in the project design .
the information provided is representative of subsurface conditions only at the locations and depths where such information was obtained and there is no expressed or implied agreement that uniformity of material exists between explored locations .
num nume num num change no .
num preliminary construction schedules are intended to provide a general overview of the sequence of construction operations based on currently available data .
such information is developed for the departments use as an aid in the project design .
available construction scheduling information if any is being provided for informational purposes only .
the department makes no expressed or implied representation as to the completeness accuracy or correctness of the data and accepts no responsibility for consequences resulting due to any actions undertaken based on the information provided .
these schedules are not considered a part of the proposal .
num preparation of bids a submit properly completed bids for department construction work in the electronic bidding format online .
b configure the electronic file for bidding to include registered business partner identification number .
for a joint venture bid the lead joint venture will be required to furnish this information on behalf of the joint venture .
c unless otherwise stated in the proposal the department will only accept bids from contractors who are prequalified on the date of the bid opening as specified in section num and who bid for work which based on their available financial capacity and approved work classification codes does not exceed their prequalification eligibility .
unless otherwise approved by the chief of highway delivery division prequalification office prequalification eligibility with regard to work classification will be determined using the applicable work classification codes shown on the design items screen in the wcc column for the corresponding contract item number .
the design items screen is accessed via the project items link on the ecms bid package screen .
if a bid item has multiple work classification codes the bidder must be prequalified for only one of the codes listed .
in accordance with the provisions of num pa code numd a prequalified contractor is eligible to bid on projects in which the types of work for which he is classified constitute at least num of the project .
items of work that are coded x or zz on the bid package design items will be excluded from the total bid price when determining compliance with the num requirement .
only the classification codes listed in the bid package design items will be credited towards meeting the num requirement .
to determine compliance with the num requirement all bidders will be credited for the q and z items .
for lump sum contract items requiring a component item schedule cis neither the work code classifications for component items on the cis nor the component item dollar values submitted by the contractor on the cis will be considered in evaluating compliance with the num requirement .
in accordance with the provisions of num pa code numb the types of work on which the contractor has been classified and eligible to bid on do not constitute over num of the total bid price the bid will be excluded and rejected .
with regard to available financial capacity prequalification eligibility will be determined by ensuring that the bidders current maximum financial capacity exceed the total amount of the bid less any credit for subletting as specified in section numa plus the total amount of all uncompleted work a bidder has under contract at the time of bid opening .
d execute bids as follows when an item in the bid contains a choice to be made by the bidder indicate this choice according to the specifications for that particular item .
when preparing the bid leave blank the unit prices of the alternates that are not bid .
thereafter no further choice will be allowed .
submit an online bid via the ecms website by using a business partner password with the security level of an authorized general partner or corporate officer properly designated to execute and attest to bids .
for a joint venture bid submit an online bid via the ecms website by using a business partner password with the security level of an authorized general partner or corporate officer properly designated to execute and attest to bids of the lead joint venture .
for a joint venture bid only one joint venture business partner is required to submit and electronically sign the bid and will be considered the joint venture prime .
e all electronic data files to be made available will be included in the bid package .
in order to access electronic data files made available in the bid package potential bidders must sign a onetime legal agreement in ecms to acknowledge that the information being provided is for informational purposes only .
note the agreement can be found by logging into ecms and clicking on the link entitled prebid design files agreement under bulletins .
make no assumption of available files if not included in the bid package .
perform necessary conversion of the files for the selected grade control equipment .
numf numg num num change no .
num f anticollusion requirements .
the authorized signer of the bid under penalty of perjury as provided in num pa. c.s.a .
section num or if applicable num u.s.c .
section num certifies that he or she is authorized to make and does make the following statement on behalf of the bidder num .
the bid item prices and the total bid amount have been arrived at independently and without consultation communication or agreement for the purpose of restricting competition with any other contractor bidder or potential bidder .
num .
neither the item prices nor the total bid amount and neither the approximate bid item prices nor approximate total bid amount have been disclosed to any other firm or person who is a bidder or potential bidder and they will not be disclosed before bid opening .
num .
no attempt has been made or will be made to solicit cause or induce any firm or person to refrain from bidding on this project or to submit a bid higher than this bid or to submit any intentionally high or noncompetitive bid or other form of complementary bid .
num .
the bid submitted by the bidder is made in good faith and not pursuant to any agreement or discussion with or inducement from any firm or person to submit a complementary or other noncompetitive bid .
num .
the bidder has not offered or entered into a subcontract or agreement regarding the purchase of materials or services from any firm or person or offered promised or paid cash or anything of value to any firm or person whether in connection with this or any other project in consideration for an agreement or promise by any firm or person to refrain from bidding or to submit a complementary bid on this project .
num .
the bidder has not accepted or been promised any subcontract or agreement regarding the sale of materials or services to any firm or person and has not been promised or paid cash or anything of value to any firm or person whether in connection with this or any other project in consideration for this firms submitting a complementary bid or agreeing to do so on this project .
num .
the authorized signer of the bid has made a diligent inquiry of all members officers employees and agents of the bidder with responsibilities relating to the preparation approval or submission of this firms bid on the project and has been advised by each of them that he or she has not participated in any communication consultation discussion agreement collusion act or other conduct inconsistent with any of the statements and representations made in this statement .
num .
no attempt has been made to take any action in restraint of free competitive bidding in connection with the bid .
num .
it is understood that if any incidents resulting in conviction or being found liable are specified in section numfnum the pennsylvania anti bid rigging act num p.s .
num et .
seq .
provided that it does not prohibit a governmental agency from accepting a bid from or awarding a contract to that person but may be a ground for administrative suspension or debarment at the discretion of a governmental agency under rules and regulations of that agency .
num .
the bidder its affiliates subsidiaries officers directors and employees are not aware that they are currently under investigation by any governmental agency and have not in the last num years been convicted or found liable for any act prohibited by state or federal law in any jurisdiction involving conspiracy or collusion with respect to bidding on any public contract except as indicated on a separate page attached to the bid document .
the authorized signer of the bid hereby states that he or she understands and acknowledges that the above representations are material and important and will be relied on by penndot in awarding the contract for which the bid is submitted .
he or she and their firm understands that any misstatement in this statement is and shall be treated as fraudulent concealment from penndot of the true facts relating to the submission of bids for this contract .
g contract unit price .
wherever an identical item number and description are used more than once provide the same unit bid price for each bid entry .
if the bidder provides different bid prices for an identical item number and description the bid will be rejected .
num num num num change no .
num num nonecms paper let bidswherever references are made to ecms or electronic submission for the purpose of a nonecmspaper let contract it will mean the paper let process identified in the proposal .
the dbe commitment attachment a is to be submitted via fax to num .
bid the unit price .
the extension and total bid amount are for informational purposes but may be used by the department to determine bidders intent if the unit price is left blank .
num bid guaranty for execution of contractbid guaranty is associated and supported by the bidders prequalification requirements .
num delivery of bidssubmit bids to the location designated before the hour of the opening date shown in the proposal .
electronic online bids will not be accepted after the time for the opening date of the bids shown in the proposal .
bids received after the time for opening of bids will be returned unopened to the bidder .
num withdrawal or revision of bids a withdrawal of bids before bid opening .
each bidder who submits a bid waives any right to withdraw it except as provided herein .
bidders will be given permission to withdraw any bid after it has been submitted to the department if the bidder electronically withdrawals or makes the request in person or by an accredited personal representative by telephone or in writing to the secretary .
deliver requests for withdrawal to the secretarys office before the time set for opening bids .
a bidder may withdraw any bids which have not been read after having been declared the apparent low bidder on any other project .
in withdrawing bids make the withdrawal request to the official in charge of the bid opening either in person or by an authorized representative before any such bids are read .
provide satisfactory credentials showing authority to act for the interested bidder at the time that the official in charge requests that any contemplated withdrawals be made .
the bid withdrawn by such a request will be deleted in ecms and will not be considered by the department .
b revision of bids before bid opening .
a bidder will be allowed to revise a bid after it has been submitted if the bidder electronically withdraws the bid or appears in person or provides an accredited personal representative to make the revision .
present all such requests to the secretarys office expeditiously so that the revision can be completed and the bid resubmitted before the time set for opening bids .
c withdrawal of bids after bid opening .
withdrawal of erroneous bids after the bid opening but before award based on bid mistakes will be allowed by the written determination of the secretary when the bidder requests relief and presents credible evidence that the reason for the lower bid price was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake and was actually due to an unintentional arithmetical error or an unintentional omission of a substantial quantity of work labor material or services made directly in the compilation of the bid .
the request for relief and the supporting evidence must be received by the secretarys office within num business days after the bid opening but before the award of the contract .
the secretary will not allow a withdrawal of a bid if the withdrawal of the bid would result in the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder its partner or a corporation or business venture owned by or in which the bidder has a substantial interest .
no bidder who is allowed to withdraw a proposal shall supply any material or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for any person to whom a contract or subcontract is awarded in the performance of the contract for which the withdrawn bid was submitted without the written approval of the secretary .
num joint venturea joint venture bid will be considered a bid by each of the participants jointly and individually for the entire contract performance as a joint venture according to the proposal terms and conditions .
the number of participants in a joint venture is limited to three .
in the proposal contract specifications drawings or any writing constituting a part of these the term bidder or contractor or any other term intending to refer to bidder or contractor as defined in section num will include num numa num num change no .
num and mean each participant in any joint venture .
a line item joint venture .
initiate a joint venture bid in the expedite software by selecting the contractor list .
select the joint venture business partner .
add the items to be undertaken by each joint venture business partner .
for each item added specify the quantity and unit price in whole or in part .
each joint venture business partner will be evaluated for prequalification work classifications and capacity based on the items designated as specified in section num. b percent joint venture two party .
initiate a twoparty num joint venture bid in the expedite software by selecting the contractor list .
select the joint venture business partner and add only the mobilization item .
using the mobilization item quantity field enter num for a num joint venture representing a num on all bid items .
enter the unit price as shown on the schedule of prices .
each twoparty num joint venture business partner will be evaluated for prequalification work classifications for all items as specified in section num .
capacity will be calculated using num for all items .
c percent joint venture three party .
initiate a threeparty num joint venture bid in the expedite software by selecting the contractor list .
select the joint venture business partners and add only the mobilization item .
to represent num on all bid items use the mobilization item quantity field and enter num for both the second and third parties of the joint venture partner leaving num for the lead of the joint venture .
enter the unit price as shown on the schedule of prices .
each threeparty num joint venture business venture will be evaluated for prequalification work classifications for all items as specified in section num .
capacity will be calculated using num for the lead joint venture and num for the second and third partners of the joint venture for all items .
num opening of bidsbids will be opened and announced publicly at the time on the date and at the place shown in the proposal .
bidders andor their authorized representatives and other interested persons are invited to be present .
in case of an emergency which causes evacuation of the building at the time of the bid opening the official in charge of the bid opening will publicly announce any necessary changes in the time of depositing opening and announcing of bids .
num disqualification of bidders and rejection of bids a the following may be considered sufficient reasons for bidder disqualification and the rejection of the bidss num. submittal of more than one bid for the same work from an individual a firm a partnership an association a subsidiary an affiliate or a corporation under the same or different name num. evidence of collusion among bidders .
any participant in such collusion will receive no recognition as a bidder for future work of the department until the participant has been reinstated as a qualified bidder num. lack of competency of adequate machinery plant or of other equipment num. inability in the judgment of the department to promptly complete the project because of uncompleted work num. failure to pay or satisfactorily settle all bills due for material furnished for labor supplied or performed for rental of equipment used and for services rendered by public utilities num. failure to comply with any department prequalification regulations num. judgment of default under a previous contract num. contractor currently debarred by federal or state authority or num. material or intentional failure to comply with contract drawings or specifications or material or intentional numa numb num num change no .
num failure to adequately maintain and control traffic during construction on a previous contract .
b in addition to rights under num pa. code chapter num the secretary reserves the right to reject any or all bids if in his or her judgment the rejection is in the states best interest .
num .
in addition bids will be rejected for any of the following reasons num.a failure to submit the bid using the electronic format furnished or approved by the department num.b failure to properly sign the bid the required affidavits or certificates or any other required documents as specified in the proposal num.c completed ebs expedite bid file is unreadable or contains errors num.d failure to include a price for each item on the bid schedule except in the case of alternate bidding in alternate bidding failure to include a price for one of the required alternate items on the bid schedule num.e the inclusion of conditions or qualifications not provided for in the proposal num.f failure to submit diverse business participation requirements as specified in the proposal num.g failure to submit disadvantaged business enterprise participation requirements as specified in the proposal or num.h failure to electronically acknowledge all addendums in the ebs expedite bid file .
num .
in addition bids may be rejected for the following reasons num.a the proposal was not furnished or approved by the department num.b part of the bid is detached num.c the bid contains omissions or alterations additions not specified or deviations of any other kind num.d the bid is materially unbalanced num.e the bid is not submitted under the name listed on the prequalification certificate num.f the bidder provides different bid prices for an identical item number and description or num.g failure to properly execute approve and return the contract together with the surety bonds and the insurance certificates as specified in section num .
num num num num change no .
num section numaward and execution of contract num consideration of bidsafter the bids are opened the total bid amount and the name of the apparent low bidder will be publicly announced .
bids will then be promptly verified and if determined by the secretary to be satisfactory the results of the determination of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder will be made available to the public .
a submission of component item schedule .
the apparent low bidder is required to complete and submit a component item schedule for each lump sum item requiring a component item schedule cis in the bid providing quantities and unit prices for the component items associated with that lump sum pay item .
the completed cis becomes part of the contract .
the proposal will include a cis for each applicable asdesigned lump sum item .
when the proposal indicates that an equivalent structure or facility of an alternate design may be constructed in lieu of the asdesigned structure or facility and the alternate design is bid the necessary cis must be prepared by the bidder .
the apparent low bidder is required to submit cis electronically using the ecms website after the bid opening .
if the cis is not submitted within num calendar days after the bid opening the contract may be awarded without the cis .
no payments will be made for any item of work until the cis is submitted and approved .
in the event a deficiency is discovered in the information provided on the cis the bidder will be notified to correct the deficiency .
in the event the apparent low bid is rejected the next lowest bidder will be notified to prepare and submit the cis in the manner as specified herein .
num award of contractwhen a bid received has been determined by the secretary to be satisfactory a contract will be awarded in writing to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder within num days from the opening date of the bids .
thirtyday extensions of the award date may be made by the mutual written consent of the representative and the lowest responsive and responsible bidder .
the department will base the award exclusively on the total in the bid schedule and on compliance with all the bidding requirements .
no prices will be negotiated due to any extensions .
contract award on a joint venture bid will place upon the joint participants complete liability jointly and individually for contract performance .
contracting corporations which are chartered in a state other than pennsylvania as well as individuals or firms doing business under fictitious names are required to register with the secretary of the commonwealth and obtain a certificate authorizing them to do business in pennsylvania before they can be awarded a contract .
num cancellation of awardthe secretary reserves the right to cancel the award of any contract at any time before its approval by the chief counsel the general counsel andor the attorney general or their designees when such cancellation is in the best interests of the state .
in the event of such cancellation payment will be made for the documented costs of insurance and surety bonds required under sections num and num and the documented cost of actual expenses reasonably incurred in accordance with a letter of intent when specified and issued by the deputy secretary for highway administration .
no payment will be made for damages of any other kind including but not limited to lost profits .
num surety bondswhen awarded the contract furnish an electronic performance bond using ecms with sufficient surety or sureties in an amount equal to num of the contract price .
have the bond specify that the contracted work will be completed in a manner satisfactory to the secretary .
have the bond state that the state is not liable for any expenses incurred through the failure to complete the work as specified nor liable for any damages growing out of the carelessness of the contractor the contractors employees or subcontractors .
also furnish an electronic payment bond using ecms in the amount of num of the contract price .
have a corporate surety legally authorized to transact business in the state and satisfactory to the secretary execute both bonds .
if the secretary decides the bond surety is unsatisfactory promptly furnish any additional required security to protect the states interests and the interests of all persons firms or corporations whowhich have furnished material provided equipment on rental or suppliedperformed labor or services on or in connection with the performance of the work for this contract .
have each participant in a joint venture submit a separate electronic performance bond and a separate electronic payment bond using ecms .
have a corporate surety legally authorized to transact business in the state and num num num num change no .
num satisfactory to the secretary execute all bonds .
num execution and approval of contractelectronically sign the awarded contract and properly executed surety bonds and return them to the secretary of transportation harrisburg pennsylvania within num days after notification by the secretary .
within the num days provide an insurance certificate or certificates listing the project number naming the state as an additional insured party and saved harmless if local authoritysponsor project name the local authoritysponsor as additional insured and proving property damage and public liability insurance is adequate to cover any loss that might accrue .
procure only occurrencebased insurance coverage with general aggregate limit on a per project basis and so note on the certificate or demonstrate exhaustive efforts to purchase such insurance where it is unavailable .
if able to demonstrate factual impossibility of obtaining occurrencebased insurance then purchase insurance in a form and amount to be determined by the department .
provide a minimum num day cancellation notice with a minimum num days cancellation notification for nonpayment .
the insurance certificate can be emailed to certificateofinsurancepa.gov or faxed to num. a when the joint bidder returns the signed contract for a joint venture to be signed by the secretary a certified copy of a resolution of the board of directors of each participating corporation must be included .
have the resolution authorize the joint venture with the other party participants for the specific contract .
have the corporation also submit a copy of its corporate powers .
have the participants in any joint venture make the designation in writing addressed to the secretary with a copy directed to the deputy secretary for highway administration .
the designations are as follows num .
the name of the person who will be in charge of the project for the joint contractors .
give this person complete authority to speak for and bind the joint contractors in all matters relating to the contract .
it is this person to whom all notices orders directions and determinations concerning the project may be given by the secretary or the representative .
notices orders directions or determinations given to this designated person or to one of the joint contractors will be considered to have been given to all parties .
no change in the person designated to be in charge of the project will be recognized by or be binding upon the secretary or the representative until the participants in the joint venture give written notice of such change .
in the event of the death or disability of the person in charge of the project it is the responsibility of the joint contractors to advise the secretary or the representative in writing over their joint signatures of such death or disability within num hours after the occurrence and then to designate a successor .
num .
a mailing address for the receipt of all estimates acceptance and final settlement certificates payments notices orders directions and determinations for the performance of the work .
the mailing address will be considered the joint contractors address and any communications directed to such address will be considered to have been received by the joint contractors .
all checks for the payment of estimates and the final settlement certificate will be made to the order of the joint contractors in the same form in which they have signed the contract and will be mailed to the designated mailing address .
change of the mailing address will not be recognized by or be binding upon the secretary or the representative until written notice signed by the joint contractors has been received by the secretary or the representative .
b no bid will be considered binding upon the state or fully executed until the form and legality of the contract is approved by the chief counsel the general counsel andor the attorney general or their designee .
if any proposal includes work to be contracted with more than one agency the contracts will be entered into as specified in the proposal .
num failure to execute contractif the contract together with the surety bonds and the insurance certificates providing adequate insurance coverage as provided in section num is not properly executed and returned liquidated damages may be assessed andor the contractors prequalification may be suspended according to num pa code chapter num regulations governing prequalification of prospective bidders .
num cancellation of contractthe contract may be canceled by either party if the notice to proceed num num num num change no .
num is not issued on or before the anticipated notice to proceed date specified in the bid package or within num days of the award of the contract whichever is later .
extensions of the cancellation period will be made only by mutual written consent of the parties to the contract provided such written consent is given before the expiration of the cancellation period .
prices will not be renegotiated .
the secretary also reserves the right to cancel the contract any time before the actual notice to proceed date .
if the contract is canceled payment will be made for the documented costs of insurance and surety bonds required under sections num and num and the documented cost of actual expenses reasonably incurred in accordance with a letter of intent when specified and issued by the deputy secretary for highway administration .
no payment will be made for damages of any other kind including but not limited to lost profits .
num assignment of antitrust claimsit is recognized that in actual economic practice overcharges by suppliers resulting from violations of state or federal antitrust laws are in fact borne by the state .
as part of the consideration for the award of the contract and intending to be legally bound the contractor assigns to the state all right title and interest in and to any current claims or claims hereafter acquired under state or federal antitrust laws relating to the subject matter of the contract .
num num num num change no .
num section numscope of work num intent of plans and specificationsthe intent of the plans and specifications is to prescribe a complete project undertaken according to the contract .
therefore according to the contract furnish material equipment tools labor and incidental work complete in place unless otherwise provided and be responsible for the complete supervision performance and completion of the work .
num alteration of drawings or workthe department reserves the right to order at any time during the progress of the work increases or decreases in quantities and alterations in the construction drawings or specifications including alterations in the grade or alignment of the road or structures .
any such order will be in writing by the representative .
also should any item contained in the proposal and contract be found unnecessary for the proper completion of the work a written order will be given to eliminate such item from the contract .
such increases decreases eliminations andor alterations will not invalidate the contract nor release the surety .
if the aforementioned changes in quantities or alterations of the construction drawings will significantly increase or decrease the cost of performing the work directly affected perform such work only when authorized in writing as specified in section numa .
payment for such work will be made under section num .
with the exception of advance warning signs detour signs work zone traffic control devices and other items specified in the contract perform no work beyond the limits of the project except as authorized in writing by the deputy secretary for highway administration .
when an item of work is eliminated reimbursement of actual expenses will be made as specified in section numd .
if the aforementioned changes in the quantities or alterations of the drawings are of such magnitude as to require a change in the time to complete the project a time adjustment will be made as specified in section num .
num extra workanticipate that extra work might be necessary in order to complete the project as contemplated .
perform extra work according to the specifications and only when authorized in writing as specified in section num .
compensation will be made as specified in section num .
num value engineeringvalue engineering applies to cost reduction proposals that are initiated developed and submitted to the department for modifying the plans the specifications or other contract requirements .
these provisions do not apply to a proposal unless it is identified as a value engineering proposal at the time it is submitted .
the department is not required to accept or act upon submitted value engineering proposals .
value engineering proposals are those that would require a change in the contract and would result in either no cost increase or a net cost savings to the department .
they are initiated by the contractor who proposes to provide the function of an improved product or service at the same cost or a lower cost and to accomplish the original purpose of the project without impairing essential functions and characteristics .
submit the following minimum information with each proposal allowing enough time for department investigation and implementation without interfering with the project schedule a description of the difference between the existing contract requirements and the proposed change with the comparative advantages and disadvantages of each an itemized list of the contract requirements which are to be changed if the proposal is adopted with a recommendation for making each change a detailed estimate of the net savings in construction costs that will result from the adoption of the proposal a prediction of any effects the proposed change will have on other department costs such as maintenance and operations and rehabilitation num num num num change no .
num a statement of the deadline for adopting the change in order to obtain maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the contract noting any effect on the required completion date or any specified milestone dates and any other schedule impacts and the contract items of work affected by the proposed change including any quantity changes as well as any extra work items to be established including prices and backup data .
when preparing the detailed estimate of the net savings in construction cost that will result from the adoption of the proposal the cost of the new work must include any increase in future maintenance or operational costs .
onehalf of the engineering and development costs incurred may also be included in the cost of the new work .
the department reserves the right to make the changes without compensation if a value engineering proposal is based upon or similar to standard specifications standard special provisions or standard drawings adopted before the award date for the contract .
the department will judge the acceptability of a value engineering proposal and the estimated net cost savings to be realized from adoption of all or any part of the proposal .
in evaluating the estimated net cost savings the department may disregard the contract bid prices if in the judgment of the department such prices do not represent a fair measure of the value of the work to be performed or to be deleted .
within num calendar days after receipt of the required minimum information as specified herein the department will review and provide notification of its acceptance or rejection of the value engineering proposal .
if the proposal is accepted in whole or in part such acceptance will be by a letter from the district executive or the director of project delivery as applicable .
if the approval of the department is conditional the letter will note the conditions .
the letter will serve as authorization for the district to process a contract work order to incorporate the necessary changes in the plans and specifications to permit the value engineering proposal or any part of it accepted to be put into effect .
continue to perform the work according to the requirements of the contract until the department processes a work order incorporating the value engineering proposal in whole or in part .
acceptance andor preparation of the value engineering proposal and performance of the work will not extend the required completion date andor any specified milestone dates unless a request for an adjustment is submitted as specified in section numb and approved by the representative .
the department reserves the right to adopt all or any part of a value engineering proposal for general use on other contracts .
value engineering proposals that are either identical or similar to previously submitted proposals will be eligible for consideration and compensation under the provisions of this section if the previously submitted proposals were not adopted for general application to other contracts administered by the department .
compensation for the contractors share of the actual net cost savings associated with a value engineering proposal will be as specified in section num .
num cleaning of project siteremove silt and other deposits from newly constructed culverts inlet outlet and parallel ditches bridges and other drainage structures including stream channels .
clean and remove surplus and discarded material equipment and temporary structures from the project and adjacent properties including waste and borrow areas .
remove debris and objectionable material from areas used or disturbed by the construction operations on or within sight of the highway .
remove paint marks or spills stains rust marks oil or any other unsuitable marks as directed .
restore waste and borrow areas as specified in section num .
maintain the vegetation within the constructed slope limits including waste and borrow areas and leave the project in a presentable condition .
the project will not be considered complete until the above work has been completed .
num disposal of existing highway structures and material within the projectsatisfactorily remove and dispose of all existing highway structures and material which are not to remain in place or to be used in the new construction .
unless otherwise directed dispose of these structures and material off the project site .
however if indicated the department will retain drainage pipes drainage grates or castings guide rail posts guide rail bridges not under the authority of the department andor portions of department bridges .
such structures on all other highways become the property of the local authorities having jurisdiction .
if the local authorities do not want to retain any portion or portions of structures or material under their jurisdiction then remove and dispose of them off the project site .
num num num num change no .
num num maintenance of existing roadwaythe department reserves the right to enter upon a project and at its own expense maintain the existing roadway .
notwithstanding the performance of such work by the department continue to comply with all the provisions specified in sections num and num .
num unexpected hazardous wastethe encountering of hazardous waste will be considered a differing site condition as specified in section numb unless the presence of such waste is indicated in the proposal or contract .
hazardous waste is defined as material meeting the definition of a hazardous waste or toxic substance control act regulated pcb waste as specified in num cfr num or num pa code chapters num to num hazardous waste regulations .
if unexpected hazardous waste is encountered at the site the representative will investigate the conditions determine the extent of the affected area and authorize the contractor in writing to remove and dispose of the waste .
payment for such work will be made as specified in section num .
the contractor will not be required to perform or arrange for any work relating to the removal and disposal of unexpected hazardous waste .
if the contractor elects not to perform authorized waste removal and disposal work notify the district executive of that decision in writing within num working days of receipt of the representatives written authorization .
cooperate fully with the department and any authorized remediation contractor as specified in section num .
num unexpected residual or municipal wastethe encountering of materials that do not meet the definition of clean fill under the pennsylvania department of environmental protection dep management of fill policy will be considered a differing site condition as specified in section numb unless the presence of such material is indicated in the bid documents .
the determination of whether waste material is residual waste or municipal waste will be made in accordance with the dep management of fill policy applicable dep regulations and the requirements of publication num .
if unexpected residual or municipal waste is encountered at the site the representative working with the contractor will investigate the conditions determine the extent of the affected area and develop and execute a mitigation plan .
if deemed necessary the contractor will be authorized in writing to dispose of the material as residual waste or municipal waste as appropriate .
payment for such work will be made as specified in section num .
num numb num num change no .
num section numcontrol of work num authority of the representative a general .
the work will be subject at all times to the inspection of the representative .
do not restrict or hinder this inspection .
to prevent disputes and litigation the representative will determine the quantity of the kinds of work and the quality of material for which payment will be made under the contract determine the answer to questions in relation to the project and its construction and decide differences concerning the performance of the work covered by the contract .
all such determinations decisions directions and explanations necessary to complete explain or make definite any provisions of these specifications and plans will be given promptly in writing to the contractor .
as a condition precedent to filing a claim directly against penndot submit notice of intent to claim to the contracting officer in writing within num days of the act or omission .
this notice of intent will give the department the opportunity to investigate the claim and to maintain and document information for future resolution or litigation of the claim .
file the claim in writing with the contracting officer within num months of the date it accrues and not thereafter .
if the contractor fails to file the claim or does not timely file the claim the contractor is deemed to have waived its right to assert the claim in any forum .
claims not filed within the specified time period will be disregarded by the contracting officer .
the claim when filed must state all grounds upon which the claim is based and must include a copy of the previously submitted notice of intent to claim .
the contracting officer will attempt to settle and resolve the claim with the contractor .
the contracting officer at his or her discretion may conduct a claim review meeting to attempt to settle and resolve the claim with the contractor .
if a claim review meeting is held it will be attended by representatives of the contractor and such department representatives as the contracting officer considers appropriate .
if the claim is not resolved by agreement between the contracting officer and the contractor the contracting officer will issue a determination in writing regarding the claim and will mail it to the contractor by first class mail .
the determination will be mailed within num days of the date on which the contracting officer received the claim unless the num day period is extended by consent of the contracting officer and the contractor .
if the contracting officer fails to issue a final determination within the num days unless extended by consent of the contracting officer and the contractor the claim will be deemed denied .
the determination of the contracting officer will be the final order of the department regarding the claim .
the determination of the contracting officer will be conclusive and binding upon the contractor unless the contractor appeals the determination by filing a statement of claim with the board of claims within num days of the mailing date of the determination or if no extension is agreed to by the contracting officer and the contractor within num days of the receipt by the contracting officer of the claim whichever occurs first .
b authority to suspend work .
the representative may suspend the work wholly or in part for the following reasons failure to carry out orders failure to comply with any provisions of the contract unforeseen conditions not anticipated in estimating the contract time necessary for the completion of the work the district executive determines that the work will create roadway conditions that will hinder the departments ability to safely maintain traffic or provide necessary services such as winter maintenance operations or numb numd num num change no .
num the district executive determines that it is in the departments best interest to delay the work until such time that a higher quality product can be obtained .
written notification will be given of the suspension and the reasons for the suspension .
c review and acceptance .
review and acceptance by the department as specified stated or indicated in the contract will be made on the basis of limited general inspections .
it is understood that because of such limited reviews ultimate responsibility for the satisfactory completion of the project including but not limited to the quality of all materials the quality of all workmanship compliance with all terms of the contract sufficiency correctness and accuracy of all working or shop drawings and sufficiency of all qc plans rests solely with the contractor .
notwithstanding review andor acceptance save and hold harmless the department from the consequences of all defective work as well as all defects errors and omissions in the working or shop drawings qc plans and plans of every other kind prepared by the contractor .
num drawingsthe following drawings when applicable are required to perform the work a contract drawings .
these drawings will be furnished .
they show roadway lines grades and typical cross sections location and design of structures related construction features and details and construction quantities .
keep one set of the drawings available on the project .
b standard drawings .
section num c working drawings .
prepare these drawings to supplement the plans .
they include falsework drawings field sketches erection diagrams erection stresses and loads and other details as necessary to construct the project .
submit two copies of the drawings to the representative for review and acceptance before beginning work on the item involved .
design computations and all drawings for loadbearing falsework submissions are to be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state .
d shop drawings .
prepare these drawings in accordance with the requirements of design drawings department standards design manual part num structures and the contract special provisions unless otherwise specified .
prepare original drawings using pencil or ink or prepare drawings electronically cad using standard ansi d size num inch by num inch sheets with num num inch margin on the left side and num inch margins on remaining three sides .
all lines on the drawing are to be of sufficient density and width so as to have residual density when reduced by num or microfilmed .
use a minimum u.s .
customary leroy size of num for lettering symbols and characters .
make details clear and uncluttered .
show complete details dimensions materials notes camber diagrams welding details and sequences and any other information required to fabricate the item .
provide a title block in the lower righthand corner of each drawing that indicates the county route section number segment and offset station contract number ecms no .
name of contractor name of fabricator title of drawing drawing number structure number snumber initials of the drawer initials of the checker and date of the drawing .
include a revision block to the left of the title block and an empty block approximately num inch by num inch above the title block to be used by the shop drawing reviewer for the shop drawing stamp .
submit drawings electronically through the penndot project collaboration center ppcc or other electronic file sharing protocol using the following requirements numd num num num change no .
num scan original drawings or convert electronic drawings to produce a portable document format pdf file for each drawing .
include structure number snumber and drawing number in the file name .
it is required that the pdf files be created with the end user commenting and digital signature features enabled .
these features allow electronic comments to be added directly to the pdf using only reader software and create a log of comments that can not be changed once the digital signature is added .
submit pdf files to the district executive or to an agent designated by the district executive for review and acceptance .
provide files on compact disk through the ppcc or other electronic file sharing .
as an alternate files may be sent by email provided attachments total to no more than num mb per email message .
provide electronic transmittal forms regardless of submittal method .
pdf files will be returned with corrections noted .
modify original or electronic drawings as required scan or convert into new pdf files and resubmit .
continue until pdf files are accepted .
after acceptance submit final shop drawings electronic pdf files and if a hardcopy is requested one set of full size prints .
after erection is complete if applicable but before project completion submit final drawings showing asbuilt conditions as electronic pdf files to the district executive .
num conformity with drawings and specifications a general .
perform work within reasonably close conformity to the lines grades dimensions and indicated details andor as specified .
b determination by the representative .
num .
restricted performance specifications .
the representative will determine acceptability of material or construction .
when material or construction is not within specification limits acceptance will be as specified within the individual specification sections except where test result variations are so great that the material or construction is unacceptable .
num .
other than restricted performance specifications .
for each individual case the representative will determine the limits of reasonably close conformity the judgment given will be final and conclusive .
if it is determined that material or the finished product in which the material was used is not within reasonably close conformity but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced the representative will then determine if the work will be accepted and remain in place .
in this event written documentation will be provided for acceptance by required contract modification andor to provide for an appropriate adjustment in the contract price for such work or material .
if it is determined that material or the finished product is not within reasonably close conformity and has resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product remove or replace it .
c certification of falsework adequacy .
have a professional engineer registered in the state certify that the falsework system has been assembled as shown on the professional engineers signed and sealed falsework drawings prepared as specified in section numc .
submit the certification to the representative before placing loads on the falsework .
d compliance with specified milestone dates .
complete all work in a manner that ensures specified milestone dates andor contractually specified sequences are met .
failure to meet any specified milestone dates or sequence will result in the withholding of payment for completed work until the associated activity or activities have been completed to the satisfaction of the representative .
num coordination of plans and specificationsperform the work according to the intent of the plans and specifications .
do not take advantage of any error onor omission in the plans or discrepancy between the plans and specifications .
in the event such an error omission or discrepancy is discovered immediately notify the department .
failure to notify the department will constitute a waiver of all claims for misunderstandings ambiguities or any other reasons resulting from the errors omissions or discrepancies .
if requested corrections and interpretations necessary for the fulfillment of the plans and specifications will be made .
do not use scaled measurements where dimensions on the drawings are given or can be computed .
in case of a discrepancy among the contract documents the following order of precedence will apply num numa num num change no .
num num special provisions num plans excluding cited standard drawings num specifications other than special provisions num standard drawings num electronic files if any special provisions or information on the plans conflict with these specifications the special provisions or information on the plans will govern .
if a conflict exists between any portion of the plans designed specifically for this project and any portion of the standard drawings the former will govern .
if necessary the district executive will determine and order in writing any modifications or changes in the plans standard drawings or specifications to update adjust accept or complete the work contemplated by the contract as specified in section num .
wherever reference specifications or publications are specified comply with the issue or edition including interim aashto specifications and astm tentative designations in effect on the date bids are opened unless the date or year of the reference specification or publication is indicated or specified .
if there is a conflict between a cited title and a cited section number the title will take precedence over the section number .
num responsibility of contractor a general .
keep direct control of the contract and see that the work is properly supervised and is performed satisfactorily and efficiently .
supervise the work personally or appoint a competent superintendent or representative to be on the project at all times .
give this superintendent or representative the authority to receive orders and directions to execute orders and directions without delay and to make arrangements for all necessary material equipment and labor .
keep on the project at all times a copy of the plans a copy of the specifications and a copy of the contract and a copy of all subcontracts .
the department is not responsible for the contractors satisfactory completion of the contract work as a consequence of the presence of department representatives or inspectors and their inspection .
notify the assistant district executive for construction in the district having responsibility for the project num days before the actual start of work .
keep the assistant district executive for construction informed as to any changes in the scheduled date for starting work .
b work by others .
for work to be done without the supervision of the department investigate the work and anticipate its execution and completion .
the department will not be liable for failure to anticipate the time of performance and completion of such work except in those cases where upon timely request the department has agreed to cooperate .
c gratuities and penalties .
do not give or offer or allow agents employees or representatives to give or offer either directly or indirectly money property entertainment or other valuable things to any employee or representative of the department for any reason purpose or cause or as an inducement bribe or reward for doing or omitting to do any act or for showing any favor or disfavor in relation to any matter relating to the contract .
any such action will constitute a violation of the contract .
upon satisfactory proof to the secretary of such violation the department may terminate performance of the work and take steps to complete the project as specified in section num .
num utility infrastructure and utility adjustments a utility infrastructure and utility adjustments interfering with contract operations .
before submitting a bid for the project examine the project site and any waste or borrow sites designated in the proposal to determine the location of all utility infrastructure and the need for any utility adjustments .
the department has indicated in the contract documents such utility infrastructure and utility adjustments as have been brought to its attention .
the department is not responsible for waste and borrow areas not designated in the contract documents .
accept the responsibility and risk relating to the conditions to be encountered regarding utility infrastructure and utility adjustments that are indicated in the contract documents or that can be ascertained from a careful prebid examination of the project site for any waste or borrow sites designated in the proposal .
numa num num num change no .
num upon execution of the contract inform all public service companies individuals and others owning or controlling any facilities or structures within the limits of the project which may have to be relocated adjusted or reconstructed of the plan of construction operations .
give due notice to the responsible party in sufficient time for that party to organize and perform such work in conjunction with or in advance of construction operations .
cooperate with the utility infrastructure owners and the owners of all waste and borrow areas not on the project site .
make arrangements for utility adjustments necessary to perform the work as indicated in the contract documents .
arrange and perform contract work in and around such utility infrastructure in accordance with recognized and accepted engineering and construction practices and in a manner that assists the utility infrastructure owners in their required utility adjustments .
refer to the provisions of act num which specifies project responsibilities in regard to public health and safety during excavation and demolition operations in areas of underground utilities .
b delays in the performance of work .
no additional compensation will be paid because of an impact to the contract work from utility infrastructure and utility adjustments unless the contractor establishes to the satisfaction of the district executive and the director of project delivery that the impact was unforeseen and unforeseeable by a reasonable contractor that losses could not have been avoided by the judicious handling of forces equipment and plants or by reasonable revisions to the schedule of operations and that the impact has resulted in a documented increase in the cost of performing the contract work in which case only delay damages will be paid as specified in section num .
the following are conditions precedent to the right if any of the contractor to an adjustment in compensation attend a coordination meetings that will be scheduled and conducted by the department before beginning construction .
the meetings will include all utility infrastructure owners .
at this meetings be prepared to discuss the project schedule all project milestones and required completion dates and all activities related to utility infrastructure and utility adjustments and how the project schedule differs from the utility relocation schedule prepared by the department during project design .
incorporate appropriate information from this meetings into the project schedule as specified in section numb .
the department will provide a record of the meetings .
furnish all schedule updates specified in section numb to all affected utility infrastructure owners .
comply with the requirements specified in section num. c utility adjustments by others .
when required owners or lessees are to bring railway tracks to the established line and grade .
utility adjustments are to be performed by the owners of the utility infrastructure unless otherwise indicated .
check the line and grade before base or pavement is placed adjacent to or around such utility infrastructure .
d damage to utility infrastructure .
compensate the owner for all cost of repairing replacing or resetting any utility infrastructure damaged or disturbed by contract construction as specified in section num .
coordinate with the railroad company to provide accepted measures for protection of railroad tracks and ballast from debris silt or other foreign matter .
provide required means of protection maintenance cleaning repair and replacement of ballast .
this work will be subject to the approval of the railroads chief engineer or authorized representative .
num cooperation between contractorsthe department reserves the right to contract for and perform other work on or near the work covered by the contract .
if separate contracts are awarded within the limits of or adjacent to any one project conduct the work to avoid interfering with or hindering the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
as directed cooperate with contractors working on the same project .
satisfactorily join work with and in proper sequence with the work of others .
assume all liability in connection with the contract .
protect and save harmless the department from all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced because of the presence and operations of other contractors working within or outside the same project limits .
num construction surveying numa num num num change no .
num a projects that do not include a construction surveying pay item .
if the project plans and specifications do not indicate a separate pay item for construction surveying control stakes will be furnished and placed offset from the proposed roadway base line and a grade sheet will be furnished showing the horizontal and vertical measurements from the stakes to the base line and grade of the roadway as planned including adjusted alignment and grades as directed to meet conditions .
where the highway is to be constructed on a grade of more than num an offset stake will be set on each side of each designated grade point .
the stakes will be on a direct line through the grade point or base line or otherwise as may be required .
slope stakes will be placed adjacent to the top of cut and toe of embankment slopes where these points are more than num feet vertically above or below the finished grade line .
applicable base line abutment pier sidewall and wingwall stakes together with offset reference and grade stakes for bridges arches slab and box culverts including metal plate and pipe culverts and other special structures will also be placed as required to facilitate and control the work .
employ a professional land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state qualified in the use of plans cross sections and specifications to establish lines and grades as may be required .
assume full responsibility for dimensions and elevations taken from the control stakes and the setting of lines and grades .
furnish templates and other material and place additional stakes and markers necessary for control and guidance of construction operations .
also furnish the inspector with any assistance required for checking lines grades and measurements established other than by the department and necessary for the performance of the work .
the department does not assume responsibility for the performance of the work as a consequence of this checking .
preserve survey points and stakes as placed .
if any of these surveying controls are disturbed or destroyed by construction operations the cost to the department for replacement will be charged against and deducted from money due or to become due .
b projects that include a construction surveying pay item .
if the project plans and specifications indicate a separate pay item for construction surveying perform the work as specified in section num .
num authority and duties of inspectorinchargethe inspectorincharge will have immediate responsibility for administering the performance of work on the project .
in case a dispute arises concerning material to be furnished or the manner of performing the work the inspectorincharge will have authority to reject material or suspend the work until the question at issue can be referred to and be decided by the representative .
a rejection of material or suspension of work will be confirmed by written notice from the representative .
num inspection of workthe work will be subject to the inspection of the representative or authorized assistants .
provide them access to the work and furnish them with every reasonable facility for determining whether the work being performed or which has been completed is according to the requirements of the plans specifications and contract except as otherwise provided .
provide all labor and equipment necessary for such examination .
should the work thus exposed or examined prove satisfactory the uncovering or removing and restoring of the uncovered or removed work will be paid for as specified in section num except the incidental work for testing the depth of base and surface courses and pavement will not be paid for separately .
should the work exposed or examined prove defective or unsatisfactory promptly uncover or remove and satisfactorily restore the defective or unsatisfactory work at no expense to the department .
when any unit of government or political subdivision or any public or private corporation is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by the contract the respective representatives will have the right to inspect the work .
such inspection will not make any unit of government or political subdivision or any public or private corporation a party to this contract and will in no way interfere with the rights of either party to this contract .
num duties of the inspectorauthorized inspectors who perform their duties under the direction of the representative will be assigned to the project .
execute work under the observation and subject to examination of an inspectors carry out such work during the normal working hours of the day unless specifically directed otherwise .
if work is performed during nighttime hours with permission provide sufficient artificial lighting to assure proper inspection and workmanship .
the inspector is not authorized to do the following revoke alter enlarge relax or release any requirements of the specifications approve or accept any portion of the work or issue instructions contrary to the plans and specifications .
num numa num num change no .
num the presence of the inspector during the performance of any work on the project will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for work that is later determined by the representative to be defective .
num defective work and materialif any work andor material does not meet the requirements of the plans and specifications or is not within reasonably close conformity as determined by the representative such work andor material will be declared defective .
unless otherwise specified repair as directed or remove and replace defective work andor material at no expense to the department .
num maintenance of performed work a maintenance of performed work .
maintain performed and completed work making continuous and effective efforts with adequate equipment and forces to keep the roadway or structures in satisfactory condition at all times during construction .
provide such maintenance at no additional cost to the department until relieved of responsibility for further physical work and maintenance as specified in section numa .
if at any time performed work is not maintained the department reserves the right to perform such work as may be considered necessary for traffic accommodation and to deduct the cost thereof from money due or to become due the contractor .
provide removals renewals restorations and repairs as required to remedy damage to performed work occurring before relief of contractor responsibility as specified in section numa .
perform such work according to the terms and conditions of the contract at no expense to the department .
if as determined by the representative the damage is due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of the contractor and occurs despite satisfactory maintenance precautions taken such work will be paid for at the departments expense as specified in section num. b maintenance during temporary suspension of work .
if the work is temporarily suspended wholly or in part for a sustained or indefinite period satisfactorily store all materials and take every precaution to prevent damage or deterioration of preformed work .
provide suitable drainage for the roadway by constructing temporary shoulders by opening culverts inlets and parallel ditches and by erecting temporary drainage structures where necessary .
during suspension the entire project under contract or any section may be opened to traffic as directed .
if opened to traffic maintain the roadway in satisfactory condition and maintain local traffic as specified in section num .
perform such work at no expense to the department except as specified in section num .
during work suspension remove all protective devices installed on the project .
however if directed maintain protective devices in certain areas .
if work is suspended in part the representative will have the authority to direct that other parts or items of work be performed .
satisfactorily protect the ends of any sections of rigidtype base course pavement or wearing surface opened to traffic during a temporary partial suspension of work .
maintain this protection remove it when no longer required and satisfactorily dispose of protective material .
during any period of work suspension properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under the contract .
take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other desirable vegetative growth .
num borrow areas and waste areas a nondesignated areas .
locate proposed areas for obtaining borrow material andor areas for disposal of waste material when required .
locate waste borrow or staging areas inside or outside of the rightofway in upland areas not impacting waters of the united states including jurisdictional wetlands unless already authorized by the u.s. army corps of engineers and dep .
situate areas so cross sections may be taken by the department to measure the volume of material removed or deposited .
before cross sectioning borrow areas remove topsoil and stockpile it for replacement when removal of borrow material has been completed .
review proposed areas with the representative for approval to negotiate a borrow andor waste agreement .
waste and borrow areas that impact waters of the united states are prohibited unless already permitted as agreed to with the u.s. army corps of engineers .
obtain waterway andor other required permits as applicable .
prepare and submit an erosion and sediment pollution control plan to the conservation district for approval .
negotiate with the owners of property to be obtained by using the departments standard borrow andor waste agreement available numa num num num change no .
num from the district executive .
this standard agreement may be modified to cover unusual or special conditions provided such conditions are acceptable to the department .
submit one copy of the executed agreement to the representative for review and acceptance .
do not proceed with work in the area until such review and acceptance is completed and until written notification of the acceptance is received .
also submit one copy of applicable permits and of the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan to the representative before starting work .
have the agreement provide for cleaning and leaving the premises and area in a welldrained and if required smoothly graded condition blending into the existing topography .
scarify lime fertilize seed and mulch any disturbed areas with material and formulae at rates typical for the project .
when directed satisfactorily remove and dispose of surplus material .
perform the clean fill determination for all borrow materials entering the construction rightofway by completing and submitting the environmental due diligence form dnum and if necessary form dnum to the department for acceptance .
b designated areas .
if the department has previously selected areas from which to obtain borrow or areas in which to deposit waste the proposal will specify the locations .
for such designated areas complete the standard agreement as specified above for nondesignated areas .
the department will provide all applicable permits and erosion and sediment pollution control plans .
num archeological and historical findingsin areas where remains of prehistoric peoples dwelling sites or where artifacts of historical or archeological significance are encountered discontinue construction operations in the general area .
contact will be made with the state historical and museum commission to determine how to proceed .
when directed satisfactorily excavate the site to preserve the artifacts encountered then remove them for delivery to the custody of the pennsylvania historical and museum commission .
in the event construction operations are halted or delayed because of archeological or historic findings appropriate adjustments will be made in the contract time as specified in section num .
such site excavation will be considered extra work as specified in section num .
num coal or valuable mineral findingsif coal or other valuable minerals are uncovered during prosecution of the work that are not addressed by contract special provisions store and handle the coal and other valuable minerals according to the directions of the representative .
do not claim or assume ownership rights .
if direction is given to handle and dispose of the material in a manner other than as unsuitable material the contract time and contract price may be adjusted as specified in section num .
num acceptance of construction loadings and material stockpiling on bridgesdo not stage equipment or stockpile materials on a bridge unless a written request has been submitted and accepted by the representative .
submissions are to be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state .
the representative will review the documentation supporting analysis if required and respond to the written request within num calendar days of receipt for a load limit submission num calendar days of receipt for a review of analytical calculations for cases that exceed the specified loading limits or for a crane placement submission .
acceptance by the representative will not relieve the contractor of liability for damages resulting from the stockpiling of materials or from the operation and movement of construction equipment .
a bridge is considered completed if all the following conditions are satisfied all applicable structural members are erected .
spans proposed for construction loading and material stockpiling are completed from expansion joint to expansion joint or from abutment to abutment excluding barriers and deck joints .
if staged construction for maintenanceoftraffic spans of staged width proposed for construction loading and material stockpiling are completed from expansion joint to expansion joint or from abutment num numb num num change no .
num to abutment excluding barriers and deck joints and the staged width has been designed for and will be opened to all legal loads without restriction .
for construction equipment on deck slabs the written request must describe the loading magnitude arrangement movement and position of the equipment on the structure including the mechanism of load transfer load path to the bridge .
a loading limits .
for spans over num feet carrying live traffic loads staged construction or over live traffic limit the stockpiling of material and staging of equipment on a nonweight posted completed bridge the following num .
individual material stockpile including but not limited to pallets of products reinforcement bar bundles aggregate piles limited to one individual stockpile with a maximum weight of num poundssquare foot and a maximum size of num square feet .
num .
multiple material stockpiles maximum weight of num poundssquare foot with a maximum total stockpile area of num square feet .
num .
combinations of material stock piles vehicles other materials and equipment are limited to a maximum total weight of num pounds per span in any for work zone width less than num feet and a maximum total weight of num pounds per span for work zones num wide provided loading limits in sections numanum and num are not exceeded .
the force effects produced by combinations of material stockpiles vehicles and other materials and equipment are limited to the force effects produced by vehicles of legal configuration evaluated at operating rating levels as defined in publication num .
on a weight posted completed bridge the above thresholds are to be reduced proportionately based on the ratio of the posted load limits to the legal load limits .
if loads are proposed that will exceed the above loading limits or loads are proposed to be placed on an incomplete bridge submit analytical calculations showing the flexural shear and axial stresses due to construction loadings do not exceed the operating stress levels as defined in publication num for the main load carrying members of the structure or the deck slab .
b placement of a crane .
submit a working drawing showing the location of crane matting and all other loads and denote their weights .
submit analytical calculations showing that flexural shear and axial stresses due to construction loadings do not exceed the operating stress levels as defined in publication num for the main load carrying members of the structure or the deck slab .
provide matting to protect the deck slab from damage .
placement of cranes is not allowed on newly constructed bridge decks until the deck concrete has cured for a minimum of num calendar days and has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
num num num num change no .
num section numcontrol of material num generaluse material complying with the requirements of these specifications .
at the preconstruction conference submit a list of material to be sampled and tested by the contractor and a list of material to be sampled and tested by the department .
comply with the provisions of the pennsylvania trade practices act num p.s .
section num et seq .
concerning the purchase of aluminum and steel products produced in a foreign country .
on federalaid projects also comply with the provisions specified in section num .
comply with the provisions of the steel products procurement act num p.s .
section num et seq .
in the performance of the contract or any subcontract .
following contract execution furnish to the department a complete statement of the project construction materials origin composition and manufacture .
for fabricated structural steel materials as identified in section numa and inspected in accordance with section nume and any other fabricated aluminum precast or prestressed concrete products inspected during manufacturing stamped and approved for shipment by the departments representative furnish form csnum to the inspectorincharge .
certified mill test reports for any steel included will be reviewed by the departments inspector and retained by the fabricator .
for all other steel products or products containing steel that will serve a permanent functional use in the project provide the inspectorincharge the following when the product is delivered to the project site for any identifiable steel products certification that section num of the steel products procurement act num p.s .
section num has been complied with .
identifiable steel products are steel products which contain permanent markings which indicate the material was both melted and manufactured in the united states .
for all other unidentifiable steel products documentation such as invoices bills of lading and mill certification that positively identify that the steel was melted and manufactured in the united states .
the provisions of the steel products procurement act will not be waived unless the secretary has determined under authority granted in section numb of the act that a certain steel product or products is not produced in the united states in sufficient quantities to meet contract requirements .
such a determination will be set forth in a proposal for the departments review and response .
include with the proposal a comprehensive list of sources including names and contact information for verification .
the secretary does not have the authority to waive the provisions specified in section num .
steel products are defined as products rolled formed shaped drawn extruded forged cast fabricated otherwise similarly processed or processed by a combination of two or more of these operations from steel made in the united states by the open hearth basic oxygen electric furnace bessemer or any other steelproducing process .
included are cast iron products and machinery and equipment as listed in united states department of commerce standard industrial classification num num and num and made of fabricated from or containing steel components .
if a product as delivered to the project contains both foreign and united states steel such product is considered to be a united states steel product only if at least num of the cost of the articles materials and supplies have been mined produced or manufactured as the case may be in the united states .
on federalaid projects comply with the provisions specified in section num .
no payment will be made on the contract if unidentified steel products are supplied until the hereinbefore requirements are met .
any payments made that should not have been made may be recoverable from a manufacturer or supplier as well as from a contractor or subcontractor .
any person who willfully violates the steel products procurement act will be prohibited from submitting bids for any contract for a period of num years from the date of determination that a violation has occurred .
if a subcontractor manufacturer or supplier violates the steel products procurement act such person will be prohibited from performing any work or supplying any materials to the department for a period of num years from the date of determination that a violation has occurred .
if steel products are used as a construction tool or appurtenance and will not serve a permanent functional use in the project compliance with the steel products procurement act is not required .
when standard manufactured items are specified and these items are identified by unit mass unit weight section dimensions or similar characteristics their identification will be considered to be nominal masses weights or num numa num num change no .
num dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by specified tolerances industry established manufacturing tolerances will be accepted .
num material a preliminary acceptance and approval .
have each material and material source of supply listed on form csnum source of supply materials or form csnum source of supply traffic control devices and approved before delivery to project .
department bulletin listed material and material sources are available for use by the contractor .
if nonbulletin material or material sources are proposed for use the requirements specified in numanum must be met before these materials are delivered to the project .
the department reserves the right to obtain samples of any material provided by the contractor for laboratory testing to verify compliance with specifications .
num .
bulletin material material application and material source .
defined as any of the following any material and material source listed in bulletin num and used in the material application as specified in the bulletin publication num or a special provision .
any material and material source listed in bulletin num and used in the material application as specified in the bulletin publication num or a special provision .
any bituminous material and material application specified in publication num and produced at a source listed in bulletin num .
any cement concrete material and material application specified in publication num and produced at a source listed in bulletin num .
submit a csnum or csnum to the representative with the following information contract item number item description material descriptiontypeclass product name manufacturerproducer plant location applicable bulletin supplier code bulletin number and publication num or bulletin section .
if a previously submitted bulletin material source no longer provides the specified material submit a change in material to the representative as outlined on form csnum or csnum .
once written acceptance is received furnish material from another bulletin material source listed in bulletin num num num or num .
num .
nonbulletin material material application or material source .
defined as any of the following any material product or material source not listed in bulletin num or bulletin num .
any material product or material source listed in bulletin num or bulletin num being used in an application not intended or specified in the bulletin publication num or a special provision .
any bituminous material or product not produced at a source listed in bulletin num .
any bituminous material or product not specified in publication num or a special provision .
any readymixed cement concrete material or product not produced at a source listed in bulletin num .
any readymixed cement concrete material or product not specified in publication num or a special provision .
num.a .
constructionaid material .
a necessary temporary or ancillary material that is not specified for use as part of a contract item or extra work item but used by the contractor only to aid in the completion of the work .
the material is typically not a permanent part of the specified work example wood and nails for temporary formwork .
the material need not be listed on form csnum and does not require any department approval for delivery to or use on the project .
the representative reserves the right to determine whether a material is a constructionaid material .
note temporary traffic control items are not constructionaid materials and do need listed on form csnum since these items must be from bulletin num listed sources and are specified for use as part of contract items or extra work items .
num.b .
projectspecific lts approved material .
nonbulletin material proposed for use on a particular project as part of a contract item or extra work item which requires approval by the lts .
use of material is not meant to circumvent the use of available material sources listed in bulletin num num num or num .
have each material and material source listed on form csnum or form csnum .
the material is defined as any material product or material source that meets one or more of the following criteria numa numa num num change no .
num meets specified requirements in publication num or special provision for the material and material application .
meets specified requirements in aashto or astm standard for the material and material application .
meets specified requirements in project special provision for the material and material application .
submit material to the lts for evaluation and testing a minimum of num days before planned delivery to the project .
submit the following information to the lts with a copy to the representative source description specified use qc plan independent lab test data showing material meets all specified requirements as determined on a single lot of material and material samples of the kind and quality specified .
do not deliver material to the project until written acceptance is received from the representative .
num.c .
projectspecific locally approved material .
nonbulletin material proposed for use on a particular project as part of a contract item or extra work item which does not require lts approval because of the low risk to constructed project performance but does require local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level .
this category of material is not meant to circumvent the use of available material sources listed in the bulletins or the requirements of projectspecific lts approved materials .
these materials must meet specification requirements and will be clearly identified in the specification as only needing local approval by the representative .
have each material and material source listed on form csnum or form csnum .
submit for local approval by the representative all required information for the material as indicated in the specification .
examples of locally approved materials are project specific items such as section num inlet filter bags section num compost filter socks and section num compost blanket and compost filter berms where the specification indicates that these materials are to be locally approved .
bulletin num will reference specific publication num sections that apply to locally approved materials .
bulletin num will not list actual materials or material sources for this category of materials as they will be accepted for use on a projectspecific basis by local approval .
b inspection .
inspect material delivered to the project and stockpile the material passing inspection for use .
do not incorporate questionable material until material is tested by lts and accepted in writing by the representative .
the department reserves the right to reject questionable material delivered to the project when the lts test results are not according to the specifications .
furnish assistance to the inspector as required to obtain samples .
allow designated department representatives to inspect material being used or intended to be used at any time before during or after material preparation while being used during the progress of the work or after the work has been completed .
furnish or arrange with producers or manufacturers to provide necessary material labor tools and equipment for such inspection .
inspections and tests if made at any point other than the point of incorporation in the work will not guarantee acceptance of the material .
inspection and testing performed by the department will not relieve the contractors responsibility for qc .
num tests and acceptance of material a restricted performance specifications .
num .
responsibility .
the department will be responsible for determining the acceptability of the material and construction .
material will be reviewed for acceptance through the departments specified acceptance procedures .
sample locations for acceptance testing will be determined by the department .
perform sampling and testing for acceptance in the presence of the inspector unless otherwise specified .
lot size will be specified .
in the event that operational conditions cause work to be interrupted before the specified lot size has been achieved the lot may be redefined by the inspector .
it is the intent of these specifications that each lot be evaluated based on the same number of samples .
transport acceptance samples from sampling point to testing site or other designated location in the presence of the inspector .
the contractor is responsible for the control and quality of the material and construction .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section numanum.a and submit it to the inspectorincharge for review at the start of the project .
include qc sampling and testing frequencies and action points to initiate corrective measures .
numa numa num num change no .
num notify the inspector before performing qc sampling and testing .
perform qc sampling and testing and report results to the inspector .
obtain and test samples according to the departments ptms .
if the required test method is not specified use methods described in the aashto standard specifications for transportation materials and methods of sampling and testing and supplements standards andor tentatives of astm or other testing procedures adopted by the department .
verification sampling and testing will be performed by the district unless otherwise specified .
qa sampling and testing will be performed or witnessed by the cmd .
independent assurance sampling and testing will be administered by the cmd .
num .
qc .
num.a maintain a qc system that provides reasonable assurance that materials products and completed construction submitted for acceptance conform to contract requirements whether selfmanufactured processed or procured from subcontractors or vendors .
when specified submit for review a plan of the qc system to be used .
have performed or perform the inspections and tests required to substantiate product conformance to contract requirements .
make the inspection and test results available for review throughout the contract life .
procedures will be subject to the review of the department before the work is started .
charts and records documenting qc inspections and tests are the property of the department .
submit a qc plan for use in compliance with the following guidelines as a minimum num.a.num raw materials .
list the source of material along with methods of documentation and testing performed to assure the material quality .
num.a.num production control .
list lot size and samples required include sample selection labeling and test procedure also include manufacturing phase .
num.a.num product testing .
list type and frequency of tests to be performed along with method of documenting and reporting test results .
list test equipment and calibration procedure frequency required .
list procedure for retesting or rejecting items failing the tests .
list the disposal methods and location for test samples and rejected lots .
num.a.num personnel .
list the personnel in charge of qc and define their areas of responsibility .
num.a.num packaging and shipping .
list method of identifying storing loading transporting and unloading to assure safe delivery of acceptable material and products .
num.a.num documentation .
list the procedures used for documentation and certification .
the qc plan and process are subject to periodic review and inspection by the department .
num.b promptly record conforming and nonconforming inspection and test results on acceptable forms or charts .
keep these records complete and keep them available for inspection at all times during the performance of the work .
num.c promptly correct any errors equipment malfunctions process changes or other assignable causes which have resulted or could result in the submission of material products and completed construction not conforming to specification requirements .
num.d when required provide or have provided and maintain measuring and testing devices necessary to ensure that material and products conform to contract requirements .
in order to ensure continued accuracy calibrate these devices at established intervals against department standards .
num.e when required make the measuring and testing equipment available to the representative for use in determining conformance of material products or completed construction with contract requirements .
in addition make personnel available for the operation of such devices and for verification of the accuracy and condition of the devices .
have calibration results available at all times .
the department reserves the right to conduct periodic inspections of the measuring and testing devices to confirm both calibration and condition of operation .
numa numa num num change no .
num num.f failure to comply with the qc plan may result in suspension of approval to provide material for department use andor removal from the approved list of material suppliers in the applicable bulletins .
num .
acceptance plans .
num.a percent within tolerance .
the percentage of each lot within the specified tolerances will be determined by the following procedures num.a.num the n sampling positions on the lot will be located by use of the table of random numbers found in ptm no .
num .
num.a.num a measurement will be made at each location or a test portion taken and the measurement made on the test portion .
num.a.num the lot x measurements are averaged to find x . n num i i n x x num.a.num the standard deviation s of the lot measurements will be determined as follows n num i num i num n x x s num.a.num the quality index qu is found by subtracting the average x of the measurements from the upper specification limit u and dividing the result by s. s x u qu num.a.num the quality index ql is found by subtracting the lower specification limit l from the average and dividing the result by s. s l x ql num.a.num the percentage of material that will fall within the upper tolerance limit u is estimated by entering table a or table b with qu using the column appropriate to the total number of measurements n. use table a if qu has a negative value or use table b if qu has a positive value .
num.a.num the percentage of material that will fall within the lower tolerance limit l is estimated by entering table a or table b with ql using the column appropriate to the total number of measurements n. use table a if ql has a negative value or use table b if ql has a positive value .
num.a.num in cases where both upper u and lower l tolerance limits are concerned the percentage of material that will fall within tolerance limits is found by adding the percent pu within the upper tolerance limit u to the percent pl within the lower tolerance limit l and subtracting num from the sum .
total percent within limits pu pl num num.a.num when determining the percentage within tolerance when the calculated quality index q.i .
value is between two tabular values in table a or table b the following procedure is used numa numa num num change no .
num the difference between the tabular q.i .
values on either side of the calculated value q.i .
value will be determined .
the difference will be divided by num and the quotient added to the lower tabular q.i .
value resulting in the interpolated q.i .
value .
if the calculated q.i .
is equal to or greater than the interpolated value the higher listed percent within tolerance will be used .
if the calculated q.i .
is less than interpolated value the lower listed percent within the tolerance will be used .
numa numa num num change no .
num table a estimating percent of lot within tolerance standard deviation method negative values of qu or ql percent within tolerance nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa numa num num change no .
num table a continued estimating percent of lot within tolerance standard deviation method negative values of qu or ql percent within tolerance nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa numa num num change no .
num table b estimating percent of lot within tolerance standard deviation method positive values of qu or ql percent within tolerance nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa numb num num change no .
num table b continued estimating percent of lot within tolerance standard deviation method positive values of qu or ql percent within tolerance nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num.b resampling of lot .
it is the intent of these specifications that lots will meet specification requirements at the time of submission .
if permitted nonconforming lots that can be corrected may be reworked and sampled .
num.c general basis of adjusted payment .
the related adjusted percentage of contract price will be determined by the method designated in the appropriate specification section .
b specifications other than restricted performance .
num .
responsibility .
the department will be responsible for determining the acceptability of the material and construction .
material will be reviewed for acceptance through the departments specified acceptance procedures .
sample locations for acceptance testing will be determined by the department .
perform sampling and testing for acceptance in the presence of the inspector unless otherwise specified .
transport acceptance samples from sampling point to testing site or other designated location in the presence of the inspector .
the contractor is responsible for the control and quality of the material and construction .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section numanum.a and submit it to the inspectorincharge for review at the start of the project .
include qc sampling and testing frequencies and action points to initiate corrective measures .
notify the inspector before performing qc sampling and testing .
perform qc sampling and testing and report results to the inspector .
do not incorporate any material into the work that is determined to be outside the specification limits .
obtain and test samples according to the departments ptms .
if the required test method is not specified use methods described in the aashto standard specifications for transportation materials and methods of sampling and testing and supplements standards andor tentatives of astm or other testing procedures adopted by the department .
verification sampling and testing will be performed by the district unless otherwise specified .
qa sampling and testing will be performed or witnessed by the bopd .
independent assurance sampling and testing will be administered by the bopd .
numb numb num num change no .
num num .
qc .
section numanum .
and as follows provide a plan of the qc system to be used for all construction work requiring acceptance testing by the department including qc test frequencies and action points to initiate corrective measures .
submit a copy of the qc plan to the project engineer to be maintained at the departments project field office before the start of work .
a qc plan is not required for items specified in section num .
num .
compliance certification of bulletin materials .
the contractor is responsible for the control and quality of all materials both bulletin and nonbulletin materials arriving at the project .
each bulletin material must be certified to be from a bulletin source and to be in compliance with the specification requirements for the material .
a properly completed and submitted form csnum certificate of compliance is the means for certification of bulletin materials .
bulletin materials are defined in section numanum .
the department reserves the right to sample and test any material for verification that specification requirements are met .
materials of questionable quality delivered to the project will be sampled tested and approved by lts before incorporation in any work .
materials on a reduced certification level may be required to be sampled tested and approved by lts before incorporation in any work .
random field verification samples of the material may be taken by the representative at the material source from delivered project material or at the place of the last manufacturer fabricator or producer before delivery .
random qa samples may also be taken by the representative from delivered project material at the place of supply or at the place of the last manufacturer fabricator or producer before delivery .
the random samples will be sent to the lts for testing .
num.a form csnum completion .
form csnum is completed by the manufacturer fabricator or producer producer of bulletin material provided to the project .
the producer maintains the original form csnum and provides a copy of form csnum with each direct shipment to the project .
when a producer sells a bulletin num material to a distributorsupplier shipper the producer provides a copy of form csnum with each delivery to the shipper .
when a shipper provides bulletin num material directly to the project the shipper completes and signs a new form csnum and provides a copy with each direct shipment to the project .
the shipper will maintain the copy of the producers form csnumthat they have received .
form csnum must be properly signed by a legally responsible company official .
num.b form csnum submission for project shipments .
ensure that form csnum is received for each project shipment of bulletin material .
submit to the representative a properly completed and signed copy of form csnum for each project shipment .
do not incorporate any bulletin material in the work until certification arrives on the project unless otherwise approved by the representative .
payment for material will be withheld until proper certification documentation is received .
form csnum may be submitted to the department either in hard copy format or electronically .
contractors who wish to submit certification documentation to a project electronically e.g .
via email facsimile or through a penndot project collaboration site must notify the department at the preconstruction meeting .
num.c supplemental or alternate certification .
certain bulletin materials require the submission of supplemental csnum certification in addition to form csnum to provide traceability of materials in multistep manufacturing processes .
epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcement steel requires the submission of supplemental certification form csnumc epoxy coating or galvanizing facility andor form csnumf fabrication facility .
structural steel aluminum or precastprestressed concrete products produced in a bulletin num approved facility with an onsite inspector or a representative must be stamped with an approved inspection stamp at the plant and certified with a form csnum .
certain bulletin materials require a form of certification other than the form csnum as identified in the particular material specification .
section num and section num materials require a properly completed vendor bill of lading .
certification of daily bituminous mixtures by submission of form csnumb .
certification of locally approved nonbulletin materials by submission of form csnumla .
numb numb num num change no .
num organize and submit only forms csnum and supplemental or alternate certifications for material supplied to the project .
submissions containing irrelevant forms or documentation for materials not incorporated into the project will not be accepted .
num.d csnum record retention .
retain form csnum for a period of not less than num years from the date of the last project shipment .
make files available for inspection and verification by the department .
notify shippers that a certification file must be maintained for purchased bulletin materials to provide an audit trail to the producer .
certifications for purchased bulletin materials must be maintained at their place of business for a period of not less than num years from the date of the last shipment to the project and must be available for inspection by the department .
notify producers that all component certifications for purchased bulletin materials must be maintained at their place of business for a period of not less than num years from the date of the last shipment to the project and must be available for inspection by the department .
num.e levels of certification for bulletin num producers .
the bopd determines the level of certification for each producer based on the producers ability to comply with the material specifications .
the levels of certification are defined in table c. bulletin num will indicate if a producer is at a certification level other than level num .
material provided by producers listed in bulletin num is approved for use only in its intended applications .
table c levels of certification for bulletin num producers producer material shipment procedure producer additional requirements level num standard certification ship on certification with form csnum none level num standard certification reduced ship on certification with form csnum see section numbnum.e.num level num lot approval certification ship only after material lot approval using modified certification with form cs num see section numbnum.e.num suspension or removal in accordance with the states contractor responsibility program producer may be suspended or removed from bulletin num for any of the reasons stated in the bulletin num preface regardless of producer certification level .
failure of producer to advance above certification level num will result in penndots initiating action for suspension or removal from bulletin num .
certain bulletin materials require supplemental or alternate forms of certification refer to section numbnum.c .
num.e.num level num standard certification .
initial level of certification typically issued to bulletin num listed producers .
material is produced and tested in accordance with the producers approved qc plan .
no known material performance or quality issues exist that warrant a reduced level of certification .
material is shipped on certification using form csnum .
num.e.num level num standard certification reduced .
reduced level of certification issued to bulletin num listed producers who have exhibited minormoderate material performance or quality issues .
producer is required to work with penndot on submission of an improvement plan that may include but is not limited to any or all of the following items a revised qc plan a failure analysisaction plan to assess why failures are occurring and how to prevent these failures from numb numc num num change no .
num occurring in the future correlation testing between inhouse and independent lab testing to assist with validating results .
material is produced and tested in accordance with the improvement plan approved by penndot .
material is shipped on certification using form csnum .
num.e.num level num lot approval certification .
this level of certification is issued to bulletin num listed producers who have exhibited major material performance or quality issues .
producer is required to work with penndot on an improvement plan as defined in level num .
material can not be shipped to projects using the standard csnum certification process .
producer must arrange for independent inplant acceptance testing ipat that will be conducted sidebyside with inhouse producer testing at the designated frequencies in the revised qc plan .
ipat will be at the producers expense .
penndots lts must approve the producers proposed ipat provider before it begins .
any material lot to be used on a project must be tested and approved by the ipat as meeting the required penndot specification prior to shipment to the project .
each material lot meeting the specification may be shipped to a project using a modified certification process as follows submit to both the project representative and lts form cs num along with a signed letter from the ipat on their official letterhead indicating that the material lot meets testing and specification requirements .
correlate results from parallel inhouse producer testing and ipat testing and submit to the lts on a monthly basis .
num use of materials from within the projectwith written permission material found in the excavation areas and meeting the departments specifications may be used in the project construction .
material used will be paid for as specified in section num .
however replace any portion removed with suitable material if required to complete the embankments .
the replaced quantity will be num of the volume of stone or gravel removed and num of the volume of sand and other material removed .
do not use reserved material as specified in section num or as indicated in the proposal .
num storage of material a general .
store material to assure preservation of specified quality and fitness for the work .
stored material even though accepted before storage may again be inspected before use in the work .
locate stored material to facilitate prompt inspection and control .
do not use private property for storage purposes without written permission of the owner or lessee .
make copies of this permission available to the department .
restore storage sites to conditions acceptable to property owners and the department .
b storage of aggregates .
provide a separate stockpile for each aggregate size and type at cement concrete plants .
do not use aggregates that become segregated or mixed with earth or foreign material .
if divided aggregate bins are used for storage or for proportioning take measures to prevent mixing of aggregates .
provide an area for storage of aggregates for use in portland cement concrete and bituminous concrete .
store aggregates on one of the following constructed according to standard practice bituminous concrete base course num inches minimum depth .
class c concrete or better num inches minimum depth .
c control of aggregates .
have aggregates available for use in cement concrete at the proportioning plant in enough time before batching to allow inspection and testing .
handle the aggregates so they may be field tested and accepted before storing them with previously accepted aggregates .
batch fine and coarse aggregates separately .
numc numc num num change no .
num properly control uniformity of moisture and uniformity of gradation .
provide a system of water sprays then use when required to maintain coarse aggregate moisture control .
during cool and cold weather concrete production maintain aggregates required for individual concrete placements whether stored in proportioning bins or stockpiles at a temperature of not less than numf before and during batching operations for a sufficient length of time to eliminate the presence of frost in or around the aggregate particles .
d storage of reinforcement .
satisfactorily store reinforcement above ground in a clean and dry condition on a platform in an orderly manner plainly marked to facilitate inspection .
num handling and transportation of material a general .
carefully handle material to preserve quality and fitness for the work and to prevent loss segregation or inconsistency in quantities after weighing or measuring for incorporation in the work .
b aggregates .
in dry batching operations measure aggregates or weigh before placing in the compartments of the vehicle unless otherwise specified or permitted .
clean the vehicles and provide tight batch partitions at least num inches higher than the batched aggregate level being hauled to prevent any spillage from one compartment to another .
c bulk cement .
bulk cement may be used as specified in section num .
if bulk cement is used transport to the mixer in acceptable metal rubber or plastic watertight containers or compartments .
d bag cement .
if bag cement is used dump the contents of the correct number of bags required for each batch into the mixer skip .
if permitted bag cement may be transported from storage to the mixer by placing the correct number of bags per batch on the batched aggregate in the aggregate compartments .
when transported the bag cement may be dumped on the aggregate after having been checked by the inspector and if done not more than num feet from the mixer .
bag cement that is allowed to lie on the batched aggregates longer than num hours or cement dumped on the batched aggregate longer than num hour will be rejected .
num unacceptable material a restricted performance specifications .
num .
acceptance or rejection .
following the application of the appropriate acceptance plan the representatives decision will be final as to the acceptance rejection or acceptance at an adjusted price of sampled lots .
num .
disposition of lots .
if permitted lots not conforming to specifications may be reworked and resubmitted for acceptance sampling .
for nonconforming lots that are not adaptable to correction by reworking remove and replace them have them accepted without payment or have them accepted at an adjusted price as stated in the specifications or if not stated as directed .
b specifications other than restricted performance .
material not conforming to the requirements of the specifications whether in place or not will be rejected .
remove such material promptly from the site of the work unless otherwise directed .
do not return rejected material to the work site until defects have been corrected and the material has been accepted for use .
c serviceable precast or prestressed concrete fabricated structural steel and aluminum products .
plant produced fabricated materials or products having materials substitutions dimensional deviations specifications deficiencies or damage which result in materials or products which may be serviceable but do not meet all contract requirements will be addressed as follows num .
minor deficiency or defect .
for materials or products with one or more minor deficiencies or defects resolution of the deficiencies or defects will be made directly by the precaster or fabricator with the bdtds structural materials section .
minor defects and deficiencies are generally defined as those which will not require numc num num num change no .
num engineering design review revisions to approved installation or erection plans or methods anticipated premature maintenance or rehabilitation the structural materials section may determine that one or more of the minor deficiencies or defects are actually significant deficiencies or nonconformances and require the precaster or fabricator to resolve the deficiency or defect as a significant deficiency or nonconformance as specified in section numcnum .
num .
significant deficiency or nonconformance .
for materials or products having one or more significant deficiencies or nonconformances which can not be corrected to meet the contract specifications and which the department determines may require one or more of the bulleted items listed in section numcnum .
submit documentation to support acceptance of the material or product provided by the precaster or fabricator and a request for department evaluation and final disposition of the materials or products .
where visible defects are present or when otherwise requested include detailed sketches drawings or photographs along with the supporting documentation form the precaster or fabricator to support acceptance of the material or product .
include a detailed repair procedure to correct the deficiency if applicable .
for requests submitted for acceptance of the material or product as is provide supporting justification to demonstrate that the significant deficiency or nonconformance will not result in additional constructability issues during erection or construction or unanticipated premature maintenance work .
obtain approval of any revisions required to the shop drawings to reflect as built conditions prior to shipment .
submit engineering calculations when required or requested to support the acceptability of the significant deficiency or nonconformance sealed by a registered professional engineer that is licensed in the state .
submittals must include a statement by the engineer that the defect will not compromise either the structural capacity or service life of the original design .
submit the above to the district assistant construction engineer with copies to the following chief structural materials engineer bridge design and technology division bureau of project delivery district structural control engineer district bridge engineer chief bridge engineer bridge design and technology division bureau of project delivery when calculations are required or requested .
include the following minimum information on a cover page attached to the submission ecms or other contract identification including state route section and county structure number if applicable specific identification of the affected units i.e .
girderbeamculvert number etc .
anticipated shipping date detailed sketches drawings or photographs of the defect if visible or when requested .
after evaluation the disposition of the material or product including any conditions of acceptance will be provided by the chief structural materials engineer from information provided by the engineering district .
replace materials or products which are rejected via this policy with those complying with the contract specifications and requirements .
num department furnished materialthe department will furnish material if specified in the proposal in the quantities required .
material will be delivered or made available at the point specified .
the cost of handling and placing material after delivery will be included in the contract price for the item .
after delivery and acceptance by the contractor the cost of replacing material due to shortages deficiencies or damage including demurrage charges will be deducted from money due or to become due .
num pennsylvania trade practices actthis section does not apply to projects which are partially or totally financed with federal funds .
numa numb num num change no .
num a general .
pursuant to the pa trade practices act act num the department will not specify purchase or permit to be furnished or used in any contract aluminum or steel products as set forth below made in the countries set forth below .
the department may utilize the discretionary waiver provision of act num as to steel products .
as to aluminum products if the sole source is from a banned country relief may be permitted under the statutory construction act num pa c.s .
num et seq .
num .
brazil .
welded carbon steel pipes and tubes carbon steel wire rod tool steel certain stainless steel products including hotrolled stainless steel bar stainless steel wire rod and coldformed stainless steel bar prestressed concrete steel wire strand hotrolled carbon steel plate in coil hotrolled carbon steel sheet and coldrolled carbon steel sheet .
num .
spain .
certain stainless steel products including stainless steel wire rod hotrolled stainless steel bars and coldformed stainless steel bars prestressed concrete steel wire strand certain steel products including hotrolled steel plate coldrolled carbon steel plate carbon steel structural shapes galvanized carbon steel sheet hotrolled carbon steel bars and coldformed carbon steel bars .
num .
south korea .
welded carbon steel pipes and tubes hotrolled carbon steel plate hotrolled carbon steel sheet and galvanized steel sheet .
num .
argentina .
carbon steel wire rod and coldrolled carbon steel sheet .
num buy america provisions and convict produced materialsthis section only applies to projects partially or totally financed with federal funds .
a buy america provisions .
furnish steel or iron materials including coating for permanently incorporated work according to num cfr num and as follows pig iron and processed pelletized and reduced iron ore manufactured outside of the united states is acceptable for use in domestic manufacturing process for steel andor iron materials .
all manufacturing processes of steel or iron materials in a product including coating and any subsequent process that alters the steel or iron materials physical form or shape or changes its chemical composition are to occur within the united states .
this includes rolling extruding machining bending grinding drilling and coating .
coating includes all processes that protect or enhance the value of the material such as epoxy coatings galvanizing or painting .
provide certification to the inspectorincharge that all manufacturing processes for steel and iron materials in a product including coating have occurred in the united states certify as specified in section num .
products manufactured of foreign steel or iron materials may be used provided the cost of such products as they are delivered to the project does not exceed num of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
b convict produced materials .
pursuant to num cfr num materials produced by convict labor after july num num may not be used for federalaid highway construction projects unless produced at a prison facility which had been producing convictmade materials for federalaid construction projects before july num num .
material produced by convicts who are on parole supervised release or probation from a prison may be incorporated in a federalaid highway construction project .
num num num num change no .
num section numlegal relations and responsibility to the public num laws to be observedat all times observe and comply with the following and post as required all federal state and local laws ordinances and regulations that have appropriate jurisdiction over the project and affect the conduct of the work or that apply to employees on the project and all orders or decrees that have been or may be enacted by any legal bodies or tribunals having authority or jurisdiction over the work material employees or contract .
protect and indemnify the state and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree including violations by contractor employees .
num permits licenses and tax responsibility a permits and licenses .
purchase and submit copies of permits and licenses .
at the job site post notices necessary for the proper and lawful performance of the work according to such permits and licenses .
do not start work until signing and submitting all documentation required to become a transfereecopermitee for all applicable permits required for the project .
b tax responsibility .
ascertain the possible existence scope and coverage of any local subdivision tax sometimes called an occupation tax wage tax income tax franchise tax or excise tax on the construction operations within the limit of the political subdivision imposing such tax .
also indemnify and save harmless the state and its agents from liability for the collection and payment of any taxes assessed and levied by the constituted authority including upon contractor agents employees andor representatives in connection with the performance of work on the project .
c vehicle registration .
attention is directed to num p.s .
numa and numa b which requires vehicles to be registered in pennsylvania when used on a project which is being built under traffic or where the vehicles are operated on a public highway opened to traffic .
num patented devices material and processesif any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright is used provide for use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
indemnify and save harmless the state or political subdivision from any claims for infringement by reason of the use of any patented design device material process or any trademark or copyright and indemnify the state for any costs expenses and damages which it may be obliged to pay by reason of any infringement at any time during the performance or after the completion of the work .
these provisions also apply to the surety .
num restoration of surface opened by permitdo not allow any opening to be made within the right of way unless a valid permit is presented authorizing the opening .
for such an opening made before the date upon which the work provided for in the contract is finally accepted repair at the time and in the manner directed in writing by the district executive .
num federalaid provisionsif the federal government pays any portion of the project costs observe the federal laws pertaining to the project as well as the rules and regulations made according to such laws .
work will be subject to the inspection of the appropriate federal agency .
such inspection will not make the federal government a party to the contract and will not interfere with the rights of either party to the contract .
num sanitary provisionsprovide and maintain in a neat and clean condition sanitary facilities including toilet facilities hand washing facilities and drinking water meeting the requirements of section numa for the exclusive use of department personnel on the project .
clean disinfect and maintain to the satisfaction of the representative any drinking water coolers or other drinking water delivery implements .
dispose of all wastes both sewage and wastewater in a manner approved by the dep .
as required obtain permits from local municipalities to num num num num change no .
num install temporary toilet facilities .
num occupational safety and healthcomply at all times with applicable federal state and local laws and regulations provisions and policies governing safety and health including the federal construction safety act public law num num cfr chapter xvii part num occupational safety and health regulations for construction and the occupation safety and health act public law num num cfr chapter xvii part num occupational safety and health standards for general industry and subsequent publications updating these regulations .
take any other needed action or proceed as directed to protect the life health and general occupational welfare of personnel employed on the project .
provide confined space training on the proper use of the testing equipment and all safety procedures to ensure a safe operation to contractor personnel and department representatives required to access the area for inspection purposes and provide all safety and testing equipment required by num cfr num to both department representatives and contractor personnel to ensure the safety of all workers and inspectors during construction operations and inspection operations of any confined spaces .
also provide proof of training such as a course signin sheet or certificate of training .
provide appropriate rescue services personnel and equipment as per num cfr numk .
if in the representatives opinion employees are exposed to extraordinary conditions which could or do constitute a hazard modify such equipment devices and job procedures to ensure protection against the hazard or to reduce the risk to the employees engaged in project work .
at the preconstruction conference submit a written project safety program .
include at a minimum the following procedures and information a procedure to document lost time .
detailed confined space mitigation procedures and safety procedures as required by num cfr num including procedures for conducting air monitor calibrations as required by the equipment manufacturers instructions and a written confined space entry permit system .
provide air monitoring equipment calibration documentation for spaces that have actual or potential atmospheric hazards .
written verification of rescue services availability and qualifications for permitrequired confined spaces .
written verification of annual training for internalcontractor employed rescue team if these services are provided by the contractor for permitrequired confined spaces .
provide a list of employees that attended the training and the dates they attended .
provide a procedure for assuring compliance by subcontractors and suppliers working within the projects limit of work .
all costs associated with the preparation and implementation and updates of project safety program and complying with the requirements are considered incidental .
give special emphasis to providing safeguards for any specially or unusually hazardous operations and health hazards .
include initial indoctrination and continuing instructions for all employees to enable them to perform work in a safe manner .
include in the instruction project safety practices manner of reporting accidents availability of medical facilities and explanation of individual responsibility for accidentfree operations .
require all persons to wear highvisibility safety apparel orange or yellowgreen that is intended to provide conspicuity during both daytime and nighttime usage and that meets the performance class num or num requirements of the ansiisea num publication entitled american national standard for highvisibility safety apparel and headwear while in work zones exposed either to traffic or to construction equipment .
all areas of a project will be hard hat areas .
require all persons within the project limits to wear protective headgear including persons in cement concrete and bituminous concrete plants operated exclusively for a project even though the plants may be remotely located .
for multiseason projects with a contract amount num provide and maintain one scoreboard safety sign num feet wide by num feet high to identify the number of days worked on the project without a lost time accident .
imprint on the sign the name of the contractor and an appropriate safety message .
prominently display the following on the sign in numinch letters a .
contractors name and address .
num num num num change no .
num b .
days worked since last losttime injury note indicates space for three removable numbers .
number displayed to include subcontractors .
place the sign in a prominent location at the project site .
update the sign at least biweekly .
immediately take corrective action upon notification by the representative of any noncompliance with the provisions of this section .
upon receipt of this notice failure or refusal to promptly comply will cause a written order to be issued stopping all or part of the work until the corrective action has been taken .
claim for an extension of time costs or damages because of the time lost due to any such stop orders will not be considered .
num railwayhighway provisionsconform to regulations stipulated in the pennsylvania public utility commissions order when work is indicated to be performed within or adjacent to the right of way or trackage belonging to or upon which a common carrier operates .
observe strict adherence to all requirements pertaining to the work safety and movement of trains to public and personal liability insurance and to any other related matters .
if it is necessary to use crossings other than those indicated make arrangements for the use of the crossings .
num bridges over navigable watersconduct work on navigable waters according to the requirements of permits issued by the u.s. army corps of engineers or u.s. coast guard whichever is applicable .
num care of public and private propertydo not damage overhead and underground facilities and structures or property within or adjacent to the project .
use special care in the performance of the work in order to avoid interference or damage to operating utilities or plants however where there is any possibility of interference or damage make satisfactory arrangements with responsible corporate officers of the utilities or plant covering the necessary precautions to be used during the performance of the work .
make these arrangements subject to review before work is started .
protect all land monuments and property markers which are to be affected by the construction until they have been correctly referenced by the department .
beyond the construction area reset monuments and markers which are disturbed by contract operations either during the construction of the project or otherwise when and as directed .
promptly make restitution for or satisfactorily repair or restore damaged public or private property .
protect trees to be left standing .
if these existing trees to be left standing are damaged satisfactorily repair or replace them at no expense to the department or compensate the department for the damage by an equitable monetary amount as determined by or agreed with the department .
num public use landsin performing work within or adjacent to public use lands namely national or state forests state gamelands wildlife or waterfowl refuges recreation areas parklands and historic sites comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction .
cooperate with the national or state forest officer or supervisor and authorized subordinates in observing sanitary laws and in exercising every reasonable precaution to prevent and suppress forest fires and vandalism .
do everything reasonable to prevent and suppress forest fires .
notify a forest supervisor as soon as possible of the location and extent of any fire observed .
before starting indicated work affecting stream channels verify that the department has the approval of the dep andor the dcnr .
num responsibility for damage claimsfurnish insurance certificates as specified in section num to indemnify and save harmless the state the department and all of its officers and employees from all suits actions or claims of any character name and description brought for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property during the performance of work by the contractor whether the same is due to the use of defective material defective workmanship neglect in safeguarding the work or public interests or by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct of the contractor or any subcontractors fabricators manufacturers or vendors .
also indemnify and save harmless the state the department and all of its officers and employees from cases arising as specified in sections num and num or from any claims for amounts arising or recovered under the workers compensation law or any other law bylaw ordinance order or decree .
num num num num change no .
num num opening sections of project to trafficthe representative will have the authority to order in writing any substantially completed section of the project opened to traffic when seasonal local or other conditions relating to the project or public convenience justify such action however such opening will not be held to be an acceptance or a waiver of any provisions of the specifications or the contract .
furnish place and maintain necessary traffic control devices as directed at the departments expense as specified in section num .
conduct the remainder of construction operations so as to cause the least obstruction to traffic .
any section of the project opened before project completion will be subject to the applicable requirements specified in section numa .
after opening a section of the project to traffic any damage to satisfactorily completed work items within the section which occurs due to vehicles other than construction vehicles and equipment engaged on the project and not to defective materials andor workmanship and which occurs despite satisfactory precaution taken will be replaced or repaired as directed at the departments expense as specified in section num .
num contractors responsibility for work a responsibility for performed work .
the terms and conditions of the contract will be in effect until the work is completed and accepted by the department as evidenced by the dated acceptance certificate issued by the department .
however the contractor will be relieved of responsibility for further physical work and maintenance as specified in section numa .
the issuance of the acceptance certificate does not relieve the contractor and surety from continuing liability for latent defects as specified in section numb .
b responsibility for latent defects .
the representative will determine if a defect is a latent defect .
the contractor and the surety continue to be liable for all latent defects however the surety is liable only until the performance bond is released .
satisfactorily repair or correct latent defects at no expense to the department .
if defects can not be satisfactorily repaired or corrected provide reimbursement for any expenses or damages incurred by the state because of latent defects .
failure to satisfactorily correct latent defects or to reimburse the state for expenses or damages incurred as a result of latent defects will be considered sufficient cause to suspend or remove prequalification according to num pa code chapter num regulations governing prequalification of prospective bidders provided that any adjudication regarding such latent defects is final .
c responsibility during temporary suspension of work .
should the work be temporarily suspended wholly or in part according to the provisions specified in section numb written notification will be given of the suspension and the reasons for the suspension .
if the work is temporarily suspended wholly or in part due to the fault of the contractor the required completion date and any specified milestone dates will not be changed unless otherwise directed by the director of project delivery .
after a whole or partial suspension upon receipt of written notice from the representative actively resume work according to the detailed schedule of operations .
num contractors responsibility for public or private facilities and structurescooperate with others in the performance of corrective project work as specified in section num .
the department will cooperate in the issue of notices and will participate in all essential field conferences relating to the facilities and structures .
num furnishing of right of waythe department will be responsible for securing all necessary rights of way in advance of construction .
any exceptions will be indicated in the proposal and contract .
num personal liability of public officialsin carrying out any of the provisions of these specifications or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by or within the scope of the contract no liability may be placed upon the secretary engineer or their authorized representatives either personally or as officials of the num num num num change no .
num state .
in such matters they act solely as state agents and representatives .
num no waiver of legal rightsthe department the secretary the engineer or the representative will not be prevented by an erroneous measurement computation estimate or certificate made or given by them or any agent or employee of the department under any provision or provisions of the contract at any time either before or after the completion and acceptance of and payment for the roadway from showing at any time that any measurement computation estimate or certificate is untrue or incorrectly made in any particular or that the work or material or any part does not conform to the specifications and contract .
the department will have the right to reject the whole or any part of the work or material should any measurement computation estimate certificate or payment be discovered or be known to be inconsistent with the contract terms or otherwise improperly given .
the department will not be prevented notwithstanding any measurement computation estimate certificate or payment from demanding and recovering from the contractor or surety such damages as it may sustain by the failure to comply with the terms of the specifications and contract or on account of any overpayments made on any estimate or certificate .
num nume num num change no .
num neither the payment on any estimate or certificate signed by the department nor any extension or remission of contract time nor any possession taken by the department or its employees will operate as a waiver of any portion of the contractor of any power herein reserved by the department or any right to damages herein provided nor will any waiver of any breach of contract held to be a waiver of other or subsequent breach .
the terms of this contract will not be waived or modified by any verbal communication between the contractor and department personnel .
num workers compensation insurancecarry workers compensation insurance or file a proper certificate of exemption as provided for by the workers compensation act and execute a valid affidavit in accepting provisions of the workers compensation act as supplied with the contract .
num minimum wage specifications and rates a requirements .
according to the provisions of the pennsylvania prevailing wage act num p.s .
num and the implementing regulations of the pennsylvania department of labor and industry comply with the prevailing minimum wage predetermination requirements as specified in the proposal specifications and contract .
b responsibility for payment of wages .
accept responsibility for all wages paid or due to any employees engaged upon the project under contract as mandated by the pennsylvania prevailing wage act various applicable federal acts and the contract .
do not attempt to pass such responsibility elsewhere .
do not require employees to refund directly or indirectly any part of such wages .
where classification reclassification or additional classifications of workers are made according to the pennsylvania prevailing wage act and its regulations make no claim against the department for additional compensation for such classification reclassification or additional classification .
if after a contract has been awarded it is decided because of unforeseen construction development to list an additional classification and wage rate the department with or without application by the contractor will make written request for a wage determination by the secretary of labor and industry .
no person may be employed on the project under contract except according to the classification set forth in the decision of the secretary of labor and industry .
c certification and payment of rate of wage .
according to the provisions of the pennsylvania prevailing wage act and various applicable federal acts including their implementing regulations file with the department a weekly statement and a final statement at the conclusion of project work under contract certifying that all employees have been paid wages in conformity with the provisions of the contract as prescribed by the regulations of the pennsylvania department of labor and industry implementing the pennsylvania prevailing wage act .
if any wages remain unpaid list on the statement the amount of wages due to each employee .
certify that directly or indirectly no refunds are received from any employee of any such minimum wages other than deductions authorized by the pennsylvania wage payment and collection law num p.s .
num .
use forms furnished by the department and submit the forms to the district executive within num days after the regular payment date of the payroll period .
payment of the current and semifinal estimates and final settlement certificate will be withheld if such certification is not submitted using the proper form within the prescribed time limit .
d posting .
post a notices in the manner and form prescribed by the current regulations of the state department of labor and industry .
this notice is to be clearly legible and to be placed in a prominent and easily accessible place at the project site under contract as well as at places where employees are paid their wages .
e records and inspection .
keep accurate records of employment and wage payments including all the information required by the regulations of the state department of labor and industry implementing the state prevailing wage act as amended .
keep time cards of employees as required by the cited regulations and act .
in addition keep the original signed indentures for each apprentice and the approvals of the pennsylvania apprenticeship and training council .
preserve the records for num years from the date of payment and keep open at all reasonable hours for inspection by the department and by the state secretary of labor and industry .
make these records easily accessible within the state within a period of num days from the date on which the state secretary of labor and industry requests in writing that such records be made available .
for the purpose of such inspection furnish the authorized inspectors of the department every assistance in determining the wages paid in compliance with the regulations .
numf numb num num change no .
num f penalties .
failure to comply with the pennsylvania prevailing wage act and its regulations will result in withholding money due or to become due on the project contract .
it will also result in termination of the right to proceed with the project work under contract andor other penalties prescribed by law .
g federalaid projects .
all federalaid projects are subject to the implementing rules and regulations of the various federal departments .
accordingly the contract provisions and the penalties prescribed for their violations both of which are required to be incorporated verbatim in all contracts for such federalaid projects will be set forth in the proposal and the contract applicable to each project .
num hauling restrictions a general .
accept responsibility for all hauling done on the project and on adjacent highways in connection with the contract .
hauling restrictions on highways will be according to the applicable sections of the pennsylvania vehicle code act of num no .
num .
before submission of the bid if truck delivery of long bridge members in excess of num feet is contemplated obtain in writing a determination if a departments hauling permit can be issued for the routing from the proposed sources of supply to the project .
without written permission do not move andor operate heavyduty construction grading and hauling equipment over existing or new pavements subbase base and surface courses and structures which will remain in service .
no special permits will be required for the transfer of oversize or overweight equipment or vehicles from one work area to another work area within the project limits .
however correct any damage caused by the transfer of equipment or vehicles .
if in special cases further restrictions are necessary such restrictions will be indicated andor specified in the proposal .
b weight limits and weighing .
num .
do not operate on public highways any vehicles which are in excess of the registered gross andor axle weight limits established in chapter num of the vehicle code num pa c.s .
chapter num or as posted by the department .
num .
submit to weighing by department weigh teams when requested .
if as a result of such a weighing it is determined that a vehicle owned or leased by the contractor or any subcontractor has been operated on public highways carrying a weight in excess of the above registered gross or axle weight limits the sum of num for each num pounds or part thereof of such excess weight will be deducted as liquidated damages from money due or to become due .
these liquidated damages are attributable to inherent damage to the highway which is not readily ascertainable and do not relieve the contractor of responsibility to pay ascertainable damage as may be required in other sections of these specifications .
num .
when a weight slip shows that a vehicle delivering material to the project exceeds limits specified in section numb the contractor will be assessed liquidated damages as specified in section numbnum .
weighing by a department weigh team will not be required .
num accessibility of fire hydrantsmake necessary arrangements with the local authorities to provide fire protection at all times .
keep the fire hydrants adjacent to the work readily accessible to fire apparatus and do not place material or other obstructions within num feet of any hydrant .
num discrimination on account of race color religious creed ancestry sex age or national origin prohibited in connection with employment a general .
do not discriminate against any individual who is qualified and available to perform the work to which the employment relates by reason of race color religious creed ancestry sex age or national origin .
b penalties .
failure to comply with the above provisions prescribed in greater detail in num p.s .
num and numb num num num change no .
num modified by pennsylvania human relations act num p.s .
num may result in the deduction of money due or to become due for each violation .
a second or subsequent violation will result in cancellation or termination of the contract upon which the violation occurred and forfeiture of all money due or to become due and other penalties prescribed by law .
c federalaid projects .
in addition to the above the requirements specified in section numg also apply .
num selection of laborers and mechanicsthis section does not apply to projects which are partially or totally financed with federal funds .
a veteran preference .
in employment on public works provisions of num p.s .
num require a preferential rating similar to that given to state employees to any soldier making application for employment and on intended discharge for reduction in force .
the word soldier as used in the cited act means a person who served in the armed forces of the united states or in any official womens organization during any war or armed conflict in which the united states was engaged and who has an honorable discharge from such service .
num waterway regulations and water pollution control a waterway regulations .
conduct indicated work in waterways flood plains or their hydrologically connected wetlands according to the requirements of permits or approvals issued by the u.s. army corps of engineers the u.s. coast guard the dep the dcnr andor the pennsylvania fish and boat commission whichever is applicable .
do not conduct work including borrowing or wasting material other than indicated in waterways floodplains or their hydrologically connected wetlands before obtaining the required permits or approvals .
b water pollution control .
comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations preventing the pollution of surface water and ground water resources .
c act num .
according to act num enacted by the general assembly of the commonwealth of pennsylvania and approved by the governor on october num num the statutes rules and regulations concerning antipollution measures have been enumerated in appendix c designated special provision num .
include in the bid price all costs of complying with the terms of the listed statutes rules and regulations .
no separate or additional payment will be made for such compliance .
in the event that the listed statutes rules and regulations are amended or if new statutes rules or regulations become effective perform all additional andor extra work deemed necessary as ordered in writing and directed by the representative as specified in section num .
determine what local ordinances if any will affect the project work .
check for any county city borough or township rules or regulations applicable to the area in which the project is being constructed and in addition for any rules or regulations of other organizations having jurisdiction such as chambersofcommerce planning commissions industries or utility companies who have jurisdiction over lands which the project occupies .
include any costs of compliance with local controls in the prices bid even though documents of such local controlling agencies are not listed herein .
no separate or additional payments will be made for complying with existing amended or new local ordinances directives or controls .
num erosion and sediment pollution control plans and permitsinstall and maintain erosion and sediment es pollution control devices as indicated or submit an alternate plan for accomplishing equal or better temporary and permanent erosion and water pollution control .
if an alternate plan is submitted do not start work until the plan is approved by the county conservation district and the department .
if a national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes permit is involved do not start work until the plan is approved by the dep or their designee and the department .
when a general or individual npdes permit is involved do not start earth disturbance activities until written acknowledgement is received for the transfereecopermittee application form completed as specified in section numa .
at the preconstruction conference submit a preparedness prevention and contingency ppc plan and identify a licensed professional professional engineer geologist land surveyor or landscape architect registered in the state and if applicable their designee to be present onsite and responsible for implementing critical stages of the approved post construction stormwater management pcsm plan .
immediately take corrective action at no expense to the department upon notification by the representative of any num numd num num change no .
num noncompliance with the provisions of this section .
failure or refusal to promptly comply with any such notice upon receipt may at the departments sole discretion result in the withholding of payment of estimates for work completed until the requirements of the es plan are met or result in the issuance of a written order stopping all or part of the work until the corrective action has been taken and the requirements of the es plan are met .
no claims for any extension of time costs or damages arising from related to or based upon any such notices of noncompliance or stop orders will be granted paid or considered .
after permanent stabilization minimum of num vegetative cover of earth disturbance activities has been achieved and installation of the pcsm best management practices bmps submit to the representative a notice of termination not for the npdes permit and asbuilt drawings of the pcsm plan prepared and sealed by the licensed professional .
operate and maintain all remaining es bmps and all pcsm bmps on the project site until written approval of the not is received from the dep or their designee .
num thirdparty liabilitycontracts covered by these specifications are not to be construed for the benefit of any person or political subdivision not a party to this contract nor will this contract be construed to authorize any person or political subdivision not a party to this contract to maintain a lawsuit on or under this contract .
num specific equal employment opportunity responsibilitiesthis section only applies to projects which are partially or totally financed with federal funds .
a general .
num .
equal employment opportunity requirements not to discriminate and to take affirmative action to assure equal employment opportunity as required by executive order num and executive order num are set forth in required contract provisions form fhwanum and these requirements imposed pursuant to num u.s.c .
num as established by section num of the federalaid highway act of num .
the equal opportunity construction contract specifications set forth under num cfr num and the provisions of the americans with disabilities act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
set forth under num cfr num and num cfr num are incorporated by reference in this contract .
the requirements set forth herein constitute the specific affirmative action requirements for project activities under this contract and supplement the equal employment opportunity requirements set forth in the required contract provisions .
num .
work with the department and the federal government in carrying out equal employment opportunity obligations and in their review of contract activities .
num .
comply with and have subcontractors not including material suppliers comply with the following minimum specific requirement activities of equal employment opportunity .
the equal employment opportunity requirements of executive order num as set forth in num cfr num are applicable to material suppliers as well as contractors and subcontractors .
include these requirements in every subcontract of num or more with such modification of language as is necessary to make them binding on the subcontractor .
b equal employment opportunity policy .
accept as operating policy the following statement which is designed to further the provision of equal employment opportunity to all persons without regard to their race color religion sex or national origin and to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity through positive continuing programs it is the policy of this company to assure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race religion sex color or national origin .
such action includes employment upgrading demotion or transfer recruitment or recruitment advertising layoff or termination rates of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship preapprenticeship andor onthejob training .
c equal employment opportunity officer .
designate and make known to the department contracting officers an equal employment opportunity officer hereinafter referred to as the eeo officer who has the responsibility for and is capable of effectively administering and promoting an active company program of equal employment opportunity and who has been assigned adequate authority and responsibility to do so .
d dissemination of policy .
numd numf num num change no .
num num .
make all company staff members related to the project who are authorized to hire supervise promote and discharge employees or who recommend such action or who are substantially involved in such action fully cognizant of and have them implement the companys equal employment opportunity policy and contractual responsibilities to provide equal employment opportunity in each grade and classification of employment .
to ensure that the above agreement is met take the following actions as a minimum num.a conduct periodic meetings of supervisory and personnel office employees before the start of work and then not less often than once every num months at which time the contract equal employment opportunity policy and its implementation will be reviewed and explained .
have the meetings conducted by the eeo officer or another knowledgeable company official .
num.b give all new company supervisory or personnel office employees a thorough indoctrination by the eeo officer or other knowledgeable company official covering all major aspects of the companys equal employment opportunity obligations within num days following their reporting for duty on the project .
num.c instruct all company personnel who are engaged in direct recruitment for the project by the eeo officer or appropriate company official in the company procedures for locating and hiring minority group employees .
num .
in order to make the equal employment opportunity policy known to all company employees prospective employees and potential sources of employees i.e .
schools employment agencies labor unions where appropriate college placement officers etc .
take the following actions num.a place notices and posters setting forth the equal employment opportunity policy in areas readily accessible to company employees applicants for employment and potential employees .
num.b bring the equal employment opportunity policy and the procedures to implement such policy to the attention of company employees by means of meetings employee handbooks or other appropriate means .
e recruitment .
num .
when advertising for employees include in all advertisements for employees the notation an equal opportunity employer .
publish all such advertisements in newspapers or other publications having a large circulation among minority groups in areas from which the project work force would normally be derived .
num .
unless precluded by a valid bargaining agreement conduct systematic and direct recruitment through public and private employee referral sources likely to yield qualified minority group applicants including but not limited to state employment agencies schools colleges and minority group organizations .
to meet this requirement through the company eeo officer identify sources of potential minority group employees and establish with such identified sources procedures whereby minority group applicants may be referred to for company employment consideration .
in the event a valid bargaining agreement exists providing for exclusive hiring hall referrals observe the provisions of that agreement to the extent that the system permits compliance with equal employment opportunity contract provisions .
the u.s. department of labor has held that where implementation of such agreements have the effect of discriminating against minorities or women or obligates the contractor to do the same such implementation violates executive order num as amended .
num .
encourage present company employees to refer minority group applicants for employment by posting appropriate notices or bulletins in areas accessible to all such employees .
in addition discuss information and procedures with regard to referring minority group applicants with employees .
f personnel actions .
establish and administer wages working conditions and employee benefits and take personnel actions of every type including hiring upgrading promotion transfer demotion layoff and termination without regard to race color religion sex or national origin .
follow the following procedures num .
conduct periodic inspections of the project site to insure that working conditions and employee facilities do not indicate discriminatory treatment of project site personnel .
numf numi num num change no .
num num .
periodically evaluate the spread of wages paid within each classification to determine any evidence of discriminatory wage practices .
num .
periodically review selected personnel actions in depth to determine where there is evidence of discrimination .
where evidence is found promptly take corrective action .
if the review indicates that the discrimination may extend beyond the actions reviewed take corrective action to include all affected persons .
num .
promptly investigate all complaints of alleged discrimination made to the company in connection with obligations under this contract attempt to resolve such complaints and take appropriate corrective action within a reasonable time .
if the investigation indicates that the discrimination may affect persons other than the complainant include in such corrective action such other persons .
upon completion of each investigation inform every complainant of all of hisher avenues of appeal .
g training and promotion .
num .
assist in locating qualifying and increasing the skills of minority group and women employees and applicants for employment .
num .
consistent with company work force requirements and as permissible under federal and state regulations make full use of training programs i.e .
apprenticeship and onthejob training programs for the geographical area of contract performance .
where feasible provide num of apprentices or trainees in each occupation in their first year of apprenticeship or training .
in the event the special provision for trainees is provided under this contract this subparagraph will be superseded .
num .
advise employees and applicants for employment of available training programs and entrance requirements for each .
num .
periodically review the training and promotion potential of minority group and women employees and encourage eligible employees to apply for such training and promotion .
h unions .
if reliance is made in whole or in part upon unions as a source of employees use maximum effort to obtain the cooperation of such unions to increase opportunities for minority groups and women within the unions and to effect referrals by such unions of minority and female employees .
actions either directly or through a contractors association acting as agent will include the procedures set forth below num .
use maximum efforts to develop in cooperation with the unions joint training programs aimed toward qualifying more minority group members and women for membership in the unions and increasing the skills of minority group employees and women so that they may qualify for higher paying employment .
num .
use maximum efforts to incorporate an equal employment opportunity clause into each union agreement to the end that such union is contractually bound to refer applicants without regard to their race color religion sex or national origin .
num .
obtain information as to the referral practices and policies of the labor union except that to the extent such information is within the exclusive possession of the labor union and such labor union refuses to furnish such information so certify to the department and set forth what efforts have been made to obtain such information .
num .
in the event the union is unable to provide a reasonable flow of minority and women referrals within the time limit set forth in the collective bargaining agreement through independent recruitment efforts fill the employment vacancies without regard to race color religion sex or national origin making full efforts to obtain qualified andor qualifiable minority group persons and women .
the u.s. department of labor has held that it is no excuse that the union with which the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement providing for exclusive referral failed to refer minority employees .
in the event the union referral practice prevents meeting obligations pursuant to executive order num as amended and these requirements immediately notify the department .
i subcontracting .
numi numc num num change no .
num num .
use maximum efforts to solicit bids from and to utilize minority group subcontractors or subcontractors with meaningful minority group and female representation among their employees .
obtain lists of minorityowned construction firms from department personnel .
num .
use maximum efforts to ensure subcontractor compliance with their equal employment opportunity obligations .
j records and reports .
num .
keep such records as are necessary to determine compliance with the companys equal employment opportunity obligations .
design the records kept to indicate num.a the number of minority and nonminority group members and women employed in each work classification on the project .
num.b the progress and efforts being made in cooperation with unions to increase employment opportunities for minorities and women applicable only to contractors who rely in whole or in part on unions as a source of their work force .
num.c the progress and efforts being made in locating hiring training qualifying and upgrading minority and female employees .
num.d the progress and efforts being made in securing the services of minority group subcontractors or subcontractors with meaningful minority and female representation among their employees .
num .
retain all such records for a period of num years following completion of the contract work and make them available at reasonable times and places for inspection by authorized representatives of the department and the fhwa .
num .
submit to the department a report each month after construction begins for the duration of the project indicating the work hours number of minority women and nonminority group employees currently engaged in each work classification required by the contract work .
this information is to be reported on form eonum and according to the instructions included thereon .
form prnum is to be submitted annually for the month of july reflecting manpower figures for the project work force for the last payroll period preceding the numst of the month .
if onthejob training is being required by special provision for trainees furnish form eonum for each trainee employed on a monthly basis and form fhwanum semiannually .
num public works employment verification act a general .
in accordance with act num of num known as the public works employment verification act the act effective january num num num p.s .
num use the federal governments everify system to ensure that all employees performing work on the project including subcontractors employees are authorized to work in the united states .
b verification form .
verify the employment eligibility of each new employee hired after january num num and submit the commonwealth public works employment verification form form located in the ecms file cabinet in references tab .
if assistance with the form is needed contact the ecms help desk at num or at num num .
ecms help desk assistance is available num hours a day num days a week .
c contractor .
email or fax the form signed by an authorized representative of the contractor possessing sufficient knowledge to make the representations and certifications on the form to contract awards at publicworksformpa.gov or num by num p.m. prevailing local time within num calendar days after the bid opening .
when the seventh numth calendar day after the bid opening falls on a day that the department offices are closed submit the form by num p.m. prevailing local time on the next business day .
failure or refusal to provide the form will be considered a refusal to comply with bidding requirements will result in rejection of the bid and may subject the contractor to the enforcement activities sanctions and civil penalties specified in the act .
numd numa num num change no .
num d subcontractor .
obtain a form signed by an authorized representative of the subcontractor performing work on the project possessing sufficient knowledge to make the representations and certifications on the form .
attach the form on the subcontractor request screen in ecms before submitting the request for approval .
failure or refusal to provide the form will be considered a refusal to comply with subcontractor approval requirements will result in rejection of the subcontractor request and may subject the subcontractor to the enforcement activities sanctions and civil penalties specified in the act .
include information about the requirements of the act in all subcontracts .
e department of general services .
the department of general services is the commonwealth agency responsible for enforcement and administration of the act .
please direct questions about the act to department of general services public works employment verification compliance office room num tent building numth and herr streets harrisburg pa num fax num num use of united statesflag vesselsfor federalaid contracts the contractor is referred to the requirements of public law num as further specified in part num title num code of federal regulations .
a the contractor agrees num .
to use privately owned united statesflag commercial vessels to ship at least num of the gross tonnage involved computed separately for dry bulk carriers dry cargo liners and tankers whenever shipping any equipment material or commodities for this contract to the extent such vessels are available at fair and reasonable rates for united statesflag commercial vessels .
num .
to furnish within num days following the date of loading for shipments originating within the united states or within num working days following the date of loading for shipments originating outside the united states furnish a legible copy of a rated onboard commercial ocean billoflading .
furnish the billoflading in english for each shipment of cargo described above to both the department through the prime contractor in the case of subcontractor billsoflading and to the division of national cargo office of market development maritime administration washington d.c. num .
num .
to insert the substance of the provisions of this clause in all subcontracts issued pursuant to the contract .
num num num num change no .
num section numperformance and progress num subletting or assignment of contracts a general .
do not sublet sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion or rights title or interest without the written consent of the representative .
if consent is given subletting a portion of the contract will be allowed however do not sublet a portion exceeding num of the original total contract price except as provided herein .
use only prequalified subcontractors classified for the type of work undertaken and not exceeding their assigned maximum capacity rating .
for prequalification capacity evaluation the amount of subcontracted work will be charged solely to the subcontractor when the subcontractor and items of work to be undertaken are named in the bid for ecms bids list subcontractors in the expedite bid file and to both the prime contractor and the subcontractor when the subcontractor is named after the award of the contract .
do not replace or cancel a subcontractor named in the bid without the approval of the representative which approval will not be unreasonably withheld .
subcontracts or transfer of contract will not release contractor liability under the contracts and bonds .
b specialty items .
specialty items as identified in the proposal may be performed by subcontract .
the cost of any specialty items performed by subcontract may be deducted from the original total contract price before computing the amount of work allowed to be performed by subcontract .
c disadvantaged business enterprises dbe .
for federalaid contracts when requirements for dbe are included in the proposal the cost indicated on the approved minority participation and commitment in ecms for dbes utilization may be deducted from the original total contract price before computing the amount of work allowed to be performed by subcontract provided the request to perform less than num of work items has been submitted with the minority participation and commitment submission .
in cases where specialty items and dbe involvement overlap any cost deducted is restricted to a single assignment of either specialty item or dbe goal amount but not both .
the maximum amount of the dbe cost that may be deducted is equal to num times the difference between the original total contract price and the specialty items cost .
d diverse businesses db .
for contracts financed with other than federal funds when requirements for db are included in the proposal the cost of the agreement amount indicated on the approved minority participation and commitment in ecms for dbs utilization may be deducted from the original total contract price before computing the amount of work allowed to be performed by subcontract provided the request to perform less than num of work items has been submitted with the minority participation commitment submission .
in cases where specialty items and db involvement overlap any cost deducted is restricted to a single assignment of either specialty item or db agreement amount but not both .
the maximum amount of the db cost that may be deducted is equal to num times the difference between the original total contract price and the specialty items cost .
e subcontract approval .
do not allow any work on the project that is assigned to others including services to be performed until a copy of the executed subcontract agreement or any other assignment of the contract has been reviewed and is available on the project to department representatives for purposes of monitoring contract compliance .
the department will verify that the subcontract is evidenced in writing and that all pertinent provisions and requirements of the prime contract are physically incorporated or included by reference .
it should be noted that the allowance for pertinent provisions to be included in a subcontract by reference does not apply to the provision entitled farrequired contract provisions federalaid construction contracts form fhwanumdspnum which must be physically incorporated into all related subcontract agreements of num or more with the exception of material supply engineering or architectural service contracts .
all firms listed on the approved minority participation and commitment including those business types other than subcontractor must be submitted for subcontractor approval after the contract is executed .
num notice to proceedas soon as practical after approval of the contracts bonds and insurance certificates by the chief counsel the general counsel or the attorney general or their respective designees and subject to the provisions specified in section num a written notice to proceed will be sent specifying the calendar num numb num num change no .
num date on which to begin the work .
a requirements for starting work .
begin work on the notice to proceed date specified in the notice to proceed and complete all physical work including any authorized additional or extra work on or before the required completion date .
b notice to proceed period .
the notice to proceed will be issued within num days after the award of the contract .
extensions of the numday period will be made only by mutual written consent of the parties to the contract provided such written consent is given before the expiration of the numday period .
num performance and progress a preconstruction conference .
before the anticipated notice to proceed date a preconstruction conference will be held in the district office .
the purpose of this conference will be to discuss the scope of the project work to discuss all essential matters pertaining to the satisfactory project completion and to resolve any questions regarding contract interpretation andor contract time .
submit the following to the representative at the preconstruction conference list containing names of the project superintendent project engineer foremen surveyor and construction scheduling coordinator names titles and contact information of the selected individuals required to complete form csnum issue escalation matrix forms csnum source of supply materials and form csnumsource of supply traffic control devices work plan num calendar day for critical path method cpm and num calendar day for resource loaded cpm contracts failure to submit the above documentation may result in the actual notice to proceed date being after the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal but will not qualify for an extension of contract time .
if a preconstruction conference is not held before the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal an extension of contract time may be granted provided the requirements of section numa have been met i.e .
the extension is supported by the construction schedule and it can be demonstrated that progress on one or more controlling operations has been adversely affected by the departments failure to comply with the requirements of this section .
b construction project scheduling .
prepare a complete schedule that adheres to and incorporates all contract time requirements shows work being completed on or before the required completion date meets specified milestone dates and is in compliance with all contractual requirements .
for designbuild or partial designbuild projects include design activities associated with the designbuild elements as well as the review and approval durations as specified in the contract provisions .
the representative may require that the contractor attend a scheduling conference for the purpose of reviewing this specification and the applicable portions of section num that pertain to the scheduling format indicated for the project i.e .
narrative cpm or resource loaded cpm .
this scheduling conference may be held in conjunction with the preconstruction conference .
be prepared to discuss the concepts and logic to be used in sequencing work activities for development of the construction schedule .
acceptance of the contractors schedule or any revisions thereto by the department will not constitute the departments approval of or agreement with the sequence of operations the durations of activities the adequacy or propriety of resources the identity of controlling operations nor the feasibility or any other characteristics of the schedule or its revisions .
show the sequence and interdependence of activities for completion of all work .
consider and make appropriate scheduling and operational allowances including but not limited to seasonal weather conditions and ambient temperatures permitting requirements plant establishment periods traffic signal testing periods intelligent transportation system equipmentrelated testing periods pavement marking retroreflectivity testing maintenance and protection of traffic restriction periods and bituminous pavement restriction periods .
incorporate in the schedule coordination with all entities subcontractors utilities railroads etc .
and adjacent or private contracts that could impact the schedule .
in addition to construction activities include in the schedule the numb numb num num change no .
num procurement fabrication and delivery of critical or special materials and equipment and indicate relationships between activities .
schedule updates are required at minimum on a monthly basis .
num .
construction scheduling coordinator .
have the individual responsible for supervising the work as specified in section numa serve as the construction scheduling coordinator or be responsible for and oversee all activities of the construction scheduling coordinator .
num .
project control meetings .
project control meetings will be held on an as needed basis as directed .
during project control meetings the representative and the contractors superintendent will conduct a site visit and jointly review project progress .
submit num working days before each project control meeting a written report in an acceptable format that includes the following progress of project design and construction activities .
impacts on the current schedule .
planned progress for the next num weeks .
other schedulerelated information as required .
num .
submittals .
prioritize and schedule submissions to allow sufficient time for department review .
make submissions at least num calendar days before information is needed for purchasing fabricating material or obtaining equipment unless otherwise indicated or directed .
the numcalendar day review period will begin on the date the representative receives the submission .
any delays caused by incomplete submissions including drawings and designs will be the responsibility of the contractor .
num .
adjustment of required completion date or specified milestone dates .
if a request for a time extension is approved or a time reduction processed the department will use the changed required completion date andor milestone dates for the purpose of monitoring progress assigning resources authorizing additional andor extra work processing contract adjustments associated with incentivedisincentive clauses and assessing liquidated damages .
contractor imposed dates in the schedule other than the required completion date specified milestone dates andor any contractually specified sequences will not be binding on the department .
num .
recovery .
if the latest completion time for any work on the current schedule results in a controlling activity being delayed num days or more beyond the required completion date or any specified milestone dates as adjusted the representative may require the contractor to submit a written description of the plan to recover all lost time and maintain the required completion date or specified milestone dates .
if required submit the written recovery plan within num calendar days of notification by the representative .
if the order of project operations is changed to the extent that the contractor is no longer following the accepted schedule the representative may require that a recovery schedule be submitted .
the revision to the schedule must include the asta powerproject .pp recovery schedule a narrative recovery plan including what has changed and an explanation as to why it has changed and a portable document format pdf of the recovery schedule submitted through the penndot project collaboration center ppcc .
if the recovery plan andor recovery schedule is not received within num calendar days from the date of the request by the representative the district executive may withhold current estimate payments until the required information has been submitted and accepted .
num .
updates .
submit updates to the schedule monthly on or before the date agreed to by the department unless otherwise specified .
if any update is not received within num calendar days from the agreed upon date the district executive may withhold current estimate payments until all requested schedule updates are received and accepted .
update submissions must include a detailed narrative of the changes for that progress period as specified in section num including progressed activities logic changes including relationship type and imposed dates calendar changes including activity association andor work days numb numb num num change no .
num duration changes critical path changes updates must be made in electronic asta powerproject .pp format along with a narrative report and pdf of the updated schedule submitted through ppcc .
activity ids or descriptions must remain constant throughout the project .
major changes to activities will be addressed by eliminating the existing activity and substituting a new activity with a unique id and description .
c penndot project collaboration center sharepoint .
submit all projectrelated documentation as required or indicated using ppcc .
coordinate with the department to obtain access for necessary parties to ppcc .
the departments standard file format is pdf .
the department may require documentation to be submitted in other compatible electronic file formats .
num limitation of operations a maintenance of traffic .
conduct the work in a manner and sequence that assures minimal interference to traffic .
b completion of sections of project .
complete any designated section or sections of the project as indicated as specified or when directed in writing as specified in section num .
the contractor will be relieved of responsibility for further physical work and maintenance only for work items within the section of the project which are satisfactorily completed at the time of or subsequent to opening of the section to traffic .
the contractors responsibility for further physical work and maintenance remains for work items within the section of the project which are not satisfactorily completed at the time of or subsequent to opening of the section to traffic .
release of contractor responsibility is further contingent on the following a final inspection of the section has been made as specified in section numa the contractors obligation under the contract to replace defective work or material is not relieved the contractors responsibility for repairing any damage to satisfactorily completed work items within the section which occurs due to construction operations is not relieved and any work done by the department on a designated section of the project that may have been satisfactorily completed as provided does not waive the rights of either party to the entire contract .
c maintenance of existing vegetation .
in order to maintain natural vegetation in all undisturbed areas do not cross these areas with construction equipment or make any other use of these areas except at allowed locations .
num character of workers methods and equipment a general .
employ at all times sufficient labor and equipment for performing the work as specified in section num. b competence of workers .
employ only competent and efficient superintendents forepersons clerks timekeepers equipment operators laborers mechanics or artisans for every kind of work .
whenever in the representatives opinion any person is unfit to perform the task does the work contrary to instructions or exhibits improper conduct discharge the person immediately and do not employ the person again on the project without written permission of the representative .
failure to remove such person as ordered or failure to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper completion of the work after being ordered to correct the deficiency may result in suspension of the work by written notice from the district executive until such orders are followed .
if the superintendent or representative on the project fails to cooperate with the departments authorized representatives in any way the district executive will give a written order for dismissal and replacement of that superintendent or representative .
numc numc num num change no .
num c equipment .
furnish the type condition and quantity of equipment that meets the qualifications necessary for the proper execution of the work within the specified contract time .
maintain the equipment in good condition subject to acceptance before and during use in connection with the project .
if special equipment not normally used in highway construction is required to be used comply with section numcnum .
num .
alternate method andor equipment .
if the contract specifies that construction be performed by the use of certain methods and equipment use such methods or equipment unless others are authorized .
to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified request authority to do so .
provide the request in writing and include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed to be used with an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change .
if acceptance is given it will be on condition that construction work is performed in conformity with contract requirements .
if after trial use of the substituted methods of equipment it is determined that the work produced does not conform to the contract requirements discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment .
complete the remaining construction with the specified methods and equipment .
remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as directed .
no change will be made in the basis of payment for the construction items involved nor in contract time as a result of authorizing a change in methods or equipment under these provisions .
num .
test of new special equipment .
a vendor or manufacturer of equipment not currently used may submit the necessary technical data concerning the item to the lts .
if the item warrants further investigation the lts may grant permission to the vendor to contact a contractor for the experimental use of the equipment on an appropriate project under construction .
the experimental operation will be observed by representatives of the lts and the district executives office to obtain data necessary to substantiate a final recommendation to the department .
num .
roller requirements .
provide rollers of the types specified for the various items of construction complying with the following num.a threewheel power rollers with an unballasted load of not less than num pounds per linear inch of tread of rear wheels having a manufacturers certified metal weight of not less than num tons .
num.b tandem powerdriven rollers with a ballasted load of not less than num pounds per linear inch of tread of drive roll having a manufacturers certified metal weight of not less than num tons .
num.c tandem powerdriven rollers with a load of not less than num pounds per linear inch of tread of drive roll having a manufacturers certified metal weight of either not less than num tons or more than num tons or either not less than num tons or more than num tons .
num.d selfpropelled trenchtype rollers with a minimum trench roller factor rft of num using the following equation rft fcfanumwdnum where rft trench roller factor dim fc maximum centrifugal force lb f minimum vibration frequency hz a maximum vibration amplitude in wd drum width in trenchtype rollers may be hand operated or remotely controlled .
use trench rollers capable of being operated in both static and vibratory modes .
roller drums must have alternating rows of raised pads across the entire drum width and be equipped with scraper bars at each drum to assist in removal of soil from between the pads .
smooth steel drums are prohibited .
supply manufacturers technical data measured data and the serial number for the specific trench roller being used to the representative before beginning compaction operations .
verify that the roller meets the minimum requirements .
equipment that does not meet the minimum requirements will be rejected .
operate equipment in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and at a frequency and amplitude to provide the minimum required numc numc num num change no .
num rft .
num.e pneumatictire rollers used to compact base courses may be either single or multipleaxle type and may be equipped with pneumatic tires of equal size and diameter on any one axle .
uniformly inflate tires so that air pressure does not vary more than num pounds per square inch .
use rollers of sufficient weight and dimensions that when loaded will cause the pneumatic tire wheels to exert a ground pressure of not less than num pounds per inch of width of tread as measured on a hard surface .
num.f pneumatictire rollers used to compact hot bituminous mixtures of a selfpropelled type .
use rollers having not less than seven wheels mounting smooth tread pneumatic tires not less than num num inch by num inch size each tire capable of exerting an average contact pressure through a range from num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch .
use rollers with wheels equally spaced along both axles and so arranged that those on one axle track midway between those of the other with the wheels on one or both axles arranged to oscillate in pairs or to be individually sprung .
use rollers equipped with power steering and fluid drive or a torque converter capable of turning or reversing on the hot material without surface scuffing or displacement and provided with means of wetting and cleaning the tires during operation to prevent adhesion of hot bituminous mixture to the tires .
make provision for checking tire pressures during operation .
keep the tires uniformly inflated at the designated pressure and with the difference in pressure between any two tires not to exceed num pounds per square inch .
in operation adjust the tire pressure and wheel load as required to provide an average contact pressure of from num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch over the surface to conform to the requirements of both the particular application and the material being compacted .
equip the roller with means of adjusting the wheel load by ballasting and provide tires with a plyrating that supports the maximum operating wheel load at the specified maximum contact pressure .
furnish copies of the roller manufacturers charts or tabulations showing the contact areas and average contact pressures for the full range of both tire inflation pressures and tire loadings for each type and size of compactor tire furnished .
also furnish copies of the calibration table or chart for the ballast box showing both the volume of the box in cubic feet for at least each numinch increment of depth and the empty or tare weight of the roller .
num.g padfoot rollers with a minimum pad contact pressure of num pounds per square inch a flat pad contact surface with a minimum pad contact area of num square inches and a minimum pad projection of num inches from the surface of the drum .
calculate pad contact pressure by dividing the static roller weight by the product of the maximum number of pads sighting across the roller drum and the pad contact area .
use padfoot rollers capable of being operated in both static and vibratory modes .
roller drums must have alternating rows of raised pads across the entire drum width and be equipped with a scraper bars to assist in removal of soil from between the pads .
supply manufacturers technical data measured data and the serial number for the specific padfoot roller being used to the representative before beginning compaction operations .
verify that the roller meets the minimum requirements .
padfoot rollers that do not meet the minimum requirements will be rejected .
num.h smooth drum tandem vibratory rollers of a selfpropelled type with the necessary frequency and amplitude to achieve required density without objectionable undulations material pickup or other surface defects .
use a vibrator drive that automatically stops when the roller changes direction or stops .
num.i smooth singledrum vibratory rollers of a selfpropelled type with a minimum drum width wd of num inches and a minimum vibratory roller factor rfy of num using the following equation rfv fcfanumwdnum where rfv vibratory roller factor dim fc maximum centrifugal force lb f minimum vibration frequency hz a maximum vibration amplitude in wd drum width in the vibratory rollers must be capable of achieving the required density without objectionable undulations numc numc num num change no .
num material pickup or other surface defects .
use a vibrator drive that automatically stops when the roller changes direction or stops .
num .
other compaction equipment .
permission may be given for the use of other types of impact vibratory andor compaction equipment designed for and capable of accomplishing compaction .
specific minimum requirements for various types of lightweight andor handoperated compaction equipment are provided below .
supply manufacturers technical data measured data and the serial number for the specific compactor being used to the representative before beginning compaction operations .
verify that the compaction equipment meets the minimum requirements .
equipment that does not meet the minimum requirements will be rejected .
num.a hand operated impact rammer jumping jack with a minimum required impact rammer factor rfi of num using the following equation rfi wofanumwplpnum where rfi impact rammer factor dim wo operating weight lb f percussion rate or frequency hz a rammer stroke or amplitude in wp rammer plate width in lp rammer plate length in the rammer plate length and width must be reported as the actual dimensions of the plate .
verify that the plate dimensions reported on the manufacturers technical data sheet are correct for the actual impact rammer being used .
use rammer plates constructed of steel .
plastic rubber or wood rammer plates are prohibited .
operate equipment in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and at a percussion rate and stroke to provide the minimum required rfi .
num.b hand operated vibratory plate compactor with a minimum required plate factor pfv of num using the following equation pfv fcfanumapnum where pfv vibratory plate factor dim fc maximum centrifugal force lb f minimum vibration frequency hz a maximum vibration amplitude in ap effective plate area innum the effective plate area must be reported as the actual area of the bottom surface of the plate in contact with the ground when placed on a firm surface .
verify the effective plate area in the presence of the representative .
use vibratory plates constructed of steel .
plastic rubber or wood plates are prohibited .
operate equipment in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and at a frequency and amplitude to provide the minimum required rfv .
num .
material transfer vehicle mtv .
for rps pavements or when specified in a special provision provide a material transfer vehicle mtv to be used as an intermediate and separate motorized selfpropelled unit between the haul vehicle and the bituminous paver as follows provide adequate covers of sufficient size to protect the material in the mtv under all conditions .
capable of transferring the material from the haul vehicle to the paver hopper at a uniform and continuous rate to allow the continuous movement of the paver .
equipped with remixing augers for remixing the bituminous material before transferring to the paver hopper .
numc numa num num change no .
num free of petroleum oils solvents or other material which adversely affect bituminous concrete .
in addition equip the bituminous paver with a manufactured hopper insert to provide a mass flow of material directly to the slat conveyors of the paver .
deliver mixture through the mtv at the correct laying temperature as specified in section nume table a or section nume table a and free from lumps of chilled material .
num time extensions and reductions a time extensions .
an extension of the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates may be granted by the department as a result of any of the events or occurrences identified herein .
if an event or occurrence qualifies for an extension of contract time and the extension is supported by the construction schedule after the impact of the event or occurrence is incorporated submit an official time extension request to the representative early enough so that it can be evaluated and decided upon by the department in time to avoid any constructive acceleration of the work but no later than num calendar days after the termination of the event or occurrence as specified herein .
submit time extension requests electronically using ecms .
include a combined pdf of the supporting schedules with each request at no additional cost to the department .
the supporting schedules are to consist of a preimpact schedule which is the most recently accepted schedule update and shows the status of the project prior to the impact and a postimpact schedule which shows all work progressed to date and clearly shows the impact of the specific event or occurrence on the required completion date andor specified milestone dates using the most recently accepted schedule update in place at the time of the event or occurrence .
along with submitting the combined pdf of the supporting schedules in ecms the electronic asta powerproject .pp files are to be submitted to the representative outside of ecms via the ppcc .
the representative will respond to all time extension requests within num calendar days of receipt .
time extension requests that are not submitted within the specified time andor do not include all of the required supporting information including supporting schedules will not be approved .
if after reviewing the contractors initial time extension request the representative determines that the supporting information provided is incomplete or inadequate notification of the deficiency will be sent to the contractor .
complete or revise the time extension request as indicated and resubmit within num calendar days of receipt of the representatives notification .
revised time extension requests that are not resubmitted within the specified time will not be approved .
if a time extension request is disapproved by the department liquidated damages may be chargeable .
the following events or occurrences may qualify for an extension of the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates a notice to proceed is issued indicating that the actual notice to proceed date will be after the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal through no fault of the contractor .
a time extension will only be granted for such an occurrence if it is requested by the contractor within num calendar days after the date of department acceptance of the initial construction schedule .
progress on one or more controlling operations is adversely affected by impacts from utility infrastructure and utility adjustments as specified in section num .
submit a time extension request within num calendar days after the date all utility infrastructure and utility adjustments impacting the contractors operations are completed .
satisfactory project completion requires work in greater quantities than those indicated in the contract and progress on one or more controlling operations is adversely affected by the item plan quantity overruns .
submit a time extension request within num calendar days after the date the overrun quantity of work under the applicable items is completed .
the district executive in writing authorizes the elimination of an items of work or a reduction in quantity for an items of work and progress on one or more controlling operations is adversely affected by the eliminationsreductionss .
submit a time extension request within num calendar days after the date of receipt of the district executives initial itemized written authorization for the work item eliminationsquantity reductions .
the district executive in writing authorizes additional andor extra work which affects progress on one or more controlling operations .
submit a time extension request within num calendar days after the numa numb num num change no .
num date the prices to be paid for all authorized additional work andor extra work at a negotiated price are agreed upon and when applicable accepted by the department or if authorized extra work is to be paid on a force account basis within num calendar days after the date the force account work is completed .
a strike or labor dispute that causes despite all reasonable efforts by the contractor to avoid it a shutdown of the entire project or of one or more controlling operations as specified in section num .
submit a time extension request within num calendar days after the date the strike or labor dispute ends .
progress on one or more controlling operations is adversely affected by the delayed action or failure to act of an agency other than the department that is not the fault of the contractor all of which will be determined by the representative .
submit a time extension request within num calendar days after the date all issues involving the agencys delay or failure are resolved .
progress on one or more controlling operations is adversely affected by an act or omission of the department that is not the fault of the contractor all of which will be determined by the representative .
submit a time extension request within num calendar days after the date all issues involving the departments act or omission are resolved .
events or occurrences that do not qualify for an extension of the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates include but are not limited to weather delays the removal and replacement of defective work and the reseeding of areas where specified growth coverage andor germination time requirements have not been met .
weatherrelated events warranting an emergency declaration by the federal government or by the government of the commonwealth of pennsylvania may qualify for an extension of contract time provided it can be clearly established that the delay to the project for which a time extension is sought is not in fact the responsibility of the contractor and that the contractor has taken all necessary precautions to protect the project from damage as required .
furthermore the secretary of transportation or an authorized delegate must determine following an emergency declaration that the emergency conditions had a direct adverse impact on one or more active construction projects .
finally for a given project to qualify the accepted schedule in place at the time of the weatherrelated event giving rise to the emergency declaration must show work on one or more controlling operations occurring during the period in which the weatherrelated event took place .
num .
dispute resolution .
if a request for an extension of the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates supported by documentation prepared using the appropriate scheduling tool is not approved by the department or is approved for a number of days that is less than the number of days originally requested and the contractor wishes to dispute the departments decision submit a written request for a reevaluation of the time extension request to the district executive within num calendar days after the date the department takes action on the request within ecms .
notification of the district executives final determination regarding the time extension request will be provided within num calendar days of receipt of the contractors written reevaluation request .
b time reductions .
a reduction of contract time affecting the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates may be processed by the department as a result of any of the events or occurrences identified herein .
on a casebycase basis before any reduction of contract time is processed in response to a qualifying event or occurrence the department in consultation with the contractor will assess whether such an action is warranted i.e .
necessary for proper and equitable administration of the contract and supported by the construction schedule after the impact of the event or occurrence is incorporated .
if a qualified event or occurrence is found to warrant a reduction of contract time an official time reduction will be prepared by the representative within num calendar days after the termination of the event or occurrence as specified herein .
reductions of contract time will be processed electronically using ecms and a combined pdf of the supporting schedules will be included as a support for the number of reduction days .
the supporting schedule will be prepared by the contractor at no additional cost to the department and show all work progressed to date and clearly show the impact of the specific event or occurrence on the required completion date andor specified milestone dates using the accepted schedule update in place at the time of the event or occurrence .
notification of the representatives processing of a time reduction will be sent to the contractor .
within num calendar days of receipt of this notification use ecms to provide the requested disposition information i.e .
indicate agreement or disagreement with the departments decision to reduce contract time and comment on the action .
however failure to provide the requested information within the specified time will not prevent the representative from completing the contract time reduction .
along with submitting the combined pdf of the supporting schedules in ecms the electronic asta powerproject .pp files should also be submitted to the numb numa num num change no .
num representative outside of ecms via ppcc .
the following events or occurrences qualify for and may warrant a reduction in contract time affecting the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates a notice to proceed is issued indicating that the actual notice to proceed date will be before the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal .
a time reduction if warranted will be processed within num calendar days after the date of department acceptance of the initial construction schedule .
satisfactory project completion requires work in lesser quantities than those indicated in the contract and progress on one or more controlling operations is favorably affected by the item plan quantity underruns .
a time reduction if warranted will be processed within num calendar days after the date all work under the applicable contract items is completed .
the district executive in writing authorizes the elimination of an items of work or a reduction in quantity for an items of work and progress on one or more controlling operations is favorably affected by the eliminationsreductions .
a time reduction if warranted will be processed within num calendar days after the date of submission of the district executives initial itemized written authorization for the work item eliminations quantity reductions .
the contractor submits an initial construction schedule that shows the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates will be earlier than the dates indicated in the contract .
a time reduction will be processed within num calendar days after the date of the department acceptance of the initial construction schedule .
progress on one or more controlling operations is favorably affected by an act of the department .
a time reduction if warranted will be processed within num calendar days after the date notification of the departments act is submitted to the contractor .
num .
dispute resolution .
if a reduction of contract time affecting the required completion date andor a specified milestone dates supported by documentation prepared using the appropriate scheduling tool is processed by the department despite the contractors objections or is processed for a number of days that is more than the number of days originally indicated and the contractor wishes to dispute the departments action submit a written request for a reevaluation of the reduction of contract time to the district executive within num calendar days after the date the district executive or a delegate approved the time reduction within ecms .
notification of the district executives final determination will be provided within num calendar days of receipt of the contractors written reevaluation request .
num liquidated damages a construction engineering liquidated damages .
for each day that any physical work remains uncompleted after the required completion date the sum per day specified in the following schedule unless otherwise stated in the proposal will be deducted from money due or to become due .
this deduction will not be as a penalty but as construction engineering liquidated damages .
original contract amount schedule of daily charges for construction engineering liquidated damages from more than to and including per calendar day num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa numa num num change no .
num in the event the contractor is declared in default as specified in section num construction engineering liquidated damages will be charged as provided by this section .
if the total amount chargeable as construction engineering liquidated damages exceeds the amount payable to the contractor or the surety the excess is to be paid to the state by the contractor or the surety .
b road users liquidated damages .
when indicated in the proposal road users liquidated damages will be charged for each day that the roadway is not opened to unrestricted traffic after the specified milestone date .
the sum per day will be deducted from money due or to become due .
this deduction will not be as a penalty but as road users liquidated damages .
in the event the contractor is declared in default as specified in section num road users liquidated damages will be charged in the amount indicated .
if the total amount chargeable as road users liquidated damages exceeds the amount payable to the contractor or the surety the excess is to be paid to the state by the contractor or the surety .
c work zone liquidated damages .
a sum of no less than num per num hour period will be charged as work zone liquidated damages for failure to comply with maintenance and protection of traffic requirements and drawings or other contract traffic control requirements .
this deduction will not be as a penalty but as work zone liquidated damages .
d erosion and sedimentation control es noncompliance liquidated damages .
begin work to correct any noncompliance with section num erosion and sediment pollution control plans and permits within num hours of notification by the representative of the noncompliance .
at the time of notification the representative will provide the contractor with a copy of the visual siteinspection report or the report from dep or their designee or other regulatory agency that identifies the noncompliance .
a sum of num per numhour period will be charged as es noncompliance liquidated damages for failure to begin work within num hours of notification of noncompliance and for each subsequent numhour period until es compliance is attained .
this deduction will not be as a penalty but as es noncompliance liquidated damages .
the liquidated damages specified in this section are in addition to and not in derogation of the contractors obligation set forth in section num to indemnify the state and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any law ordinance regulation order or decree including violations by contractor employees as well as any other obligation that the contractor may have to indemnify or hold the state and its representative harmless .
num default and termination of contractin the following paragraphs the word contractor also means the surety in case of default and completion of the contract by the surety .
a delay neglect or default .
the contractor may be declared in default for the following reasons failure to begin work within the time specified in the notice to proceed failure to perform the work with sufficient labor equipment or material to ensure the completion of the specified work according to the contract terms unsatisfactory performance of the work failure or refusal to remove material or to repair or remove and replace any work rejected as defective or unsatisfactory discontinuing work without approval failure to resume work which has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so insolvency or bankruptcy commission of any act of bankruptcy or insolvency numa numd num num change no .
num making assignment for the benefit of creditors failure or refusal within num days after written notice by the secretary to make payment or show cause why payment should not be made of any amounts due for material furnished labor supplied or performed for equipment rentals or for utility services rendered as covered by the payment bond failure to protect to repair or to make good any damage or injury to property as specified in section num and not performing work in an acceptable manner for any cause .
the secretary upon written notice from the district executive or upon other proof satisfactory to the secretary and after having given written notice to the contractor and the surety of such delay neglect or default on the part of the contractor will have power and authority without violating the contract to declare the contractor in default take the completion of the work out of the hands of the contractor appropriate or use any or all material and equipment of the contractor assembled for the project enter into a contract or contracts for the completion of the work according to the contract or use such other methods that will be expedient for the completion of the contract in a satisfactory manner .
b completion by surety .
the secretary may elect to take the performance of the work from the contractor .
the secretary may at that time notify and require the surety to complete the contract according to its terms .
also require the surety to render within num months from the completion certificate date but before payment on the final certificate a detailed statement of the costs of the completion of the work including receipts and disbursements of all funds received and paid on account .
however the responsibility of the surety extends only to the limit of the bond amount .
c completion by department forces .
the secretary may elect to take the performance of the work from the contractor and fulfill the contract with department forces .
at that time and in the states name the secretary may take all right title and interest in and to the equipment and material owned by the contractor and assembled for use in the execution of the contract and may use them for completion .
d settlement of contract .
if the contract completion by any of the methods specified results in financial loss to the state the secretary may dispose of any of the remaining equipment and material taken over as specified in section numa or c without further legal process and in the manner that may be considered in the states best interests .
any equipment or material not required for completion or recoupment of loss or for legal charges against the contract or any balance remaining from the disposition of material and equipment after deducting losses by the state or any legal charges against the contract will be turned over to the party legally or equitably entitled to them .
in the event the contract is completed by department forces all proper costs and legal charges incurred by the department in connection with the contract will be deducted from money due or to become due to the contractor .
the department will credit the contractor with the amount realized from the disposal of equipment or material .
if legal charges against the contract and the expense incurred by the department in connection with contract completion by any of the methods specified less the credits herein provided for exceed the sum which would have been payable under the contract for the completed work the contractor or the surety are liable to the state for the excess amount .
if such legal charges and expenses are less than the contract value of the completed work the difference will be paid to the contractor or such difference may be paid to the surety in an amount not exceeding the total amount which has been paid by the surety on its obligations under the performance bond and the payment bond .
in this event the surety is required to furnish evidence satisfactory to the secretary that such payments have been made and that any balance remaining after payment to the surety will be paid to the contractor .
nume num num num change no .
num e termination clause .
the state may by written notice with the approval of the fhwa where applicable terminate the contract or any portion because of any of the following conditions the contractor is prevented from proceeding with the construction contract as a direct result of a presidents executive order with respect to the occurrence of war or in the interest of national defense the state or the contractor is prevented from proceeding with the construction contract as direct result of an order of a court of competent jurisdiction funds necessary for the project completion become unavailable for the departments convenience the department has determined that such termination will be in the states best interest or all of the work of any controlling operation is delayed for more than num consecutive calendar days for any cause beyond the responsibility of the contractor .
the secretary may enter into an agreement with the contractor or may terminate the contract by written notice to the contractor .
if an agreement is entered into it will be executed by the contractor and the secretary approved by the surety and the chief counsel the general counsel or the attorney general or their designees .
when the contract or any portion is terminated before completion of all items of contract work payment will be made for each unit of work fully completed at the contract unit price and payment for each partially completed unit of work will be as mutually agreed or at the percentage of the contract unit price that the cost of the partially completed unit is of a fully completed unit with a maximum allowable of num .
no claim for lost profits or damages of any kind will be allowed for the termination .
acceptable material obtained by the contractor for the work will be purchased from the contractor at actual cost as shown by receipted bills and actual cost records at such points of delivery as may be designated .
termination of any portion of the contract does not relieve the contractor of responsibilities for the completed work nor will it relieve the surety of its obligation for any claim arising out of the performance of the work .
num noncompliance by the contractorin addition to the elective measures the secretary may take for violation of the contract as specified in section num the secretary will also have the discretionary right to take any or all of the following actions if the contractor fails neglects or refuses to comply with the requirements specified in sections num num numc numd or num the secretary may shut down the work until the requirements of the violated section are met .
in this event no remission will be made in contract time for the period for which the work is shut down .
the secretary may withhold payment of estimates for work completed until the requirements of the violated section are met .
the secretary may enter upon the project and perform all work necessary to conform to the requirements of the section violated then deduct the cost from money due or to become due to the contractor or the surety .
if the contractor fails to comply with the requirements specified in sections num and numc the secretary will not proceed until num hours after written notice to the contractor and the surety that the secretary will take such action .
the secretary has the right to enter upon the project and repair or replace public or private property which has been damaged in violation of section num to estimate the amount of such damage and to deduct the amount from money due or to become due to the contractor or the surety .
when money is deducted as provided the secretary will settle with the property owner and secure a written statement releasing the state and the contractor from further responsibility for such damage .
num strikes or labor disputestime extensions will be considered appropriate in the event of a strike num num num num change no .
num or labor dispute which causes despite all reasonable efforts of the contractor to avoid it a shutdown of the entire project or of one or more controlling operations whether the strike or labor dispute involves a union bargaining with the contractor a subcontractor the department or third parties .
in no event however will the contractor be entitled to any delay costs for labor material equipment or related expenses such as overhead or administrative costs profit etc .
resulting from the strike or labor dispute regardless of whether the strike or labor dispute involves a union bargaining with the contractor a subcontractor the department or third parties affecting a controlling operation .
num numb num num initial edition section nummeasurement of quantities num measurement a units of measure .
work performed under this contract will be measured in the following units shown in the measurement and payment sections of the specifications and in the design items in the proposal unless otherwise specified lump sum .
not measured .
indicates complete construction of the item of work as specified .
each .
measured by the number of individual items of work completed .
linear foot .
measured parallel to the longitudinal base or foundation upon which items are placed or along the longitudinal surface of the item .
m. linear feet .
num linear feet to the nearest num m. feet .
vertical foot .
measured vertically to the nearest num foot with a minimum vertical measurement of num foot at each unit .
square foot square yard .
measured by a twodimensional area method on the surface of the item .
cubic yard .
measured by a threedimensional volume method .
acre .
measured by a twodimensional area method on the surface to the nearest num acre .
pound .
measured by actual item net weight avoirdupois .
ton .
measured by actual item net weight in short tons consisting of num pounds avoirdupois .
gallon .
measured by actual item liquid volume .
m. gallon .
measured by actual item liquid volume consisting of num gallons to the nearest num m. gallon .
foot board measure .
measurement by a threedimensional method of the actual item lumber board foot .
m. feet board measure .
num feet board to the nearest num m. feet board .
set .
measured as an item unit set consisting of two or more parts together as specified .
bag .
measured as an item unit bag .
bushel .
measured by actual item dry measure consisting of num quarts .
b general .
measurement will be according to the system of weights and measures recognized by the united states bureau of standards .
method of measurement and computation of quantities will conform to generally recognized engineering and construction practice .
computer generated or electronic digital measuring and computing devices are acceptable methods .
numb numb num num initial edition a station when used as a definition or term of measurement will be num linear feet horizontal measurement .
when required weigh material on accurate acceptable scales using competent qualified personnel at locations designated .
when material is shipped by rail the car weight may be accepted if only the actual weight of material is measured .
however car weights will not be acceptable for material passed through mixing plants .
weigh empty trucks used to haul material measured by weight daily as directed .
mark each truck with a distinct legible identification .
trucks may be selected at random and weighed as directed to verify the weight of material by weighing the truck empty and loaded on other acceptable scales .
use acceptable vehicles to haul material to be measured by volume at the delivery point .
use acceptable vehicles of any size or type provided the actual body contents can be readily and accurately determined .
load vehicles to at least their water level capacity .
level the loads at the delivery point .
if requested material measured by the cubic yard may be weighed and converted to tons if approved in writing by the district executive .
factors to be used for conversion from weight measurement to volume measurement or weight measurement to area measurement will be determined by the representative and agreed to by the contractor before using this method of measurement .
measure bituminous material by the gallon or ton as indicated .
measure volumes at numf or correct to volume at numf using astm d num for asphalts or astm d num for tars .
net certified scale weights or weights based on certified volumes for rail shipments will be used as a measurement basis .
weights will be subject to correction when bituminous material has been lost from the car or by the distributor wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the work .
if bituminous materials are shipped by truck the net certified weight or volume subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities .
num numc num num change no .
num section numpayment num generalpayment for items of work performed under this contract will be made at the contract price per unit of measure as specified in section num for the item complete in place or portions thereof .
unless otherwise specified the contract unit price will cover all costs for materials labor and equipment specified described or identified in each section of the specifications including the special provisions and plans identified in each section of the specifications including the special provisions and plans as as required or as directed or allowed under the specifications including the special provisions and plans and for which payment is not expressly provided .
in addition to the above the contract price includes all other costs incurred in performing work on the project e.g .
home office overhead and all profit .
the contract price is accepted as payment in full for all risk loss damage or expense of every kind arising out of the nature of the work or the performance as specified in section num .
work specified as incidental in the measurement and payment section of the specification for a contract item is to be considered as an additional obligation to the other work required for the items .
this incidental work is not payable directly but is to be considered included in the contract price for the items of work specified .
removal and replacement of defective work as specified in section num will not be paid by the department .
no payment will be made for work in excess of that indicated shown or specified unless otherwise accepted in writing by the secretary .
removal of material found in excavation areas and accepted for use as specified in section num will be paid for at the contract unit price for the class of excavation in which it is found .
payment will also be made for the contract bid item in which the excavated material is used .
work material or labor specified for an item will not be measured or paid for again under any other indicated pay items .
num differing site conditions suspensions of work and significant changes in the character of work a general .
if differing site conditions changes in quantities or alterations of the construction drawings will significantly increase or decrease the cost of performing the work directly affected perform such work only when authorized in writing as specified in section numa .
payment for such work will be made as specified in section num. b differing site conditions .
during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions differing materially from those indicated are encountered at the site or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions is responsible for promptly notifying the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
upon written notification the representative will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding loss of anticipated profits will be made as specified in section numa .
the representative will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment that results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this section for any effects caused on unchanged work .
c suspensions of work ordered by the representative .
if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the representative in writing as specified in section numc for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes numc numa num num change no .
num that additional compensation andor contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay submit to the representative in writing a request for adjustment within num calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment in the request .
upon receipt the representative will evaluate the contractors request .
if the representative agrees that the cost andor time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors and not caused by weather the representative will make an adjustment excluding profit as specified in section num and section num as applicable .
the representative will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided for or excluded as specified in section numc .
d required changes in the scope of work .
the department reserves the right to make in writing at any time such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
such changes in quantities and alterations in the work will neither invalidate the contract or release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as changed or altered .
if alterations in the work or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the work will be paid for at the original contract unit price .
if alterations in the work or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding loss of anticipated profits will be made as specified in section num .
the basis for the adjustment will be agreed upon before the performance of the work .
if a basis can not be agreed upon the work will be paid for as extra work as specified in section num .
the term significant change in character applies only to the following circumstances if the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or if any major item of work as defined in section num is increased to in excess of num or decreased to below num of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantity applies only to that portion in excess of num of the original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num to the actual quantity of work performed .
when a contract item experiences a significant change in character as a result of a decrease to below num of the original contract quantity the actual quantity of work performed may be paid at an adjusted price as agreed upon with the contractor and as approved however total compensation will not exceed the contract items original value .
item value is defined as the original contract quantity multiplied by the contract unit price .
e adjustment of lump sum items .
the original contract price for a lump sum item where quantities and unit prices for component items are designated on a component item schedule submitted as specified in section numa will be adjusted only if differing site conditions as specified in section numb or changes directed by the representative will significantly increase or decrease the cost of performing the work .
if the representative determines that conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time for performance of the work or if increases or decreases in quantities are required due to a change directed by the representative adjusted payment will be made as specified in section num .
num additional work extra work and extra work on a force account basis a general .
work specified in sections num and num will be paid if authorized in writing by the district executive as additional work extra work or extra work on a force account basis .
compensation will be limited to the work authorized in writing and actually performed .
work performed before written authorization will be at the contractors risk .
a work order identifying the work to be done and the price to be paid therefore will be processed before or during numa numd num num change no .
num the performance of the work .
to avoid interrupting the project written authorization to perform work under this section will be in the form of a letter telegram mailgram or other writing from the district executive or the inspectorincharge in writing to the contractor when confirming an oral authorization of the district executive issued within a reasonable length of time .
if the work is to be paid as additional work the district executives writing will refer to the contract price for that work .
if the work is to be paid as extra work and is such that a reasonable price therefore can be negotiated and is such that force account records if necessary can be kept by the department the district executives writing will authorize commencement of work as extra work .
within num calendar days of such authorization submit a price for the extra work with backup data to the district executive for transmittal to the representative .
pending approval of the price force account records will be kept as stated below .
if the price is accepted the work will be paid only at the negotiated price which will not be renegotiated once submitted for acceptance .
if the work is to be paid as extra work and the contractor and district executive can not agree on a tentative price therefore and the work is such that force account records can not be kept by the department the district executives writing will contain a firm binding price determined by the district executive to be fair and equitable for the work to be performed .
if the district executive and contractor can not agree on a tentative price for the extra work and if the work is such that force account records can be kept by the department the district executives writing will state that such work is to be paid on a force account basis .
force account records will be kept as stated below .
payment for additional work extra work and extra work on a force account basis is accepted as payment in full for all profit and for all equipment labor material field overhead home office and general administrative expenses and every other expense incurred as a result of the additional or extra work .
no claims for additional compensation of any kind arising out of or relating to such work can be asserted against the department with the board of claims .
b additional work .
this includes only the following work of the type already provided by the contract and work for which there is a contract price .
perform all such work only when authorized in writing by the district executive as stated in section numa .
all additional work will be paid at the contract price and in the same manner as if it had been included in the original contract .
c extra work .
this includes only the following work arising from changes specified in section num that result in a significant increase or decrease in the cost of performing that work or work having no quantity andor price included in the contract which is determined by the district executive to be necessary or desirable to complete the project .
perform all such work only when authorized in writing by the district executive as stated in section numa .
all extra work will be paid only as stated in section numa .
d force account work .
perform extra work on a force account basis only when directed in writing by the district executive as stated in section numa .
numd numd num num change no .
num upon receipt of written authorization to perform force account work schedule a meeting with the representative to discuss any concerns regarding the work itself as well as expectations regarding reimbursement for the associated costs .
topics of discussion at this meeting should include but are not limited to the availability of needed materials or equipment expectations regarding reimbursement for offsite labor show up time travel time andor paid non working holidays payment of standby time for owned equipment the need to rent equipment the need for consumables and whether they will be purchased or taken from stock and the availability of needed subcontractors and the incurring of costs for overnight travel .
the department will keep records of extra work done on a force account basis .
compare force account records with those kept by the department at the end of each day or as directed to ensure accuracy and obtain concurrence .
report any unresolved disagreements with such records to the representative .
failure to review the departments records or to report disagreements with such records will create a presumption that the departments records are complete and accurate .
payment for extra work performed on a force account basis will be made as specified herein upon completion of the work .
progress payments will be made only when an itemized estimated force account of cost is provided in writing within num working days after receipt of the departments written authorization to perform the extra work on a force account basis .
num .
labor .
wages of forepersons equipment operators and skilled semiskilled and common laborers directly assigned to the specific operation or directly involved in the offsite handling loading and transportation of material equipment andor purchased consumables needed specifically for the force account work will be reimbursed as direct labor at the actual wage rate and fringe benefit rate paid for each hour that such employees are engaged in the performance of authorized work and if directed overtime as provided for in existing laws regulations collective bargaining agreements or other employment contracts generally applicable to the classes of labor employed in the work .
the workforce utilized and hours paid for offsite handling loading and transportation must be mutually agreed upon as being fair and reasonable given the nature and scope of the force account work .
additionally if a labor crew assigned to the force account operation arrives on the job site and is not permitted to perform work of any kind i.e .
contract work additional work or extra work due to circumstances beyond its control payment of show up time as provided for in an existing collective bargaining agreement or employment contract will be reimbursed as direct labor at the actual wage rate and fringe benefit rate paid .
reimbursement for the payment of reasonable travel time from a central meeting location to the site of the force account work andor for non working paid holidays may be made at the actual wage rate and fringe benefit rate paid if it is mutually agreed that such costs are unavoidable and being incurred for the convenience of the department .
additionally with regard to reimbursement for nonworking paid holidays the contractor must show that the payment is required by existing laws regulations collective bargaining agreements or other employment contracts or being made in accordance with an established written company policy and that any prerequisite or post requisite work hours were earned completely in the performance of the force account work .
finally if a worker in a given labor classification is engaged in the performance of work not of the type typically performed by individuals in that classification and there is an osha requirement for specific personal protective equipment ppe to be used by individuals performing such work the cost of the required ppe will be reimbursed as purchased consumables as specified in section numdnum.a .
indirect labor costs will be paid without markup as a percentage of the total base labor cost as supported by certified payroll records and when required a fringe benefit letter .
the total base labor cost will be the total amount paid directly to the force account workforce based on the actual wage rate paid each individual worker which is to include that portion of the workers fringe benefit rate also paid directly if any .
any amount paid on behalf of the members of the force account workforce as tax exempt fringe benefits will not be included in the indirect labor cost computation .
allowable indirect labor costs include the following social security tax at the percentage legally required medicare tax at the percentage legally required unemployment taxes at the estimated effective rate computed as specified below workers compensation insurance at the rate computed as specified below and liability insurance at the current policy period rate used to account for the cost of applicable liability insurance provided as specified in sections num and num .
update the liability rate annually in numd numd num num change no .
num ecms prior to the start of each new policy period .
the liability insurance rate entered into ecms is to be accompanied by a certification attesting to the fact that the rate being charged for liability insurance for force account work does not exceed the applicable current policy period rate used when determining unit prices for bidding purposes during the policy period .
maintain appropriate records needed to verify the certification for audit purposes including bid documents records of all payments rate computations and policy statements in accordance with the provisions of section num.c contractors and subcontractors are to compute their companys estimated effective rate for unemployment taxes for the current calendar year by dividing total companywide pennsylvania and federal unemployment tax payments for the prior calendar year by the total wages and salaries reported for applicable employees for the same period .
the tax payment wage and salary amounts used to compute the estimated effective rate are to be consistent with the information reported on pennsylvania unemployment compensation tax forms filed with the department of labor and industry and on federal unemployment tax returns filed with the internal revenue service .
each employer reports its state and federal unemployment tax payments under a unique account or identification number representing the company and all employees for whom unemployment taxes must be paid .
the gross wages and unemployment tax contribution reported on pa form ucnum under the employers pa uc account number along with the total payments to all employees and futa tax liability reported on form num under the companys employer identification number ein are considered companywide amounts representing all applicable employees for the purpose of computing the companys estimated effective rate for unemployment taxes .
a companys estimated effective rate for unemployment taxes is to be recomputed by april num of each calendar year based on the prior calendar years reported total wages and salaries and total tax payments .
contractors and subcontractors are to compute their companys workers compensation insurance rate based on an average of applicable policy premium costs amounts paid or credited for deductibles loss claims and retrospective adjustments and actual payroll basis over the last five consecutive complete policy periods .
the average of the policy premium amount established by the insurance carrier during its endofpolicy period premium adjustment audit for each of the last five consecutive complete policy periods is to be added to the average of the total amount paid during the last five consecutive complete policy periods for deductibles andor to settle loss claims and the average of the total amount paid to or credited by an insurance carrier current or prior during the last five consecutive complete policy periods as retrospective adjustments to policies in effect during prior policy periods dividing by the average of the applicable payroll basis for the last five consecutive complete policy periods and multiplying the result by num .
the term policy periods as used herein is defined as the period of time covered by the last five consecutive workers compensation insurance policies for which an endofpolicy period premium adjustment audit was completed .
when determining the policy premium amount for each year and its associated payroll basis only the portion of each that is attributable to the companys field or projectbased workforce need be included .
the portion of each that is attributable to the companys clerical or sales workforce may be excluded .
additionally any premium amount and associated payroll basis that is attributable to a company workforce employed in a state other than pa may be excluded .
as support for the workers compensation insurance rate being charged provide a copy of the last five consecutive endofpolicy period audit adjustment statements prepared by the insurance carrier and ensure each statement indicates the payroll basis upon which the adjusted premium was based .
additionally provide a schedule i.e .
spreadsheet of applicable deductible and claim payments made during the last five consecutive complete policy periods and include at a minimum the amount payment date and invoice number for each payment .
finally provide a schedule of applicable payments made and credits received during the last five consecutive complete policy periods as retrospective adjustments and include at a minimum the amount the paymentcredit date and the policy period to which each adjustment is applicable .
if a company involved in the performance of force account work has not been in business long enough to compute its workers compensation insurance rate based on an average of five consecutive complete policy periods of cost data compute the companys workers compensation insurance rate based on average cost data from all available consecutive complete policy periods .
contractors and subcontractors will be required to enter their companys estimated effective rate for unemployment taxes into ecms along with required supporting documentation prior to april numth of each calendar year .
additionally contractors and subcontractors will be required to enter and their computed workers compensation insurance and liability insurance rates into ecms along with the applicable expiration date for each type of coverage prior to the start of each new insurance policy period .
supporting documentation demonstrating that the workers compensation insurance rate entered into ecms was computed as specified above will be required as will the required liability insurance rate certification .
the coverage expiration date information will be tracked by ecms and used to prompt the contractor or subcontractor to update its rate information as existing policy periods expire .
numd numd num num change no .
num num .
material .
an item or product purchased specifically for the force account work that becomes a permanent part of the completed work will be considered a material for reimbursement purposes .
the cost of material used will be reimbursable including applicable sales tax and transportation costs charged by the material supplier .
num .
equipment .
reasonable rental rates for equipment including trucks and machinery mutually considered necessary will be allowed computed as follows num.a owned equipment .
the term owned equipment as used herein applies to equipment including trucks and machinery that the contractor is required to provide for the proper execution of the original contract work as specified in section numc whether such equipment is actually owned by the contractor is leased rented or has been obtained in some other manner .
for any owned equipment used in the performance of force account work a rental rate will be determined using data obtained from the rental rate blue book aka .
equipmentwatch cost recovery which is published by equipmentwatch a division of penton inc. blue book published data considered current as of the first day that work is performed on a specific force account is the data that will remain applicable throughout the performance of such work even if blue book data for an applicable piece of owned equipment is updated during that time .
outdated blue book data will be voided by the department annually as of a specific date and no longer accepted thereafter .
the department utilizes the engineering and construction management system ecms to keep electronic records of force account work .
to enable the department to electronically account for owned equipment utilized by contractors and subcontractors in the performance of force account work within ecms the following actions must be taken purchase a subscription to all necessary volumes of the blue book in electronic format based on the various ages of the pieces in the contractors equipment inventory for department projects utilize the all saved models tool available to subscribers to create a department project equipment inventory from the equipment included in the all saved models inventory create an equipment group use the group manager tool to select the applicable equipment group and generate a basic fleet report i.e .
the report that lists the id subtype manufacturer model year serial number and configuration as applicable for each piece of equipment in the group using the available csv button export the basic fleet report to a spreadsheet and save the spreadsheet in a .csv comma separated values file format .
note do not use the available pdf button to export the basic fleet report as ecms will not allow a spreadsheet saved in .pdf format to be imported .
at this point if the contractor or subcontractors owned equipment inventory includes any pieces that are not listed in the blue book such equipment must be added to the spreadsheet .
when adding equipment with no blue book listing to the spreadsheet care should be taken to ensure that applicable information relating to id subtype manufacturer model year serial number and configuration as it is entered is consistent with the existing column headings .
log in to ecms and import the .csv file using the import equipment hyperlink found on the contractor portal screen .
at a minimum the equipment group imported to ecms must include all of the owned equipment that will be used to perform the authorized force account work on a given project .
however to avoid having to repeat the above import procedure for future force account work on the same project or for force account work on other projects the contractor may elect to import a spreadsheet file that lists all of the equipment assigned to a given project or its entire department project owned equipment inventory .
the ecms equipment group import procedure may be repeated at any time e.g .
to import new pieces added to the inventory or to import a piece that was missed in a prior import .
an hourly rental rate for owned equipment will be computed by dividing the blue book monthly rate by num .
to this rate the blue book area adjustment percentage for pennsylvania and the age adjustment percentage for the numd numd num num change no .
num model year of the piece of equipment will be applied .
blue book citylevel regional adjustment factors will not be used in computing an hourly rental rate for owned equipment .
an allowance will be made for operating costs by adding to the above adjusted hourly rate the blue book estimated operating cost per hour for each hour that the owned equipment is actually in operation on the force account work .
if a piece of owned equipment is required at the work site on a standby basis but is not operating compensation if any will be at num of the adjusted hourly rate exclusive of operating costs .
payment for standby time will not be made on any day a piece of owned equipment is operated the entire work day .
for a standard numhour work day when equipment operates less than num hours payment for standby time will be limited to the number of hours that when added to the operating time for that day equals num hours .
for work days that exceed num hours when equipment operates less than num hours payment for standby time will be limited to the number of hours that when added to the operating time for that day equals num .
when force account work extends into one or more full weeks in any numweek period payment for standby time will be limited to the number of hours that when added to the operating time for that week equals num hours regardless of the number of hours per day or days per week the contractor works i.e .
overtime multiple shifts etc .. payment for standby time will not be made on days the contractor elects not to work or days not normally a work day .
standby time will not be paid if equipment is awaiting repair while repairs are being made or for maintenance or servicing of equipment .
standby time will not be paid for equipment not on the job site i.e .
while equipment is awaiting transport or being transported to the job site .
with the exception of owned equipment used for maintenance and protection of traffic owned equipment used on a numhour basis will be reimbursed at a daily rental rate which will be determined by dividing the blue book monthly rate by num .
owned equipment used for maintenance and protection of traffic on a numhour basis will be reimbursed at the blue book daily rate .
applicable adjustment percentages from the blue book will be applied .
where owned equipment utilized in the performance of force account work is not listed in the blue book a rental rate will be determined based on the sale price for such equipment at the time of purchase if the equipment is actually owned or the applicable lease agreement .
in these cases for equipment that is actually owned the monthly rate will be computed as num of the sale price and the total hourly rate determined by dividing the monthly rate by num when the equipment is operating and by num when the equipment is required at the work site on a standby basis but not operating with no adjustment percentages applied .
for equipment that is leased an hourly rental rate will be determined by prorating the lease cost .
additionally if not included in the lease cost an allowance will be made for operating costs by adding to the hourly rental rate the blue book estimated operating cost per hour for an equivalent piece of equipment for each hour the equipment is actually in operation on the force account work .
the equivalence of the piece of equipment in the blue book listing to the piece of equipment actually used must be mutually agreed upon .
with the exception of owned equipment used for maintenance and protection of traffic owned equipment used on a numhour basis with no listing in the blue book will be reimbursed at a daily rental rate which will be computed as num of the sale price for the equipment at the time of purchase divided by num with no adjustment percentages applied .
owned equipment used for maintenance and protection of traffic on a numhour basis with no listing in the blue book will be reimbursed at a daily rental rate which will be computed as num of the sale price for the equipment at the time of purchase divided by num with no adjustment percentages applied .
if instead of being purchased the equipment was actually fabricated by the owner the sale price used to determine the daily rental rate will be the owners total documented fabrication cost .
if equipment used on a numhour basis with no listing in the blue book is leased whether or not the equipment is used for maintenance and protection of traffic the daily rental rate will be determined by prorating the lease cost .
the rates established above include the cost of fuel oil lubrication supplies necessary attachments repairs overhaul and maintenance of any kind storage all costs of moving equipment on to and away from the work site except as specified below and all incidentals .
if a piece of owned equipment not already on or near the project site is needed specifically for the force account work the cost of moving the equipment on to and away from the work site will be reimbursed provided the equipment will not be used immediately thereafter in the performance of original contract work .
the department will not approve any contractor requests for reimbursement of owned equipment costs incurred in the performance of force account work in excess of those outlined above unless such costs were mutually agreed upon in writing based on an acceptable cost breakdown prepared by the contractor .
num.b rented equipment .
if a piece of equipment needed for the force account work is not of the type required to be provided by the contractor for the proper execution of the original contract work or if the piece of equipment needed is owned but not currently available and the equipment can be obtained by rental discuss the need to rent the equipment with the representative and obtain approval of the rental source and the rate to be paid before renting numd numd num num change no .
num the equipment for the force account work .
the department will not provide reimbursement for equipment rented without the prior knowledge and approval of the representative .
the contractor will be reimbursed the actual invoiced cost for rented equipment plus the cost of transporting the equipment to and from the work site provided transportation is not included in the rental cost and the rented equipment will not be used immediately thereafter in the performance of original contract work .
an allowance will be made for operating costs by adding to the rental cost the blue book estimated operating cost per hour for each hour the rented equipment is actually in operation on the force account work .
if the rented equipment has no listing in the blue book the blue book estimated operating cost per hour for an equivalent piece of equipment will be allowed as mutually agreed upon .
transportation charges for each piece of rented equipment to and from the site of the force account work will be paid provided return charges do not exceed the delivery charges haul rates do not exceed the established rates of licensed haulers and charges are restricted to those units of equipment not readily available and not on or near the project .
equipment that is rented or leased from an entity that is a division affiliate or subsidiary of or that is in any other way related to the contractor or its parent company will be considered owned equipment for reimbursement purposes and subject to the provisions of section numdnum.a .
num .
services by others .
specialized construction analyses engineering services and work not considered subcontract work requiring prequalification will be considered services by others for reimbursement purposes .
additionally when required exclusively for the force account work as directed the securing of permits bonds and specialized insurance coverage of a type not already required by the contract will be considered a service by others .
the contractor will be reimbursed the actual invoiced cost of each service by others including allowable permit fees bond premiums and insurance premiums plus num to cover administration and all other costs .
the markup on service by others costs will be limited to num only regardless of whether the service was arranged by the contractor or a subcontractor performing any or all of the force account work .
the overhead and profit allowances specified in section numdnum are not applicable to service by others costs .
num .
consumables .
an item needed specifically for the force account work that does not become a permanent part of the completed work the useful life of which is either fully or partially expended in the performance of the work will be considered a consumable for reimbursement purposes .
reimbursement for consumable items will be determined as follows num.a purchased consumables .
if a consumable item needed for the force account work is purchased new as evidenced by a supporting invoice and the items useful life is completely expended in the performance of the work as mutually agreed upon by the representative and the contractor the full cost of the item will be reimbursed including applicable sales tax and transportation costs .
otherwise that portion of the items useful life expended in the performance of the force account work will be determined as mutually agreed upon by the representative and the contractor and reimbursement made at a prorated cost .
in such cases the purchase price of the item plus applicable sales tax will be prorated with applicable transportation costs being reimbursed in full .
num.b consumables taken from stock .
if one or more of the items shown in table a is needed for the force account work and is not purchased new but rather obtained from the contractors existing inventory of used consumables the item will be considered as being taken from stock .
given the fact that the usage history of these items can not always be accurately assessed by the department reimbursement will be made based on the percentage of value and payment frequency specified in table a .
when utilizing table a to compute reimbursement for a consumable taken from stock item value will be established based on a supporting invoice .
the supporting invoice must show the purchase of the item new or used from a vendor regularly engaged in the sale of such items .
reimbursement based on the percentage of value in table a includes the cost of offsite handling and loading the consumable e.g .
at the contractors yard .
applicable transportation costs to the project site i.e .
labor and equipment costs will be reimbursed separately .
all consumables taken from stock remain the contractors property upon completion of the force account work .
no additional payment will be made for a consumable taken from stock if the numd numd num num change no .
num contractor elects to leave the item in place for its own convenience .
no payment will be made for a consumable taken from stock if the contractor is unable to furnish a supporting invoice meeting the above requirements .
table a consumable item unit of measure of value reimbursed payment frequency structural steel plate lb num monthly metal bridge overhang brackets each num monthly temporary concrete barrier lf num monthly steel sheet piling lb num monthly structural steel falsework lb num monthly wood structural timber board foot num one time wood dimensional lumber board foot plywood sheet concrete forms metal sf num monthly concrete forms laminated concrete curing blankets each num one time for each nummonth period or portion thereof .
num .
subcontracting .
if any or all of the force account work is to be performed by an approved subcontractor the work must be considered subcontract work requiring prequalification and the contractors need to subcontract the work must be approved .
payment for work performed by a subcontractor will be determined based on a complete statement of applicable material labor and equipment costs computed as specified herein plus applicable markups for overhead and profit .
if a subcontractors workforce must be in overnight travel status while performing force account work any costs incurred for hotel rooms per diem subsistence travel allowance or any other similar expense may be reimbursed provided it is mutually agreed that such costs are unavoidable and being incurred for the convenience of the department .
overnight travel costs when agreed to will be reimbursed as service by others as specified in section numdnum .
num .
overhead and profit .
except for work considered to be service by others as specified in section numdnum to cover all administration general and project superintendence other overhead bonds insurance anticipated profit and use of small tools and equipment for which no rental is allowed i.e .
tools andor equipment having a sale price at the time of purchase of num or less num will be added to the total material cost num will be added to the total direct labor cost and num will be added to the total cost of equipment rented as specified in section numdnum.b and the total cost of consumables provided as specified in section numdnum .
if applicable in addition to the above markups num will be added to the total cost of any force account work performed as approved subcontract work as specified in section numdnum .
num .
statements .
upon completion of force account work prepare an itemized statement of the cost of the work in the form of a properly completed ecms actual force account record detailed as follows name classification work dates daily hours total hours base pay rate fringe benefit rate total pay rate and extension for each foreperson equipment operator and skilled semiskilled and common laborer description year make model axel configuration capacity horsepower etc .
blue book edition reference use dates daily hours total hours rental rates operating and standby and extension for each piece of owned equipment andor description rental cost transportation costs if separate and extension for each piece of rented equipment numd nume num num change no .
num description quantity unit of measure unit price and extension for all materials applicable sales tax and transportation costs charged by the material supplier name description quantity unit price and extension for all consumables name description and amount for all services by others and rates paid for liability insurance workers compensation insurance and unemployment taxes .
statements of labor costs are to be supported by certified payroll records .
if certified payroll records do not indicate the fringe benefit rate being paid furnish a notarized statement on company letterhead paper listing the total fringe benefit rate for each applicable labor classification showing how the total rate is proportioned and distributed and identifying the portion of the rate if any that is being paid directly to individual workers which would be subject to payroll taxes and therefore considered part of the base labor cost .
if a salaried working foreman is involved in the force account work and the contractor elects not to include that individual on certified payroll records furnish an affidavit certifying that the individuals combined salary and benefit package is equivalent to or exceeds the wage and fringe benefit rates being charged .
statements of material costs including sales tax and transportation costs rented equipment costs consumables costs and service by others costs are to be supported and accompanied by invoices receipts or canceled checks .
if materials used in the force account work are not specifically purchased for the work but are taken from the contractors stock or provided by entities that are divisions affiliates subsidiaries or in any other way related to the contractor or its parent company and a supporting invoice receipt or canceled check can not be provided furnish an affidavit certifying that the materials were obtained as described above that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation costs claimed were actually incurred .
if the contractor fails to furnish the required itemized statement of the cost of force account work detailed as specified within num calendar days after completion of the force account work final payment for the work will be made based on the daily force account records kept by the department .
in such cases since the department will be unable to verify the prices paid for materials rented equipment consumables and services by others due to the contractors failure to provide supporting invoices receipts or canceled checks the total cost of unsupported material rented equipment consumables andor services by others will be fully discounted and not included in the final payment amount .
when the required itemized statement of the cost of the force account work detailed as specified is furnished within num calendar days after completion of the force account work the department will review the submission and notify the contractor in writing within num calendar days regarding all corrections that must be made and all outstanding support documentation that must be provided .
make all necessary corrections obtain all missing support documentation and resubmit the itemized statement within num calendar days of the date of the departments written notification .
if the contractor fails to furnish a properly completed and fully supported statement of the cost of force account work within the numcalendar day period final payment for the work will be made based on the contractors original submission and the daily force account records kept by the department .
in such cases the total cost of any material rented equipment consumables andor services by others for which a supporting invoice receipt or canceled check has not been furnished will be fully discounted and not included in the final payment amount .
extensions of either of the above numcalendar day periods will be made only by mutual written consent of the parties to the contract provided such written consent is given before the expiration of the applicable numday period .
if the amount already paid to the contractor via progress payments exceeds the final payment amount computed after discounting unsupported material rented equipment consumables andor service by others costs the overpayment amount will be recouped through the processing of a negative force account adjustment .
the contractors failure to submit all required supporting invoices receipts or canceled checks releases and forever discharges the department from any claims relating to the act of discounting the cost of unsupported material rented equipment andor services by others before making final payment for force account work .
e disputes .
notwithstanding the provisions specified in section num in the event of a disagreement with the district executive as to whether work is original contract work or additional work original contract work or extra work or nume num num num change no .
num additional work or extra work notify the inspectorincharge immediately of such disagreement and confirm the disagreement in writing to the district executive within num calendar days .
upon notification to the inspectorincharge of such disagreement records will be kept daily of all labor equipment and materials used from that day forward in the disputed work .
keep and maintain such daily records in the field .
claim no extra costs of any kind for work performed before notifying the inspectorincharge of disagreements with the district executives decision .
on each monday compare records of the previous weeks work with those kept by the department and review for accuracy .
report to the district executive within num calendar days of each review all disagreements with such records or to report disagreements with such records .
refusal or repeated failure to meet to review the departments records or to report disagreements with such records will create an irrebuttable presumption in favor of the department that its records are accurate .
disputes concerning all such work will be resolved by the district executive and payment will be made on the basis determined by him .
in the event of a disagreement with the decision of the district executive comply with provisions specified in section num concerning due notice in writing of an intent to file a claim and send a copy of the written notice to the district executive within the time frame allowed by that section .
if written notice is not submitted to the district executive within num calendar days of receipt of the district executives decision daily records of labor equipment and materials will no longer be kept by the department and no claim for additional compensation of any kind arising from or relating to the disputed work or the decision of the district executive can be filed with the board of claims .
if due notice in writing is submitted to the district executive and deputy secretary for highway administration within the num calendarday period continue to keep and review daily records as provided above until completion of the disputed work .
with the exception of those specific daily records or portions thereof on which written disagreements were filed with district executive as provided above any claim for damages filed with the board of claims arising out of or relating to the disputed work or the decision of the secretary can be measured at the hearing solely by the aforementioned daily records kept by the department .
num price adjustment of bituminous materialsthese requirements provide for a price adjustment in the form of a payment to the contractor or a rebate to the department for fluctuations in the cost of asphalt cement used in the bituminous materials placed as part of the construction work specified in the following sections num numa num num num numd num numb num num num numd num numb num numc num numd num num num num nume numd numa num num numc num numd publication num approved products for lower volume local roads msnumb msnumbc msnuma msnumb msnumb msnumb msnumb msnumb msnuma msnumbc msnuma applicable contract items include any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered placement of one or more of the bituminous materials specified in these sections .
a price adjustments when applicable will be computed based on the bituminous material item quantity gallon only as paid on current estimates .
b when measured and paid for on a square yard basis the tonnage of material placed will be determined from delivery tickets and the bitumen tonnage computed as specified section numbnum.a .
the tonnage of material wasted if any will be agreed upon with the contractor and deducted .
c when measured and paid for on a material used basis price adjustments when applicable will be computed based num numb num num change no .
num on the bituminous material item quantity gallon only as paid on current estimates .
d price adjustments when applicable will be computed as specified for the type of bituminous material used in the type of paved shoulder placed .
excludes shoulder backfill items .
e price adjustments when applicable will be computed based on the tonnage of asphalt cement used in the ultrathin bonded wearing course only i.e .
excluding the asphalt cement used in the emulsified asphalt membrane .
a general .
these price adjustment provisions apply only to projects where more than num tons of asphalt cement including asphalt cement residue contained in emulsions or cut backs will be used in the bituminous materials specified or indicated for placement .
the department posts monthly index prices for asphalt cement pg num using price data obtained on the last wednesday of the preceding month from a survey of producers who do business in pennsylvania .
data provided by producers serving the eastern portion of the state is averaged to compute the index price for zone num districts num num num num num and num .
data provided by producers serving the western portion of the state is averaged to compute the index price for zone num districts num num num and num .
the index price for zone num districts num and num is computed as the average of the index prices for zone num and zone num .
the price index in the proposal ib will be the index price posted by the department determined as specified above for the month in which the project is advertised .
the price index at the time of placement ip will be the index price posted by the department determined as specified above for the month during which the applicable material is placed .
b price adjustment criteria and conditions .
the following criteria and conditions will be considered in determining a price adjustment for bituminous materials num .
no price adjustment .
when the ratio ipib falls within the range of num to num no price adjustment will be made for any bituminous material placed during the relevant month .
num .
price rebate .
when the ratio ipib is calculated to be less than num the department will receive an automatic price rebate determined according to the following formula p.r .
num ipib q ib where p.r .
price rebate ip price index for the last wednesday of the month preceding the month in which the material is placed onemonth price adjustment period ib price index in the proposal q quantity tons of bitumen in mixture placed num .
price increase .
when the ratio ipib is calculated to be greater than num the contractor will receive a price increase determined according to the following formula p.i .
ipib num q ib where p.i .
price increase ip price index for the last wednesday of the month preceding the month in which the material is placed onemonth price adjustment period ib price index in the proposal q quantity tons of bitumen in mixture placed num .
equivalent tonnage .
num.a ton basis .
for bituminous mixtures containing performancegraded pg asphalt binder or emulsified numb numb num num change no .
num asphalt which are measured and paid for on a ton basis including superpave hma base binder and wearing courses flexible base replacements asphalt treated permeable base courses stone matrix hma wearing courses bituminous wearing courses fjnum fjnumc fbnum and fbnum bituminous binder courses fbnum and fbnum manual bituminous patching and polymermodified emulsified asphalt paving systems microsurfacing type rf the equivalent tonnage is computed as follows bitumen tonnage in bituminous mixture bituminous mixture tonnage placed percent bitumen by weight if the bituminous mixture contains performancegraded pg asphalt binder the percent bitumen will be obtained from the approved jmf form trnuma job mix formula report for the bituminous mixture placed .
the percent bitumen will be the virgin ac listed on the applicable jmf .
if the bituminous mixture contains emulsified asphalt the percent bitumen will be computed using the approved mix design for the type of bituminous mixture placed and bulletin num .
the percent bitumen will be the percent emulsion in the bituminous mixture as listed on the applicable mix design multiplied by the minimum asphalt percent by weight for the class of emulsified asphalt used as specified in bulletin num .
num.b square yard basis .
for bituminous mixtures containing performancegraded pg asphalt binder only i.e .
not including emulsified asphalt or cutback asphalt which are measured and paid for on a square yard basis including superpave hma base binder and wearing courses flexible base replacements aggregatebituminous base courses stone matrix hma wearing courses bituminous wearing courses fjnum fjnumc fbnum and fbnum bituminous binder courses fbnum and fbnum and paved shoulders types numf numsp numf numsp and num the equivalent tonnage is computed as follows bituminous mixture tonnage placed num a d d where a surface area square yards d design depth inches d design density pounds per cubic feet weight by bitumen percent placed tonnage mixture bituminous mixture bituminous in tonnage bitumen the design density will be obtained from the approved jmf form trnuma job mix formula report for the bituminous mixture placed .
the design density will be the ndes density listed on the applicable jmf .
if necessary the design density i.e .
ndes density obtained from form trnuma will be converted to the proper units by multiplying by the density of water num pounds per cubic foot .
the percent bitumen will be obtained from the approved jmf form trnuma job mix formula report for the bituminous mixture placed .
the percent bitumen will be the virgin ac listed on the applicable jmf .
num.c gallons per square yard basis .
for bituminous coatings or mixtures measured and paid for on a square yard basis where bituminous material i.e .
performancegraded asphalt binder emulsified asphalt or cutback asphalt is used or applied on a gallons per square yard basis including bituminous tack coats bituminous prime coats bituminous seal coats bituminous surface treatments slurry seals and polymermodified emulsified asphalt paving systems micro surfacing the equivalent tonnage is computed as follows bitumen tonnage num a a g where a surface area square yards a actual residue application rate gallons per square yard numb numb num num change no .
num g specific gravity of bituminous material for bituminous tack coats bituminous prime coats bituminous seal coats and bituminous surface treatments the actual residue application rate will be the rate of application of the emulsified asphalt cutback asphalt or performancegraded pg asphalt binder as applicable in gallons per square yard as determined in the field according to ptm no .
num multiplied by num if pg asphalt binder is used or by the minimum asphalt percent by weight for the class of emulsified asphalt or cutback asphalt used as specified in bulletin num .
for bituminous seal coats and bituminous surface treatments using precoated aggregate the actual residue application rate for the bituminous precoating material will be the design rate of application of the coarse aggregate in pounds per square yard multiplied by the average of the minimum and maximum residual bituminous binder percent by weight for the type of bituminous precoating material used as specified in section numd multiplied by num if pg asphalt binder is used or by the minimum asphalt percent by weight for the class of emulsified asphalt or cutback asphalt used as specified in bulletin num divided by the weight of water num pounds per gallon .
for slurry seals the actual residue application rate will be the average of the minimum and maximum rate of application for the type of slurry seal constructed in pounds per square yard as specified in section nume multiplied by the percent emulsion in the bituminous mixture as listed on the applicable mix design multiplied by the minimum asphalt percent by weight for the class of emulsified asphalt used as specified in bulletin num divided by the weight of water num pounds per gallon .
for polymer modified emulsified asphalt paving systems microsurfacing the actual residue application rate will be the average of the yield value for the bituminous mixture calculated at the end of each days application in pounds per square yard multiplied by the percent emulsion in the bituminous mixture as listed on the applicable mix design multiplied by the minimum asphalt percent by weight for the emulsified asphalt as specified in bulletin num divided by the weight of water num pounds per gallon .
the specific gravity of bituminous material will be obtained from the bill of lading provided with each shipment of bituminous material delivered to the project .
if bituminous material from multiple shipments is placed or applied during the same onemonth period and the specific gravity reported on the bills of lading varies from one shipment to another the specific gravity of bituminous material will be the average of the specific gravities reported on each applicable bill of lading .
num.d gallon basis .
for bituminous coatings or mixtures where the bituminous material i.e .
performance graded asphalt binder emulsified asphalt or cutback asphalt used or applied is measured and paid for on a gallon basis including bituminous tack coats bituminous prime coats and bituminous material for cold recycled bituminous base courses bituminous wearing courses fbnum bituminous binder courses fbnum bituminous seal coats and bituminous surface treatments the equivalent tonnage is computed as follows bitumen tonnage num v g p where v volume of bituminous material gallons g specific gravity of bituminous material p asphalt the specific gravity of bituminous material will be obtained from the bill of lading provided with each shipment of bituminous material delivered to the project .
if bituminous material from multiple shipments is used placed or applied during the same onemonth period and the specific gravity reported on the bills of lading varies from one shipment to another the specific gravity of bituminous material will be the average of the specific gravities reported on each applicable bill of lading .
for other than performancegraded pg asphalt binder asphalt num the asphalt will be the minimum asphalt percent by weight for the class of emulsified asphalt or cutback asphalt used as specified in bulletin num .
num .
expiration of contract time .
if bituminous materials or mixtures are placed after expiration of contract time and liquidated damages are chargeable the value for ip used to compute the price adjustment will be either the price index at the time of actual placement or the price index at the time contract time expired whichever is less .
num .
approval .
should the price index at time of placement ip indicate an increase of num or more over the numb numa num num change no .
num price index in the proposal ib do not furnish bituminous material for the project without prior written approval .
num .
paymentrebate .
the price adjustment will be paid or rebated upon approval of a work order to be prepared after completion of all work .
cumulative price adjustments amounting to less than num will be disregarded .
upon written request by the contractor partial payments may be made before total completion when the unpaid accrued price increase exceeds num or once every num months .
num .
inspection of records .
the department through the office of inspector general reserves the right to inspect the records of the prime contractor and its subcontractors and material suppliers to ascertain actual pricing and cost information for the asphalt cement used in the bituminous materials incorporated in the work .
num .
extra work .
if applicable items of work as specified herein are added to the contract as extra work as specified in section num no price adjustment will be made for fluctuations in the cost of asphalt cement used in any bituminous materials placed in the performance of the extra work unless otherwise approved .
the current price for asphalt cement is to be used when preparing required backup data for extra work to be performed at a negotiated price .
for extra work performed on a force account basis reimbursement for material costs along with the specified overhead and profit markup will be considered to include full compensation for the current cost of asphalt cement .
num current estimate paymentscurrent estimate payments will be processed based upon assessments made by the department as work is satisfactorily completed .
processing of estimate payments will begin on the first estimate date established following the notice to proceed date or indicated in the special provisions .
no estimate payments will be processed before the notice to proceed date .
current estimate payments exceeding num will be processed by the department at semimonthly intervals or more frequently as work progresses .
current estimate payments amounting to less than num may be processed monthly .
final payments amounting to between num and num will be disregarded .
partial payments do not bind the department to the acceptance of any material furnished or work performed .
within num calendar days of the receipt of current estimate and final payments from the department pay all subcontractors their earned share of the payments including all retainage provided the terms and conditions of the applicable subcontract or purchase agreement have been reasonably met .
num material stored or on hand a stored material .
the representative may authorize payment for certain material before its incorporation into the work .
upon the contractors written request and the representatives written approval the contractor may be paid num of the cost of the material less the prorata share of the retainage if any provided the quantity of stored material does not exceed the total estimated quantity required to complete the project the cost is at least num but does not exceed num of the contract price of the applicable contract item or component item and the accumulative costs do not exceed num of the current contract amount .
the cost of the material is that amount to be paid by the contractor as evidenced by invoices .
fabricated structural steel that is to receive a protective coating may be approved for prepayment at num of the contract price of the applicable contract item or component item before application of the coating provided the structure has been fully fabricated and preassembly of field connections has been made .
payment for stored material will not be authorized until the material has been delivered to the project site or an approved location in the vicinity of the project is inspected by the representative to ensure the material is in a satisfactory condition and of sufficient quantity is stored in an approved manner and conforms to the requirements specified in this section and section num .
identify stored material by project designation and set apart from other materials .
material to be stored less than num days is not eligible for prepayment .
in determining eligibility for prepayment the beginning date for evaluating whether the required numday minimum storage period will be met will be the date the material is delivered to the project or approved storage location or the date the invoice is submitted to the department whichever is the latter .
material originally determined to be ineligible for prepayment due to the minimum storage period requirement that is then stored for more than num days is eligible for prepayment on the next estimate provided the invoice has been submitted to the department .
if the representative determines because of required fabrication at an offsite location that it is not feasible or practicable to store material in the vicinity of the project the material may be stored at an approved location which is not in the vicinity of the project at the contractors expense .
numa num num num change no .
num with the exception of structural steel to be incorporated into fabricated structural steel components for main bridge members as specified in section numanum .
only end product manufactured material or fully fabricated products that are awaiting installation andor incorporation into the finished work are eligible for prepayment .
components elements or ingredients of a finished product are not eligible for prepayment .
aggregates cements and other bulk material are not eligible for prepayment .
living or perishable plant materials are not eligible for prepayment before planting .
assume full control and responsibility for the protection of the stored material from the elements and against loss or damage by any cause .
in the event any stored material becomes lost stolen impaired or damaged while stored the monetary value of the lost stolen impaired or damaged material as may have been paid for in a current estimate will be deducted from a subsequent estimate .
retain the title to the prepaid material until issuance of the acceptance certificate .
payment for acceptable stored material will be made on current estimates against the applicable contract item .
the amount paid will be proportionately recouped as the material is incorporated into the work .
the cost of surplus stored material previously paid on a current estimate but not ultimately incorporated in the final measured work will not be included in the final payment .
surplus stored material is the property of the contractor .
remove surplus material from the project and dispose of in a satisfactory manner .
pay the material provider the amount due as shown on the invoices within num calendar days of receipt of payment from the department .
provide evidence of payment upon request .
failure to make invoice payments as specified will cause the appropriate monies to be deducted from future estimates and will cause the disapproval of further prepayment requests .
num .
prepayment for structural steel .
structural steel to be incorporated into fabricated structural steel components for main bridge members may be approved for payment up to num of the contract price of the applicable contract item or component item provided the quantity cost delivery inspection and storage requirements of section numa are met .
the cost of the structural steel is that amount to be paid by the fabricator as evidenced by invoices .
invoices for approved structural steel are to include the material quantity and department project identification i.e .
ecms number sr section and county and must be accompanied by certification as specified in section numbnum .
and proof of payment e.g .
a copy of a canceled check or receipt or a certified letter from the structural steel supplier acknowledging receipt of payment .
payment for approved structural steel will be made on current estimates against the applicable contract item .
the amount paid will be proportionately recouped as the fabricated structural steel components are incorporated into the work .
pay the fabricator the amount due as shown on the invoices within num calendar days of receipt of payment from the department .
when payment is made the structural steel becomes the property of the department .
have the fabricator furnish a transfer of ownership document within num calendar days of receipt of payment and promptly submit the documentation to the department .
only approved structural steel to be incorporated into fabricated structural steel components for main bridge members is eligible for prepayment .
handling transportation and storage of structural steel materials including but not limited to any storage site rental security and weather protection are to be borne by the contractor and included in the contract price for the applicable contract item .
b erected steel .
partial payment for structural steel required for bridge construction will include not over num of the total estimated weight of structural steel in a span erected and completely and permanently bolted riveted or welded .
the total estimated weight of structural steel will be included in partial payments after painting has been satisfactorily completed .
num value engineeringupon approval of a value engineering proposal as specified in section num a twopart lump sum value engineering payment will be made in an amount equal to onehalf of the actual net cost savings associated with the proposal .
actual net cost savings is defined as the cost difference between the original contract work and the actual cost of the new work .
compensation will be made only for proposals pertaining to contracts in effect with the submitting contractor at the time of submission .
an initial contract work order or contract adjustment will be processed to provide payment for onehalf of the lump sum value engineering payment based on the estimated net cost savings as identified in the approved value engineering proposal .
upon completion of all items of work included as part of the value engineering proposal a final lump sum payment will be made by processing a followup contract work order or contract adjustment .
the final lump sum payment amount will be determined by computing the actual net cost savings associated with the value num numc num num change no .
num engineering proposal based on actual item quantities taking onehalf of the actual net cost savings and deducting the amount paid under the initial contract work order or contract adjustment .
num final inspection acceptance and final payment a final inspection .
when the project is substantially complete make arrangements for a mutual final inspection .
substantial completion is the date when at least num of the contract work has been completed and the project can be used occupied or operated for its intended use .
at the time of final inspection the representative along with the contractor will establish the following the date of final inspection the list of all physical work items by stations and in detail requiring completion andor correction and a list of all certificates or documents requiring submission completion andor correction .
as established during the final inspection perform work as necessary for required correction or completion of all physical work items and complete correct and submit all outstanding certificates and documents .
the contractor will be relieved of responsibility for further physical work and maintenance only for work items which are satisfactorily completed at the time of or subsequent to the final inspection .
the contractors responsibility for further physical work maintenance and thirdparty liability remains for work items which are not satisfactorily completed at the time of or subsequent to the final inspection .
when all physical work has been satisfactorily completed according to the requirements of the contract the representative will establish the date of physical work completion .
upon receipt and verification the representative will establish the date that all required certificates andor documents are satisfactorily furnished .
when all physical work has been satisfactorily completed and all contractually required certificates and documents have been properly furnished the date of project acceptance will be established .
if any substantial project section has been completed in advance of the whole a final inspection will be made of that section and the contractor will be relieved of responsibility for further physical work and maintenance on the section of the project as specified in section numb .
the final inspection will be conducted as specified for the entire project except the date of project acceptance will not be established nor will an acceptance certificate be issued .
b acceptance certificate .
upon completion of the requirements specified in section numa an acceptance certificate will be issued establishing the date on which the project has been satisfactorily completed and certifying that the project is accepted as of that date .
c final settlement certificate computations .
the representative will compute the entire amount of each contract work item performed and its contract value .
the representative will notify the contractor of the amount for each item including additions to and deductions from the contract quantity for each item of work all other legal and equitable additions and deductions to be made amounts previously paid and the net amount of the final settlement certificate computations .
the representative will request written acceptance of or exception to these final settlement certificate computations within num days of the notification .
failure to follow the following procedures will waive the right to file a claim .
num .
within num days from the date the final settlement certificate computations or revised computations are submitted notify the representative in writing of acceptance or exceptions .
num.a if accepted or upon failure to accept or take exception within the specified time the director bopd will certify to the secretary in the final settlement certificate the entire amount of each work item performed its contract value all legal and equitable additions and deductions and the amounts previously paid .
the secretary will certify to the state treasurer the amount due in final payment and contract settlement .
under these circumstances all claims are considered waived by the contractor .
the department will forward a copy of the final settlement certificate setting forth the final settlement date .
copies will also be forwarded to the surety and other appropriate interested agencies .
the date the secretary notifies the contractor of the final settlement certificate computations or revised computations will be the date of contract numc numb num num change no .
num completion .
num.b if not acceptable notify the district executive in writing of all exceptions .
the district executive will give notification of the acceptance or rejection of the exceptions .
the contractor or surety has the right to appeal within num days of the rejection to the chief hdd .
notification will then be sent in writing from the chief hdd stating that the claim has been approved or rejected .
where the claim does not involve any disputes specified in section num the date that the claim accrued for purposes of filing claims before the board of claims will be the date notification in writing is sent from the district executive of the rejection of the claim .
in the event of an appeal within num days as provided the date will be the first notification following the claim rejection by the chief hdd .
num .
during final settlement certificate computations if the department determines that the net total amount to be received is actually a negative amount then prompt reimbursement to the department for the total amount overpaid is required .
in the event of failure to reimburse the department the secretary will take legal measures to secure the amount due .
the department may in addition remove the contractor from its list of approved prequalified contractors according to regulations .
d final settlement of contract .
final contract settlement will occur when the secretary certifies to the state treasurer the amount due in final payment and contract settlement after making all legal and equitable additions and deductions including amounts previously paid according to the contract terms the terms of written or approved work orders and the terms of an award if any of the board of claims .
the department will forward a copy of the final settlement certificate setting forth the final settlement date .
copies will also be forwarded to the surety and other appropriate interested agencies .
e final settlement certificate on related contracts .
where work has been done for a political subdivision of the state or other agency by means of approved related contract or contracts under the specifications and department supervision the secretary will forward a copy of the acceptance certificate to the proper authorities .
the final settlement certificate in such cases will be certified to the proper authorities for payment after approval by the secretary or authorized representative instead of to the state treasurer as provided for work done for the state .
num release of final paymentsthe secretary will authorize interest payments on the final payment due at the rate of num per annum beginning num calendar days after the date of physical work completion and running until the date when payment is made .
if payment for an item or items is withheld due to a lack of required information from the contractor interest charges for the item or items will not begin to accrue until num days after the date the representative receives the information required for payment .
for projects financed with bonds interest will be payable at the rate of interest of the bond issue or at the rate of num per annum whichever is less .
foreign corporations and their sureties will not be discharged from liability on the bond nor the bond surrendered until the corporation files the following with the department a certificate from the department of revenue proving the payment in full of all bonus taxes penalties and interest and a certificate from the bureau of employment and unemployment compensation of the department of labor and industry as required by the act of june num num p.l .
num num p.s .
num .
num evaluation disposition and adjusted payment of low strength cement concretethe following outlines procedures for the evaluation disposition and adjusted payment of low strength cement concrete .
use the concrete specification flowchart section nume as a visual guide to these procedures .
a general .
low strength castinplace cement concrete will be evaluated using the compressive strength of concrete cylinder or concrete core test specimens .
the requirements of this specification do not apply to concrete construction performed as specified in section num. b definitions .
numb numc num num change no .
num fnumday .
numday minimum mix design concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch as specified in section num table a. fc .
numday structural design concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch as specified in section num table a. fnumcyl .
numday concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch of acceptance cylinders representing a specific concrete lot .
determined as the average of the compressive strength testing of two cylinders molded from the same sample .
fnumcyl .
when specified for bridge decks only numday concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch of acceptance cylinders and qc cylinders representing a specific concrete lot .
determined as the average of each set of compressive strength testing of two cylinders molded from the same sample .
the lower of the two averages will be used in the calculation of payment .
fcores .
numday concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch of concrete test cores representing a specific concrete nonbridge deck lot .
determined as the average of the compressive strength tests of the cores and calculated according to ptm no .
num .
fcs .
minimum acceptable concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch as specified in section num table b .
cup .
contract unit price of inplace concrete as shown in the bid items or for lump sum structure items the component item schedule .
this value represents the cost of the inplace concrete only and does not include the cost of reinforcing steel .
the cost of stayinplace formwork and other incidental items is to be included in the contract unit price .
lot .
lot size cubic yards .
table b minimum concrete compressive strength requirements class of concrete use minimum fcs psi aaap bridge deck num aaa other num aa paving num h.e.s .
paving num aa structures and misc .
num a num c num h.e.s .
num c evaluation disposition and payment of low strength cement concrete using acceptance cylinders .
if fnumcyl representing a specific concrete lot fails to meet the fnumday for the specified class of concrete the concrete may be considered deficient .
disposition of the low strength concrete will be determined as follows num .
fnumcyl fc .
if fnumcyl is greater than or equal to fc and the corresponding qc test result is greater than or equal to fc the concrete lot may be accepted at an adjusted payment .
the adjusted payment will be calculated as specified in section numdnum with fcoresfnumcyl .
as an alternative within num working days of notification of deficient fnumcyl request permission of the representative in writing to extract concrete cores from the deficient lot of concrete .
if this alternative is permitted the procedures specified in section numd for extracting and evaluating the core specimens will be followed .
when coring is approved final disposition of the low strength cement concrete will be determined based solely on the numc numd num num change no .
num compressive strength of core specimens fcores .
the acceptance cylinder strength will no longer be used .
num .
fcyl fc .
num.a nonbridge deck lots .
extract core specimens from the deficient lot of concrete .
notification to core will be given by the representative within num working days after receiving acceptance cylinder test results .
use the procedures specified in section numd for extracting and evaluating the core specimens .
num.b bridge deck lots .
conduct compressive strength testing at numdays .
if fnumcyl fc the lot will be accepted at full payment .
if fnumcyl fc the adjusted payment will be calculated as specified in section numdnum .
using fnumcyl for fcores .
d evaluation disposition and payment of low strength cement concrete using concrete core specimens .
core locations will be randomly selected within the deficient lot of concrete according to ptm no .
num .
obtain cores under the direction and supervision of the representative within num week of notification at no additional cost to the department .
obtain five cores from the deficient lot of concrete .
obtain cores according to ptm no .
num except as follows obtain numinch diameter cores which are free of reinforcing steel .
a pachometer will be used to locate the reinforcing steel .
if numinch diameter cores free of reinforcing steel can not be obtained smaller diameter cores may be allowed provided the core diameter is at least three times the nominal maximum size of the coarse aggregate used in the concrete mix but not less than num inches .
deliver cores immediately to the representative .
cores will be delivered to the lts within num working days .
cores will be prepared for testing according to ptm no .
num and compressive strength testing will be conducted according to ptm no .
num .
the compressive strength test results of the core specimens will be evaluated to determine material acceptance and adjusted payment .
disposition of the low strength concrete will be determined as follows num .
acceptance .
material acceptance for the lot of low strength cement concrete will be determined using the minimum fcs value for the specified class of concrete as specified in section numb table b and the average of the compressive strength test results of the core specimens fcores or fnumcyl when applicable .
if fcores meet the minimum compressive strength listed in table c the lot of low strength cement concrete will be considered acceptable .
adjusted payment will be computed as specified in section numdnum .
if fcores does not meet the minimum compressive strength listed in table c the lot of low strength cement concrete will be considered deficient .
remove and replace deficient lot of concrete at no additional cost to the department unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive .
remove and replace reinforcement steel damaged as a result of the concrete removal process and not conforming to requirements specified in sections num and num at no additional cost to the department .
under certain specific circumstances the district executive may approve allowing deficient concrete to remain in place .
this approval may be granted only if all of the following conditions are met the contractor must request in writing that the lot of deficient concrete remain in place .
an engineering analysis of the deficient concrete is performed at no expense to the department .
adjusted payment for the lot of deficient concrete left in place will be exactly num of the contract unit price cup of the contract item .
the contractor provides a signed document waiving the right to pursue a claim as a result of the reduced payment for the lot of concrete .
num .
payment .
adjusted payment for lot of low strength cement concrete will be computed using the payment numd numd num num change no .
num factors specified in table c. the applicable payment factor will be determined using the fc value for the specified class of concrete as specified in section num table a the minimum fcs value of the specified class of concrete as specified in section numb table b including a num pounds per square inch and the average of the compressive strength test results of the core specimens fcores .
adjusted payment a x cup x lot table c low strength concrete payment factors a average of compressive strength test results of core specimens fcores payment factor a fc num fcs num num fcs num num fcs num num fcs num num nume nume num num change no .
num e concrete specification flowchart .
continue curing as per the prescribed methods and durations .
continue field cure until numday specification strength is obtained or numday maximum .
yes no does result meet numday specification strength criteria does result meet form removal specification strength criteria yes no formwork can be removed .
keep formwork in place until form removal strength is obtained .
perform qc test for numday compressive strength .
perform qc test for form removal compressive strength .
acceptance testing start obtain random concrete sample where directed .
plastic concrete slump and air content tests will be performed .
quality control testing mold sufficient number of qc cylinders field cure .
see inset box below .
four acceptance cylinders will be molded standard cure .
a perform qc test for live load compressive strength .
b minimum number of qc cylinders num form removal strength num numday compressive strength num live load strength num numday compressive strength num numday compressive strength bridge decks only backup cylinders as required when necessary nume nume num num change no .
num no no contractor will be notified to core within num days of receiving test results .
are fnum cyl and fnumcyl qc fc no yes contractor can request permission of the representative to extract concrete cores or accept adjusted payment based on fnumcyl .
cores or cylinder cylinders adjusted payment will be as per section numcnum .
extract core specimens to determine concrete acceptance .
contractors request to core within num working days of notification of fnum cyl test results .
cores deliver cores to representative immediately after drilling .
cores will be delivered to the lts within num working days .
c yes yes yes a is fnum cyl qc fnumday acceptance test for numday compressive strength will be performed .
yes no ok to apply live load to concrete lot .
placement of live load on concrete lot is not permitted until live load specification strength is obtained .
does result meet live load specification strength criteria b perform qc test for numday compressive strength .
is fnum cyl fnumday concrete lot may be accepted at full pay if fnum cyl fnumday .
is fnum cyl qc fc no is it a deck lot d yes no nume nume num num change no .
num fcs acceptability will be calculated as per section numdnum .
cores will be tested in accordance with ptm procedures .
concrete lot is deficient .
remove and replace unless directed in writing by the district executive .
is lot acceptable yes no c fc acceptability will be calculated as per section numd.num .
adjusted payment will be calculated using core strength as per section numdnum .
fnumcyl tests will be performed .
is fnum cyl fc concrete lot may be accepted at full pay .
fcs acceptability will be calculated as per section numdnum .
is lot acceptable yes no yes fc acceptability will be calculated as per section numd.num .
adjusted payment will be calculated using fnumcyl as per section numdnum .
concrete lot is deficient .
remove and replace unless directed in writing by the district executive .
d no num numd num num change no .
num num evaluation disposition and adjusted payment of prestressed concrete beams a general .
low strength concrete prestress beams will be evaluated using the compressive strength of concrete cylinder or concrete core test specimens .
b definitions .
fnumday .
numday minimum concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch as specified on the approved shop drawings .
fcyl .
numday concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch of acceptance cylinders representing a beam .
determined as the average of the compressive strength of two or more cylinders .
fr .
minimum concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch for transfer of prestress as indicated .
fcores .
concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch of acceptance cores extracted from a beam .
determined as the average compressive strength of the cores as determined by ptm no .
num .
fbp .
fabricated beam price .
c evaluation disposition and payment of low strength prestressed concrete beams using acceptance cylinders .
if fcyl representing a specific beam fails to meet the fnumday for the specified design the beam will be considered deficient .
if fcyl fr the beam will be rejected .
if fcyl fr perform structural calculation based on fcyl for the prestressed beam .
calculations must include all the original design considerations and be performed by a professional engineer registered in the state .
submit calculations to the bdtds structural materials section for review by the appropriate engineering district .
these calculations must be submitted within num weeks of notification that fcyl was deficient .
if the structural calculations show that the beam is not acceptable to the department the beam will be rejected .
if the structural calculations show that the beam is serviceable in accordance with section numc the beam will be accepted and the adjusted payment will be computed as follows adjusted payment ab x num num x fbp where a fcyl fr b fnumday fr as an alternative within num working days of notification of deficient fcyl request permission of the chief structural materials engineer in writing to extract five concrete cores from the deficient beam .
if this alternate is permitted the procedures specified in section numd for extracting and evaluating the core specimens will be followed .
when coring is approved final disposition of the low strength beam will be determined based solely on the compressive strength of core specimens .
the acceptance cylinder strength will no longer be used .
d evaluation disposition and payment of low strength prestressed concrete beams using cores .
when coring is approved by the chief structural materials engineer obtain cores under the direction and supervision of the representative or his or her designate within num week of notification at no additional cost to the department .
obtain five cores one from each fifth of the deficient strength beam according to ptm no .
num .
obtain cores from the portion of the beam that does not contain prestressing strands .
use a pachometer if necessary to avoid damage to the stirrups or strands .
patch holes left after coring using an approved patching material from a manufacturer listed in bulletin no .
num or the approved concrete mix design .
deliver the cores to the representative immediately upon drilling .
cores will be delivered to the lts within num working days of obtaining them .
no cores will be tested at an age of greater than num days .
cores will be prepared for testing according to ptm no .
num and compressive strength testing will be conducted according to ptm no .
num .
the fcore and standard deviations of three cores will be determined and the results sent to the supplier of the prestress beam .
if fcore fnumday the beam will be accepted at full payment no structural analysis is required .
numd numa num num change no .
num if fcore falls below fr the beam will be rejected .
if s num pounds per square inch and fcore s fr the beam will also be rejected .
if s num pounds per square inch or fcore s fr perform structural calculations based on fcore and submit these to the structural materials section as specified in section numc .
if the structural calculations show that the beam is not acceptable to the department the beam will be rejected .
if the structural calculations show that the beam is serviceable in accordance with section numc the beam will be accepted at an adjusted payment .
the adjusted payment will be calculated using the equation specified in section numc except that fcore will be used in place of fcyl .
num price adjustment for diesel fuel cost fluctuations a general .
these requirements provide for a price adjustment in the form of a payment to the contractor or a rebate to the department for fluctuations in the cost of diesel fuel consumed in the performance of applicable construction work .
these requirements apply to contract items as grouped by category .
category descriptions and the fuel usage factors which are applicable to each are as follows num .
categories .
num.a category aearthwork .
contract items performed under sections num num and num including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered earthwork .
the sum of the plan quantity for each applicable item in the category must exceed num cubic yards .
if the sum of the plan quantity for each applicable item in the category exceeds num cubic yards but is less than or equal to num cubic yards the earthwork will be considered small excavation for adjustment purposes .
if the total of the plan quantity for each applicable item in the category exceeds num cubic yards the earthwork will be considered large excavation for adjustment purposes .
excluding presplit blasting and cleaning existing ditches .
num.b category bsubbase and aggregate base courses .
contract items constructed under sections num num num num num num num num and publication num items msnum msnum msnum msnum msnum and msnum including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be preformed is considered construction of a subbase or aggregate base course .
the sum of the plan quantity for each applicable item in the category must exceed num tons .
when the coarse aggregate and bituminous material are measured and paid for under separate contract items price adjustments when applicable will be computed based on the coarse aggregate item quantity ton only as paid on current estimates .
num.c category cflexible bases pavements pavement patching and shoulders .
contract items constructed under sections num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and publication num items msnum msnum msnum msnum ms num msnum msnum msnum msnum and msnum including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered construction of a flexible base pavement pavement patch or shoulder .
the sum of the plan quantity for each applicable item in the category must exceed num tons .
when measured and paid for on a material used basis price adjustments when applicable will be computed based on the coarse aggregate item quantity square yards only as paid on current estimates .
for seal coats surface treatments paid on an area basis a depth equal to the maximum allowable size of the type of aggregate used as specified in section num table c will be assumed .
excluding shoulder backfill .
num.d category drigid bases pavements pavement patching and shoulders .
contract items constructed under sections num num num num num num num num num num num and num including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered construction of a rigid base pavement pavement patch or shoulder .
the sum of the plan quantity for each applicable item in the category must numa numa num num change no .
num exceed num square yards .
excluding patching joint new pavement joint and subbase material for concrete pavement patching .
excluding concrete overlay transition concrete pavement cores cement concrete and surface preparation for concrete overlay .
num.e category e structures .
structure work i.e .
new construction or structure rehabilitation tabulated on an sdrawing or bpaadrawing whether the work is measured and paid for under a lump sum contract item numxxxxxxx series plus one or more associated contract items or under one or more separate contract items excluding any component items or associated contract items for fabricated structural steel prestressed concrete bridge beams bearings bearing pads andor any designrelated work such as might be included in a designbuild project or when an alternate design structure is bid .
any contract item tabulated on an sdrawing or bpaadrawing as being a roadway item is to be included as are the following contract items whether or not tabulated on an sdrawing or bpaadrawing removal of existing bridge culvert superstructure removal of portion of existing bridge culvert painting of existing structural steel i.e .
contract items performed under sections num and num including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered painting of existing structural steel containment i.e .
contract items within the numxxxx series and causeway construction and removal i.e .
any contract item where the item description includes the word causeway .
the value of all structure work on the project i.e .
the sum of the value of each applicable component item or contract item in the category must exceed num .
item value is defined as the contract item or component item quantity as indicated on the sdrawing bpaadrawing or roadway drawing multiplied by the contract unit price or component item unit price as applicable .
num.f category fmilling .
contract items constructed under sections num and num including any modified standard or nonstandard item where the character of the work to be performed is considered milling .
the sum of the plan quantity for each applicable item in the category must exceed num cubic yards .
num .
diesel fuel usage factors category factor units a earthwork small excavation large excavation num num gallons per cubic yard gallons per cubic yard b subbase and aggregate base courses num gallons per ton c flexible bases and pavements num gallons per ton drigid bases and pavements num gallons per cubic yard e structures num gallons per num of work performed f milling num gallons per cubic yard num .
quantity conversion factors category conversion factor b square yard to ton num lbsinch of depthsquare yard numa numc num num change no .
num b cubic yard to ton num lbscubic yard c square yard to ton num lbsinch of depthsquare yard d square yard to cubic yard inches of depthnum f square yard to cubic yard inches of depthnum for variable depth milling an average milling depth of num inches will be assumed .
for profile milling an average milling depth of num inch will be assumed .
b index prices .
the department posts a monthly index price for ultra low sulfur uls no .
num diesel fuel using price data obtained on the last wednesday of the preceding month from the oil price information service opis which publishes a weekly report on gasoline and distillate reseller prices for cities in the eastern u.s. price data reported for harrisburg philadelphia and pittsburgh are averaged together to determine the statewide index price .
the price index in the proposal fb will be the index price posted by the department determined as specified above for the month in which the project is advertised .
the price index at the time of performance fp will be the index price posted by the department determined as specified above for the month during which applicable contract work is performed .
c price adjustment criteria and conditions .
the following criteria and conditions will be considered in determining a price adjustment for diesel fuel cost fluctuations .
num .
no price adjustment .
when the ratio fpfb falls within the range of num to num no price adjustment will be made for any diesel fuel consumed in construction work performed during the relevant month .
num .
price rebate .
when the ratio fpfb is calculated to be less than num the department will receive an automatic price rebate determined in accordance with the following formula p.r .
num fpfbqfbf where p.r .
price rebate fp price index for the month during which the diesel fuel is consumed in the performance of applicable construction work .
fb price index in the proposal q quantity of eligible category items as reported on current estimates .
item quantities will be converted as necessary to agree with the units associated with the applicable diesel fuel usage factor .
f diesel fuel usage factor num .
price increase .
when the ratio fpfb is calculated to be greater than num the contractor will receive a price increase to be determined in accordance with the following formula p.i .
fpfb numqfbf where p.i .
price increase fp price index for month during which the diesel duel is consumed in the performance of applicable construction work .
fb price index in the proposal q quantity of eligible category items as reported on current estimates .
item quantities will be converted as necessary to agree with the units associated with the applicable diesel fuel usage factor numc numc num num change no .
num f diesel fuel usage factor num .
paymentrebate .
the price adjustment will be paid or rebated upon approval of a contract adjustment to be prepared on a quarterly basis .
quarterly price adjustments amounting to less than num will be disregarded .
num .
expiration of contract time .
when eligible items of work are performed after expiration of contract time and liquidated damages are chargeable the value of fp used to compute the price adjustment will be either the price index at the time of actual performance or the price index at the time contract time expired whichever is less .
num .
final quantities .
upon completion of the work and determination of final pay quantities a final contract adjustment may be prepared to reconcile any difference between estimated quantities previously paid and the final pay quantities .
in this situation the value for fp used in the price adjustment formula will be the average of all fp s previously used for computing price adjustments .
num .
inspection of records .
the department through the office of inspector general reserves the right to inspect the records of the prime contractor and its subcontractors and material suppliers to ascertain actual pricing and cost information for the diesel fuel used in the performance of applicable items of work .
num .
extra work .
when applicable items of work as specified herein are added to the contract as extra work as specified in section num no price adjustment will be made for fluctuations in the cost of diesel fuel consumed in the performance of the extra work unless otherwise approved by the representative at the time written authorization to perform the extra work is submitted .
the current price for diesel fuel is to be used when preparing required backup data for extra work to be performed at a negotiated price .
for extra work performed on force account basis reimbursement for material equipment and service by others costs along with specified overhead and profit markups will be considered to include full compensation for the current cost of diesel fuel .
num evaluation disposition and price adjustment of low strength precast concrete products a general .
low strength precast concrete products will be evaluated using the compressive strength of concrete core test specimens .
this policy applies to non prestressed precast concrete products where the minimum structural design strength is equal to the numday minimum concrete compressive strength .
where precast concrete products are designed with a minimum structural concrete strength less than the numday minimum compressive strength evaluation and disposition will be in accordance with section num. b definitions .
fnumday .
numday minimum concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch as specified on the standard drawings or on the approved shop drawings .
fcyl .
numday concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch of acceptance cylinders representing the lot of precast concrete products .
determined as the average of the compressive strength of two or more cylinders .
fcores .
concrete compressive strength pounds per square inch of acceptance cores extracted from the precast concrete products .
determined as the average compressive strength of all cores from the lot as determined according to ptm no .
num .
lot .
one shifts production and produced from a single mix design at the same watercement ratio .
c evaluation and disposition of low strength precast concrete products using cores .
if fcyl representing a specific lot of precast concrete products fails to meet the fnumday for the specific product the lot of precast concrete products will be considered deficient .
request permission from the chief structural materials engineer in writing to extract cores from the deficient lot within num working days following testing and determination that fcyl f numday obtain cores under the direction and supervision of the representative or his or her designate within num working days following authorization for coring numc numd num num change no .
num and evaluation at no additional cost to the department .
the representative will affix their inspection stamp using indelible ink on each core to provide verification and traceability .
deliver cores to the lts within num working days from the date coring and evaluation was approved .
use a pachometer to avoid damage to the reinforcing steel .
patch holes left after coring using the approved concrete mix design or an approved concrete repair material a manufacturer listed in bulletin num that will achieve the minimum concrete design strength .
for products with architectural finishes obtain advance approval for the repair methods and materials from the department .
determine the total number of cores required for evaluation of the lot from the cube root of the number of precast concrete products produced for that lot rounded to the nearest whole number .
a minimum of five cores are required regardless of the lot size .
cores will be obtained and compressive strength testing conducted according to ptm no .
num .
if fcores fnumday the lot of precast concrete products is considered serviceable in accordance with section numc and will be accepted .
if fcores fnumday the lot is considered deficient and will be rejected .
d price adjustment and payment for low strength concrete acceptance testing using concrete core specimens .
if a specific lot of precast concrete products is determined to be deficient by failing to meet fcyl fnumday but is considered serviceable by meeting fcores fnumday the lot will be accepted and the contract unit price cup will be reduced by num for the lot .
num numc num num initial edition section numdelay claims num compensable delaysthe department is responsible for delay damages arising only from delays created by its negligent acts or omissions and from utility infrastructure and utility adjustment delays as specified in section num .
unless otherwise specified assume the risk of damages from all other causes of delay .
num general conditions concerning delay claimsbecause of the nature and extent of damages arising out of work that has been delayed of the need for the department to be made aware of potential delay claims promptly after the cause or causes of delay have arisen so that recordkeeping can begin and of the parties intent to have all such claims as fully documented as possible strict adherence to the provisions of this section is an essential condition precedent to filing a delay claim with the board of claims .
the following items of damage can not be included in any delay claim against the department profit loss of profit labor inefficiencies home office overhead including but not limited to costs of any kind for home office personnel and consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency .
num notification of delay claimnotwithstanding the provisions specified in section num within num calendar days of any negligent act or omission of the department or of any utility infrastructure or utility adjustment delay as specified in section num notify the inspectorincharge that operations have been or will be delayed and that a claim for delay damages either is going to or might be filed with the board of claims .
confirm such notification in writing to the district executive within num calendar days of such notification to the inspectorincharge .
num proceduresupon notifying the inspectorincharge as provided above keep records on a daily basis of all labor material equipment and site overhead expenses for all operations that are affected by the delay .
identify in such daily records each operation and the station or stations thereof affected by the delay .
the departments forces will also keep daily records of all labor equipment material and site overhead expenses for all operations affected by the delay .
on each monday compare the previous weeks daily records with those kept by the department and review for accuracy .
report to the district executive within num calendar days of each such review all disagreements with such records .
refusal or failure to meet to review the departments records or to report disagreements with such records will create an irrebuttable presumption in favor of the department that its records are accurate .
make no claim for delay costs of any kind allegedly incurred before notifying the inspectorincharge that operations have been delayed .
on a weekly basis prepare and submit to the inspectorincharge written reports containing the following information a the number of days behind schedule .
b an identification of all operations that have been or are to be delayed .
c an explanation of how the departments negligent act or omission or the utility infrastructure or utility adjustment as specified in section num delayed each operation and an estimation of how much time is required to complete the project .
numd numd num num initial edition d an itemization of all extra costs being incurred including an explanation as to how those extra costs including site overhead costs relate to the delay and how they are being calculated and measured an identification of all project employees for whom costs are being compiled and an identification of the manufacturers numbers for all items of equipment for which costs are being compiled .
upon completion of the project submit to the inspectorincharge and the district executive copies of a report containing the following information an itemization and explanation of the measurement and basis of all extra costs being sought including all reports certified by an accountant a description of the operations that were delayed including all reports by scheduling experts or other consultants if any all actions taken by the contractor to minimize the delay and to minimize the delay costs incurred an asbuilt chart cpm scheme or other diagram depicting in graphic form how the operations were adversely affected and for delays related to utility infrastructure and utility adjustments an explanation of why the delay was unforeseen based on the contract documents and a careful prebid examination of the project site or of any waste or borrow sites designated in the proposal .
the district executive will review the submission and any reports prepared by the inspectorincharge .
if in the opinion of the district executive the department is not liable for any delay a written decision will be issued .
comply with the provisions of section num if the district executives decision is disputed .
if the district executive determines that the department delayed operations a review of the damages claimed will be made and a written decision will be issued .
comply with the provisions of section num if the district executives decision is disputed .
for operation delayed by a utility infrastructure or utility adjustment as specified in section num concurrence of the district executives decision by the director of project delivery is also required .
only expenses for extra labor material equipment and site overhead will be considered by the department .
ten percent will be added to these costs to cover allocable home office overhead .
likewise in the event a delay claim is filed with the board of claims only the foregoing expenses may be claimed .
when computing additional equipment expenses do not use in any way the rental rate blue book for construction equipment or any other rental rate book .
for equipment that is owned use actual records kept in the usual course of business and compute increased ownership expenses pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles gaap .
for equipment that is rented or leased use the rental agreement or actual invoices to compute increased rental expenses .
equipment that is rented or leased from an entity that is a division affiliate or subsidiary of or that is in any other way related to the contractor or its parent company will be considered owned equipment .
num num num num initial edition section numproject records num scopethis section pertains to all project records that were used to prepare and compute the bid to prepare all schedules used on the project to record the progress of work on the project and to record compute andor analyze all costs incurred on the project including those used in the preparation or presentation of claims to the department or the board of claims .
num definitioncharts graphs crosssections plans photographs schedules reports accounting statements accounting ledgers balance sheets bid sheets takeoff sheets cost estimates cost records payroll records financial documents notes memoranda correspondence and all other records whether typewritten handwritten computerized microfilmed photographed or recorded that were prepared by or received by the contractor .
num retention periodretain the aforementioned project records for a period of num years from the date of receipt of final payment with the following exception if any litigation claim or audit is started before the expiration of the numyear period retain the records until all litigations claims or audit findings involving the records have been resolved .
num inspectionupon written notice by the representative or an authorized agent acting on behalf of the department make available all requested project records for inspection and copying by department personnel or those authorized to act on its behalf .
make such records available at a reasonable time and place .
refusal or repeated failure to present requested project records for inspection or copying may be considered grounds for declaring the contractor in default and may be considered against prequalification for work on future projects .
exempt from this section are all project records which under the pennsylvania rules of civil procedure are deemed confidential and therefore exempt from discovery .
num release of electronic version of project plan filesafter executing the contract the department may if requested in writing provide the existing available electronic version of the project plan files the commonwealth of pennsylvanias commonwealths intellectual property to the contractor subject to the terms and conditions of this specification .
the departments project manager will determine the content of the electronic files to be released .
the department does not warrant or guarantee the information and data in the electronic version of the project plan files as a substitute for the sound engineering judgment of the contractor .
do not assume any proprietary rights to or interest in the commonwealths intellectual property .
hold maintain and protect the commonwealths intellectual property in the strictest confidence .
do not transfer any translated or converted form of the information or data in any manner without written permission of the department .
do not copy distribute sell rent sublicense or lease the commonwealths intellectual property to any third parties or use the files or any translated or converted form of the files to produce market or support contractor owned products .
the provisions set forth in this paragraph are not intended to supplant a contractors right to allow access to its subcontractors .
after payment of the final invoice for work and services provided by the contractor as part of the contract one electronic copy of the information and data contained in the commonwealths intellectual property or any translated or converted form of its intellectual property may be retained for archival purposes only .
however all rights in the intellectual property including documents sketches drawings designs papers reports computer programs data computer documentation and other tangible materials authored prepared and transmitted by the department constitute and remain the intellectual property of the commonwealth .
the electronic version of the project plan files are provided by the department as is without any covenant representation or warranty of any kind or nature whatsoever express or implied .
indemnify and hold harmless the department its officials and employees for any injury to the person or property of third parties arising out of the use of or any defect in the commonwealths intellectual property or any translated or converted form of these files or any num num num num initial edition accompanying documentation .
all copies of the commonwealths intellectual property remain the property of the commonwealth acting through department and any rights involving the copyright law patent law trademark law and trade secret law remain with the commonwealth .
all goodwill remains with the commonwealth .
num num num num initial edition section num earthwork section numclearing and grubbing num descriptionthis work is removal of the first num inches of topsoil and organic material .
removal of topsoil and organic matter such as trees stumps brush roots and other vegetation within the limits of grading including ditches and channels .
when indicated perform tree trimming and selective tree removal outside of the limits of grading as specified in section num .
removal of objectionable material rubbish and junk within the project limits .
removal of buildings and structures fences walls guide rail posts guide rails signs direction markers and other obstructions interfering with the work .
disposal of removed material .
salvaging temporarily storing and delivering of material .
obtaining of waste areas for disposal of material as specified in section num .
stockpiling of topsoil mixture as specified in section num .
chipping and stockpiling wood waste material if specified in the special provisions .
num constructionclear and grub before the start of grading operations in an area .
the contractor may remove stumps within excavation areas during grading .
replace suitable material and topsoil that is required on the project and was wasted during clearing and grubbing operations at no expense to the department .
do not damage trees or other vegetation beyond the grading limits .
install protective fencing as indicated as specified in section num before clearing and grubbing operations .
clear the ground of organic matter within excavation areas .
remove stumps and roots to a depth of at least num feet below subgrade or slope surfaces .
remove organic matter and topsoil within embankment areas to a depth of num inches below the existing ground to num feet beyond the pavement edges .
beyond num feet of the pavement edges and within the embankment area cut trees and stumps flush with the ground surface .
remove remaining topsoil over num inches in depth when directed as specified in section num .
stockpile removed topsoil as specified in section num .
trees and shrubs along a highway previously opened to traffic belong to the property owner .
surrender all material from the removal of trees and shrubs to the owner of the abutting property .
dispose of the trees and shrubs if the owner refuses to accept the wood .
transport wood chips to approved stockpile areas that will not interfere with construction operations obstruct drainage or cause water pollution .
num num num num initial edition dispose of material in an approved waste area unless otherwise specified in the special provisions or burn if permitted .
comply with the requirements of the air pollution control act act num or as amended the solid waste management act act num or as amended and the permits specified in section numa whichever are applicable .
do not burn within num feet of remaining vegetation .
recondition the sites of fires as specified in section num .
when an enclosure fence is partly or wholly within the right of way notify the property owner num days in advance of clearing and grubbing operations to allow the owner to make necessary arrangements to restore the enclosure .
upon failure of the property owner to proceed with work required to enclose the property carefully remove the fence within the right of way and neatly pile material on the owners property adjacent to the right of way .
num measurement and paymentlump sum if no item of work is provided in the contract this work is incidental to the other contract items .
num numa num num initial edition section numtotal demolition or partial demolition of buildings and other structures num descriptionthis work is total or partial demolition of buildings and other structures as indicated .
the following definitions apply a total demolition .
total demolition and removal of indicated buildings and other structures located wholly within the right of way .
b partial demolition .
partial demolition and removal of indicated buildings and other structures located partly within the right of way .
demolish and remove only the portion within the right of way unless the owner of the remaining portion requests and authorizes total demolition in writing .
c refinishing party walls .
demolition of indicated buildings or other structures to the party wall that separates them from another building or structure outside the right of way .
refinishing of the exposed portion of the party wall including the party wall foundation .
num material a cement type is ip or ii .
section num b fine aggregate type a .
section num c lime .
section num d water .
section num e emulsified asphalt class enum or enum .
section num f caulking compound .
section num g other material .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
metal mesh lath num pounds per square yardfss qqlnuma roofing material num pounds per rollastm d num insulating boardastm c num types i and ii grades num and num asphalt masticfss sscnum num construction a general .
confine movements and operations to the existing rightofway limits .
do not deposit construction material junk debris or rubbish on private property .
do not enter private property without first obtaining the written consent of the property owner or owners and filing a copy of the consent with the department .
the department will obtain the vacation of all buildings or structures to be demolished as expeditiously as possible .
the department does not guarantee that all facilities will be vacated and available in sufficient time to allow systematic operations .
the department does not assume responsibility for the condition of the various buildings or loss of fixtures equipment material or other objects between submittal of the proposal and actual possession of the buildings .
numa numd num num initial edition remove and dispose of material taken from within the project limits as well as debris and rubbish except items of personal property belonging to owners or tenants and material required for backfilling .
remove material from the project limits as it accumulates or as directed .
conduct no sale of material while within the project limits .
comply with the requirements outlined in pennsylvanias asbestos occupations accreditation and certification act of num acts num and num as well as federal national emission standard for hazardous air pollutants neshap regulations for providing notification to all state and county agencies having regulatory enforcement responsibility for demolition and asbestos abatement projects prior to the start of any such work .
such notification should be made using the asbestos abatement and demolitionrenovation notification form which may be obtained by contacting the dep asbestos office at num num or the nearest dep regional office .
the form may also be obtained here .
b safety regulations .
furnish erect and maintain barricades steady burn lights flashing warning lights and warning and keep out signs where the placing of such protective devices is warranted or as directed .
provide erect light and maintain suitable footway shelter platforms as required by law or as directed .
control dust resulting from demolition .
comply with the national emission standard for asbestos as contained in the federal register vol .
num no .
num. c utility disconnections .
before starting work make arrangements with the proper authorities for turning off and disconnecting utilities in connection with demolition operations .
perform the work according to local requirements .
when only a portion of an occupied building is to be demolished conduct demolition and related operations without interrupting utility service to the remaining portion of the building .
make permanent reconnections where it is necessary to reconnect facilities to the undemolished portion of the building .
d demolition .
submit a demolition plan to the representative at least num weeks before beginning demolition .
provide a rodent control plan if directed .
before beginning demolition pump out and clean wells cesspools and outbuildings within the areas to be cleared in a sanitary manner .
disinfect all such structures as required by the appropriate health authorities then backfill to the adjacent ground level .
do not interfere with functioning wells cisterns cesspools or other ground openings outside the condemned area .
securely and permanently cap well casings .
cut off and cap pipes leading into or out of abandoned wells or wells to be demolished .
where the uncondemned portion of a property has been abandoned cover backfill or treat wells and other openings that constitute a hazard or dangerous condition .
before proceeding with this work obtain the consent of the owner or owners in writing .
leave contiguous buildings in a safe condition .
do not deface mar or jeopardize them .
repair damage and restore them as directed .
remove existing fences and guide rail posts unless otherwise directed .
do not disturb existing curbs sidewalks and street paving unless directed .
do not use a swinging ball immediately adjacent to any public thoroughfare or in any area where its use may create a public hazard .
do not set fire to any structure .
burn debris only with written permission of local police or fire authorities and if the burning conforms to state air pollution control commission regulations .
do not begin burning debris until the department receives a copy of the written permission .
ensure that the demolition work is strictly confined within the limits of the indicated temporary construction area without hazard to adjacent properties or to the public .
do not demolish chimneys common to adjacent properties .
do not disturb these chimneys other than to give them support as necessary for continued stability .
repoint and cap as directed .
restrict partial demolition to horizontal operations one floor of each structure at a time .
progressively demolish a structures except for the stripping of fixtures from top to bottom one floor at a time .
the contractor may perform bay or sectionaltype demolition provided a detailed plan including the buildings structural framework is submitted and accepted before beginning the work .
progressively demolish bay or sectionaltype structures from top to bottom as well .
completely demolish each bay or section before starting operations on any adjacent bay or section .
remove each bay or section in a manner that maintains the integrity and proper support of adjacent bays or sections .
numd nume num num initial edition if only a portion of a building is to be demolished adequately shore brace and support the remaining part to maintain the integrity of remaining walls floors and roofs and their supporting members .
construct shoring bracing and supports to be outside the right of way .
tightly board up and seal the remaining portion of a partially demolished building along the rightofway line .
construct the new closure and connections to the remaining portion of the building in a satisfactory manner and make them weatherproof .
provide a closure of adequately braced lumber studding placed not more than num inches apart with plywood or equal facing without holes tightly and securely nailed to the studding .
cover the plywood facing with two layers of smooth finished roofing material .
overlap the roofing material by not less than num inches .
where demolition involves severance through a cellar or other subsurface opening immediately erect a numinch thick cement masonry wall adjacent to and wholly outside the right of way .
provide a wall extending from num inches below the existing cellar floor to the elevation of the top of adjacent cellar walls .
integrally connect the new wall to the existing adjacent walls .
demolish wall portions above the first floor that are located immediately adjacent to and parallel to any street .
remove walls and foundations except required party walls as indicated to an elevation num feet below the adjacent sidewalk elevation .
clear partition walls and columns of any nature in cellars or in other subsurface openings to their floor elevations .
fill in and repair holes breaks or depressions in remaining walls with brick and cement mortar .
rough cast repaired areas with cement mortar so that they are left in a safe and weatherproof condition .
remove floor construction above cellars .
remove basement partitions furnaces heating apparatus piping fuel tanks miscellaneous fixtures and stairways from the demolition area .
store material suitable for backfill that may be encountered in the demolition until the walls are down .
e refinishing party walls .
where indicated or directed cap party walls and restore by insulating and plastering to an acceptable finish .
before work thoroughly clean the party wall of old plaster sand and dirt .
rake pit joints in the brickwork to a minimum depth of num inch as directed .
water joints and repoint while damp .
num .
insulating coating .
if the wall has an average thickness of less than num inches apply an insulating coating as follows evenly spread a heavy coating of cold asphalt mastic over the entire wall surface .
fit press in place and securely bond insulating boards numinch by numfoot by numfoot stock to the asphalt mastic .
caulk joints between the insulating boards with emulsified asphalt or caulking compound to obtain a uniform and finished appearance .
num .
cement plaster coating .
num.a metal mesh lath .
place metal mesh lath against the insulating coating and securely attach with acceptable devices .
if an insulating coating is not required securely attach the metal mesh lath directly to the wall using acceptable devices penetrating the mortar and not the brick .
repair damage to the mortar bond or interior of the wall to the satisfaction of the representative .
num.b cement plaster .
do not plaster until the preceding operations have been inspected and accepted .
do not plaster when the outside air temperature is below numf .
extend the plaster from the roofline or wall top to the established ground line or as directed .
provide a total thickness of finished plaster not less than num inch .
nume numd num num initial edition mix plaster in a suitable mixer with water to obtain a plastic composition .
proportion the mix as follows cement plaster cement plaster scratch and brown coats finish coat cementnum bag num pounds cementnum bag num pounds limenum bag num pounds limenum bag num pounds natural sandnum cubic feet natural sandnum cubic feet immediately before scratch coat application evenly wet the wall surface but do not saturate .
apply a numinch scratch coat heavily crosshatched to integrate with the metal mesh lath .
after the scratch coat dries thoroughly again evenly wet the wall surface but do not saturate .
apply a numinch brown coat .
after the brown coat dries thoroughly again evenly wet the wall surface but do not saturate .
apply a numinch finish coat .
provide color and finish type as directed .
protect each coat of plaster from sun and wind to prevent rapid drying .
keep each coat moist by sprinkling for at least num days after application or as directed .
allow each coat to dry thoroughly before placing the succeeding coat .
upon completion of the plastering install suitable matching wood trim along the border of the roof .
paint new wood trim to conform to the trim color of the remainder of the structure or as directed .
f backfilling .
backfill subsurface areas as specified in section num and as follows before starting backfilling operations submit the method of backfill and compaction for review and acceptance .
furnish additional embankment material for backfilling subsurface areas .
have the quality nature and source of any additional embankment material accepted before use .
do not use unsuitable or unstable material in the backfill .
breakup existing cellar floors and other surface areas to ensure adequate subsurface drainage .
backfill cellars and other subsurface spaces and grade to the adjacent ground level or as directed .
clean party wall foundations against which backfill material is to be placed point brick or block walls with mortar and waterproof with two coats of emulsified asphalt .
g treatment of disturbed areas .
treat disturbed areas resulting from demolition with seeding and soil supplements as specified in section num .
use a seeding type as indicated or directed .
when directed mulch as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a demolition .
lump sum if a structure is set afire the amount bid for this item will be deducted from the total amount due .
b refinishing party walls .
lump sum c utility disconnectionsreconnections .
utility disconnectionsreconnections are incidental to demolition .
the contractor shall pay all expenses resulting from utility disconnectionsreconnections including fees to utility companies or other agencies .
d treatment of disturbed areas .
treatment of disturbed areas is incidental to this work .
num numd num num change no .
num section numclass num class numa and class numb excavation num descriptionthis work is excavation for roadways roadway appurtenances and structures .
the three classes of excavation include the following a class num excavation .
excavation as shown on the standard drawings for roadways shoulders ditches drainage structures stream channels grade separation structures retaining walls and wingwalls .
excavation as indicated or directed for benches and for the removal of existing pavements not being rehabilitated .
excavation as indicated or directed for the removal of unsuitable material having a bottom width of num feet or more .
excavation as indicated or directed to allow for the placement of topsoil .
excavation and stockpiling as indicated or directed for the removal of topsoil other than the first num inches which are incidental to the clearing and grubbing operations specified in section num .
removal of unforeseen slides and rock ledges .
removal of stone fences piles of dirt or stones individual boulders and any portions of structures above the natural ground when in excess of num cubic yard volume .
b class numa excavation .
excavation for the removal of unsuitable material below subgrade having a bottom width of less than num feet as indicated or directed .
saw cut as necessary .
includes backfilling as specified in section num. c class numb excavation .
for roadway rehabilitation sawcutting and removal of existing pavement to neat lines as indicated or directed .
num construction a general .
during construction keep the excavation graded to drain seal with smoothwheeled compaction equipment to prevent subgrade from becoming saturated .
seal the surface at the end of the workday in order to prevent conditions from deteriorating before work can proceed .
temporary drainage structures or channels may be required .
b blasting .
drill and blast rock not removable by other excavating methods in a manner that completes the excavation to the lines indicated with the least disturbance to adjacent material as specified in section num. c removal of existing pavements .
num .
under embankments .
remove existing pavements within num feet of the finished grade scarify the underlying base to a depth of num inches and recompact .
num .
outside embankment limits .
remove existing pavements outside the limit of embankments as indicated to neat lines and backfill with suitable material compacted as specified in section numb .
num .
roadway rehabilitation .
outline area cut and remove existing pavement structure as indicated or directed .
d slopes .
vary the slopes if directed depending on the type of material encountered in order to obtain satisfactory stability .
remove the material by a method that allows the revised slope lines to be neatly and acceptably numd numc num num change no .
num trimmed to meet existing conditions .
if a slide occurs notify the inspectorincharge immediately and cease operations in the slide area until directed to resume .
remove slide material and bench or flatten slopes as directed to obtain the planned width of roadway .
e excavation beyond established slope lines .
do not remove or excavate any material beyond the slope lines indicated without written authorization .
f stream channels .
do not excavate stream channels until directed .
g topsoil .
stockpile topsoil removed from within the excavation or under embankment areas as specified in section num unless otherwise directed .
replace topsoil that is required on the project and wasted during clearing and grubbing operations at no expense to the department .
h bracing and shoring .
brace and shore sides of the excavation as necessary .
remove bracing and shoring when no longer required unless otherwise indicated or directed .
i cofferdams .
drive timber or metal sheeting to form a cofferdam .
brace the sheeting in all directions .
pump or bail to remove water as necessary .
remove sheeting or bracing when no longer required unless otherwise indicated or directed .
j suitable material required for embankment and backfill .
haul suitable excavated material for placement in embankment and for backfill .
replace suitable material section numanum that is required on the project and wasted during clearing and grubbing operations at no expense to the department .
k unsuitable and surplus material .
dispose of unsuitable and surplus material in suitable waste areas obtained as specified in section num .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard for the class of excavation indicated and as follows a excavation within established slope lines .
excavation quantities will be determined for payment as follows num .
plan quantities .
indicated quantities may be used if the representative agrees in writing that the project has been constructed as indicated and that the indicated quantities may only be used if the borrow section can be isolated .
num .
measured quantities .
if the plans have been altered by construction changes or if the project involves borrow excavation that can not be isolated excavation will be measured .
measurement may also be requested or the representative may require measurement if there is disagreement as to the accuracy of the indicated quantities .
cross sectional measurements will be obtained by field survey or by photogrammetric methods .
the original crosssections will be used as the base crosssections and the final crosssections plotted thereon .
additional crosssections may be interpolated at intermediate points where necessary to more accurately determine the quantities .
the average end area method based on horizontal measurement will be used to compute quantities .
if this method produces considerable error the representative will use any other threedimensional method that will keep the error to a minimum .
stone fences piles of stone and individual surface boulders in excess of num cubic yard and not shown on the crosssections will be measured by a threedimensional volume method .
measure the excavation by acceptable methods involving threedimensional measurements where it is otherwise impractical to measure material by the crosssectional method due to the erratic type or location of work .
b excavation beyond established slope lines .
the department will make payment as specified in section numa when widened excavation is used in place of borrow excavation as shown on the standard drawings and accepted in writing .
excavating offsets for the convenience of drilling is incidental to the class num excavation .
c stream channels .
request an inspection of the excavation when excavation of a channel is completed as numc nume num num change no .
num indicated .
crosssections will be obtained and the quantities computed using the method specified in section numanum when the excavation is satisfactory .
these quantities will be used as the basis for current and final payments .
clearing and grubbing required to make such measurements is incidental to stream channel excavation .
d slope changes .
the department will pay for work required to change slopes from the indicated template when directed as specified in section num. e saw cutting .
saw cutting is incidental to class numa excavation .
num numj num num initial edition section numclass num class num and class num excavation num descriptionthis work is the cleaning of existing ditches and the excavation for ditches stream channels culverts drains and structures .
the three classes of excavation include the following as shown on the drawings or the standard drawings .
a class num excavation .
excavation for inlet outlet and parallel ditches stream channels structures removed below the ground surface and not replaced with new structures spillways and halfcircle pipe .
b class num excavation .
excavation for new grade separation and drainage structures new retaining walls abutments piers and wingwalls .
c class num excavation .
excavation for pipe culverts pipearches metal plate pipe metal plate pipearches standard endwalls for pipe culverts and pipearches and excavation in excess of the standard depth for pavement base drains pipe underdrains subsurface drain outlets and subgrade drains .
d cleaning existing ditches .
removal and disposal of all soil and organic material in existing ditches .
num construction a foundations .
notify the representative num weeks in advance of excavation for structures so that cross sections may be obtained .
excavate to a depth that provides a satisfactory foundation as directed .
do not disturb the foundation area to the extent that it requires removal of additional material to provide a satisfactory bearing .
compact direct load bearing foundation to the original bearing capacity as specified in section numb .
do not place concrete or masonry until the foundation area has been accepted .
b drilling and blasting .
drill and blast to complete the excavation to the required lines with the least disturbance to remaining material .
do not blast within num feet of the foundation bearing elevation .
remove remaining rock to bearing elevation using mechanical means .
c bracing and shoring .
section numh d cofferdams .
drive timber or metal sheeting to a depth below the bottom of foundation substantially braced in all directions to form a cofferdam when required allowing the foundation area to be pumped reasonably free of water while concrete or masonry is being placed .
the representative may require the cofferdam to be sealed below the foundation with sufficient concrete so that it may be pumped reasonably dry where the foundation area is of sandy or other porous materials .
remove sheeting and bracing when no longer required unless otherwise indicated or directed .
e backfilling .
backfill spaces excavated for but not occupied by structures with acceptable material as specified in section numb .
f ditch and stream channel slopes .
trim slopes neatly to the lines indicated .
do not remove or excavate any material beyond lines indicated without written authorization from the representative .
g topsoil .
dispose of or utilize topsoil removed in class num excavation as specified in section numg h suitable material required for embankment and backfill .
section numj i unsuitable and surplus material .
section numk j cleaning existing ditches .
remove and satisfactorily dispose of all soil and organic matter from within the limits of the existing ditch and side slopes as indicated or directed and as specified in section numf .
num numb num num initial edition num measurement and payment a class num class num and class num excavation .
cubic yard measured using the methods specified in section numanum for the class of excavation indicated .
when directed to perform excavation below the indicated structure foundation elevation the department will pay for excavation as additional work as specified in section numb to a maximum depth of num feet and as extra work as specified in section numc beyond a depth of num feet .
the department will not pay for material removed or excavated in advance of obtaining crosssections unless written authorization by the representative is first obtained .
b cleaning existing ditches .
linear foot num numa num num initial edition section numborrow excavation num descriptionthis work is excavation of or obtaining embankment material from borrow areas acquired as specified in section num or from other sources for construction of embankments or backfills .
borrow excavation includes common borrow excavation foreign borrow excavation and selected borrow excavation described as follows a common borrow excavation .
excavation of suitable material as specified in section num from borrow areas that can be measured before and after excavation .
common borrow excavation also includes the removal of topsoil from borrow areas and stockpiling as specified in section num. b foreign borrow excavation .
excavation of or obtaining satisfactory material from sources outside the limits of the project that can not be measured before and after excavation .
c selected borrow excavation .
excavation of or obtaining material used in specific items of work and designated by quality size andor gradation and if indicated as specified in section num or section numa from sources outside the limits of the project that can not be measured before and after excavation .
num construction a general .
if project excavation is insufficient to complete the embankments or backfills or does not meet the physical requirements obtain material to complete the work .
do not use material from borrow excavation until all suitable and available project excavation is used unless otherwise directed .
if suitable material is available on the project the representative may upon request authorize in writing the widening of areas adjacent to slopes to obtain a portion or all of the excavation in place of borrow excavation as shown on the standard drawings .
the contractor may waste suitable material and replace it with common borrow after obtaining written authorization from the district executive and making satisfactory arrangements for obtaining crosssections of borrow and waste areas and the satisfactory disposal of the waste material .
haul material from borrow excavation of other sources for placement in embankment or for backfill .
restore borrow areas as specified in section num. b common borrow areas .
when common borrow areas are required obtain from areas as specified in section num .
clear and grub the borrow site as specified in section num and remove topsoil .
notify the representative at least num weeks before removing any suitable material to sample test and take crosssections .
c foreign andor selected borrow excavation .
when foreign or selected borrow excavation is required do not begin operations until the material and placement sequence is accepted in writing and an erosion and sediment pollution control plan is accepted by the county conservation district andor the dep and by the representative as applicable .
num measurement and payment a common borrow excavation .
cubic yard measured as specified in section numanum based on crosssections of the borrow area .
the department will not pay for material removed before measurements are taken .
additional material obtained within project limits as specified in section numa used in place of borrow excavation will be measured and paid for as specified in the preceding paragraph .
however the department will make payment at the lower contract unit price for either class num excavation or borrow excavation of the type indicated .
the department will not pay for common borrow required to replace suitable excavated material wasted for contractor convenience error or oversight .
numb numc num num initial edition b foreign borrow excavation .
cubic yard measured as compacted material in completed embankments .
c selected borrow excavation .
for the type indicated and as follows num .
volume basis .
cubic yard measured in place as compacted material using the average endarea method .
num .
weight basis .
ton num numa num num change no .
num section numplacement and compaction of embankment and fill num descriptionthis work is the construction of embankments fills and backfills .
num material a embankment material .
obtain material for embankment fill or backfill construction from the various classes of excavation on the project including common borrow excavation foreign borrow excavation and selected borrow excavation .
num .
general .
provide material meeting one of the following material classification requirements .
material of maximum size that can be placed within and does not interfere with the proper compaction of compacted numinch layers except as specified and classified as follows num.a soil .
material consisting of earth having num or more of the material passing the no .
num sieve and having a minimum dry density of num pounds per cubic foot ovendried mass determined in accordance with ptm no .
num .
material must have a maximum liquid limit of num determined in accordance with aashto t num and a plasticity index of not less than the liquid limit minus num determined in accordance with aashto t num for soils with liquid limits of num to num .
num.b granular material type num .
material consisting of natural or synthetic mineral aggregates having greater than num of the material passing the numinch sieve less than num retained on the numinch sieve and less than num passing the no .
num sieve except for aashto no .
num coarse aggregate and select granular material numrc .
num.c granular material type num .
material consisting of natural or synthetic mineral aggregates having less than or equal to num of the material passing the numinch sieve greater than or equal num retained on the numinch sieve and less than num passing the no .
num sieve .
also includes aashto nos .
num or num coarse aggregate or penndot nos .
numa or ogs coarse aggregate meeting the requirements specified in section num select granular material numrc meeting the requirements specified in section num and structure backfill .
num.d rock .
includes natural material that can not be excavated without blasting or using rippers also boulders detached stones and concrete and masonry units of a size that can not be readily incorporated into compacted num inch layers and having insufficient soil to fill the voids in each layer .
num.e shale .
includes rocklike material formed by natural consolidation of mud clay silt and fine sand usually thinly laminated comparatively soft and easily split .
num.f random material .
includes type num or type num granular material combined with shale concrete brick stone or masonry units that can readily be incorporated into compacted numinch layers .
num .
suitable material .
provide material meeting the requirements of any of the materials specified in section numanum and reasonably free of organic matter coal carbonaceous materials or other objectionable matter .
wet dry or frozen material may be suitable when dried wetted or thawed respectively .
the contractor may waste suitable material including wet or frozen material after obtaining written authorization .
this suitable material is subject to replacement in equivalent volume .
b geotextile .
section num class num type a num construction a general .
num .
prepare the embankment foundation area as specified in section num .
backfill existing depressions in embankment or fill areas such as gullies old stream channels stump holes and numa numa num num change no .
num areas of undercutting and topsoil or pavement removal to the adjacent ground elevation .
backfill with material indicated .
if no specific materials are indicated backfill with suitable material unless directed otherwise .
where undercutting is not directed proof roll entire embankment or fill foundation with a loaded triaxle dump truck num pounds gvw .
maintain uniform inflation pressures for all tires on the loaded triaxle between num and num pounds per square inch .
when conducting proof rolling do not exceed a speed of num feet per second num mile per hour .
any areas displaying permanent deformation rutting greater than num inch are considered unstable .
treat unstable areas by excavating material in the area to a depth of num foot .
dry the material and recompact or replace with compacted suitable material of the same type or other material including soil type num granular material and type num granular material except having particles no greater than num inches in size as approved by the representative or as indicated .
perform proof rolling only in the presence of the representative who will assess and approve or disapprove the stability of the area being investigated .
in wet areas or unstable areas the representative may waive this requirement if other stabilization or treatment measures are indicated andor required .
the representative may also waive this requirement in confined areas or in areas too small to be effectively proof rolled with the loaded triaxle dump truck .
proof roll the foundations of small or confined areas using the equipment that will be used to compact the fill in these areas .
treat areas identified by the representative as unstable as specified above .
proof rolling of constructed embankments or fills may be required by the representative at any time during the construction when the constructed embankment or fill appears to be visually unstable .
perform proof rolling and mitigation of unstable areas as described above and at no additional cost to the department .
break existing pavements more than num feet below the finished grade as follows break bituminous pavements to a maximum size of num square foot and recompact break concrete pavements to a maximum size of num square yard and scarify bituminous surfacetreated roadways to a depth of num inches and recompact .
remove existing pavements less than or equal to num feet below finished subgrade in their entirety unless specified otherwise .
when constructing embankment or fill on an existing or excavated slope bench the slope to the width and depth indicated or as directed .
where required for installation of transverse drainage construct embankment as shown on the standard drawings .
num .
qc plan .
when placing and compacting materials as specified in sections numbnum.a and num.b prepare a compaction control qc plan as outlined on form csnum and submit for the representatives review .
a qc plan is not required when placing and compacting materials as specified in sections numbnum.c num.d num.e and num.f where the compaction criteria is nonmovement .
qc test methods must be in accordance with section numanum .
the frequency of the qc testing may be determined by the contractor however at a minimum the frequency must meet the requirements as indicated in table a .
use startup criteria at the commencement of operations until proper control of operations has been demonstrated by passing and repeatable qc test results as determined by the representative .
a minimum of one startup frequency cycle must be completed before moving to production qc test frequencies .
qc tests can not be performed at the same location as an acceptance test and can not be replaced by an acceptance test .
submit the compaction control qc plan at the preconstruction conference or at least num calendar days before placement and compaction is scheduled to commence .
if any changes are needed to the qc plan throughout the life of the project submit an addendum to the representative for review before implementation .
table a minimum qc test frequency material embankment or fill subgrade pipe backfill startup frequency one qc test per lift for each num square yards placed minimum six tests per lift per day .
in limited or restricted areas the test rate should not exceed the rate for pipe backfill .
one qc test per lift for each num square yards placed minimum eight tests per lift per day .
for every pipe run conduct one qc test for every num cubic yards of pipe backfill minimum two tests per lift per day .
production frequency one qc test per lift for each num square yards placed one qc test per lift for each num square yards for every pipe run conduct one qc test for every num numa numa num num change no .
num minimum three tests per lift per day .
in limited or restricted areas the test rate should not exceed the rate for pipe backfill .
placed minimum four tests per lift per day .
cubic yards of pipe backfill minimum two tests per lift per day .
subgrade consists of the top num feet of the material immediately below the pavement section subbase .
num .
moisture density and acceptance testing .
for materials placed and compacted as specified in sections numbnum.a and num.b determine the inplace moisture and density in accordance with ptm no .
num using the direct transmission method .
all other materials will be accepted based on a condition of nonmovement as determined by the representative .
provide a nuclear densitymoisture gauge calibrated according to aashto t num .
ptm no .
num may be used if the gauge is manufactured by troxler note ptm no .
num is written for troxler manufactured gauges while aashto t num is generic to any nuclear density gauge .
gauges must be calibrated every num months .
a sheet with the current annual calibration providing the projected monthly decay standard with upper and lower limits must be kept with every gauge .
use form trnuma located in ptm no .
num for recording daily gauge standardization and for recording the results of all nuclear gauge moisture and density test results .
at locations directed by the representative conduct acceptance testing for moisture and density at the frequencies specified in table b .
if the required density of the compacted material is not obtained promptly rework reshape and recompact or remove and replace damaged or unsatisfactory areas and perform an acceptance retests before placement or testing of another area .
the extent of the unsatisfactory area is defined by the representative using one of the following visual inspection of the site behavior of the material under the compaction equipment originally used to compact the material delineation using the acceptance moisturedensity gauge or any combination of the above methods .
when an acceptance retest fails to meet the specified requirements check standard count of the acceptance test gauge on the reference standard block in accordance with ptm no .
num or aashto tnum as appropriate .
if the standard count does not meet requirements established for the gauge from the last annual calibration or is inconsistent with the daily gauge standardization count the gauge must be diagnosed and repaired or replaced as necessary before work may proceed .
if the acceptance test gauge is determined to be functioning properly and if the required density of the compacted material within the specified moisture limits can not be obtained conduct a new moisturedensity test on the material in accordance with ptm no .
num to determine if the moisturedensity relationship of the material has changed .
if the moisturedensity relationship of the material has changed the corresponding new target values for moisture and density must be established and used for qc acceptance and verification testing .
if moisturedensity testing indicates that the original target moisture and density are valid the contractor must review their operations make adjustments within specification requirements and amend the qc plan to obtain acceptable results .
table b acceptance test frequency material embankment or fill subgrade pipe backfill frequency one acceptance test per lift for each num square yards placed minimum one test per lift per day .
in limited or restricted areas the test rate should not exceed the rate for pipe backfill .
one acceptance test per lift for each num square yards placed minimum one test per lift per day .
for every pipe run conduct one acceptance test for every num cubic yards of pipe backfill minimum one test per lift per day .
subgrade consists of the top num feet of the material immediately below the pavement section subbase .
num .
verification testing .
the representative will perform verification testing using an independent nuclear densitymoisture gauge on one of the first three acceptance tests and a minimum of one verification test for every num acceptance tests performed thereafter .
verification testing will consist of testing for moisture and density as specified in section numanum .
the verification testing will take place immediately after the contractors nuclear densitymoisture gauge has obtained a passing acceptance test result as specified in sections numbnum.a and num.b .
verification tests will be run at the same location and in the same test hole as the acceptance test .
maintain a distance of at least num feet between gauges and from any other radioactive source when performing acceptance and verification testing .
perform testing in an area where influences affecting the gauge performance are minimized whenever practical .
in some instances the representative may direct an additional acceptance test based upon availability of verification testing equipment and personnel .
verification test results will be compared to the associated acceptance test results and will not be used to determine numa numb num num change no .
num acceptance of the inplace moisture and density .
a verification test is considered acceptable if the independent nuclear densitymoisture gauge readings are within num pounds per cubic foot for wet density not the dry density and within numw for moisture where w is the moisture content in percent when compared to the readings obtained by the contractors nuclear densitymoisture gauge .
when verification test results do not conform as specified check the standard count of both the acceptance test gauge and the verification test gauge on their respective reference standard blocks in accordance with ptm no .
num or aashto t num as appropriate before placement and testing of another area .
if the standard count for either gauge does not meet requirements established for the gauge from the last annual calibration or is inconsistent with the daily gauge standardization count the gauge must be diagnosed and repaired or replaced as necessary before work may proceed .
aashto t num or aashto t num may be used to help resolve questions concerning proper functioning of gauges when determining moisture .
if both gauges are determined to be functioning properly the representative will immediately contact the dmedmm or district compaction supervisor for guidance before the continuation of work .
the representative will record the acceptance test results the verification test results and applicable corrective measures on form tr numa .
num .
compaction control technician .
provide and assign to the work during placement and compaction of material a properly trained and experienced nuclear equipment operator to perform the required qc and acceptance testing .
the technician must carry a valid nuclear gauge operator certification during placement and compaction of material .
b placement and compaction .
num .
general .
provide uniform material from the same borrow source for the entire lift being placed unless otherwise indicated or directed by the representative .
compact material using the specified equipment appropriate for the material classification and placement condition .
do not operate compaction equipment at a speed exceeding num feet per second num mile per hour when compacting materials .
for compaction equipment other than rollers as specified in section numcnum operate the equipment over the material to be compacted for a minimum duration of num seconds .
use the appropriate target moisture and density for the material being placed for qc acceptance and verification testing .
shape layers of the compacted embankment or fill to drain during construction .
fine grade to remove low areas and seal the embankment or fill surface at the end of each work day by rolling with a smooth drum roller to promote continuous positive drainage and reduce water infiltration .
no furrows at the edges of embankments or fills that prohibit the free drainage of surface water are allowed .
num.a soil .
place soil for the full width of the embankment or fill in uniform horizontal layers to achieve a compacted numinch depth .
determine the optimum moisture content and maximum dry density in accordance with ptm no .
num .
compact soil with a padfoot roller meeting the requirements specified in section numcnum.g .
run all compaction equipment in static mode .
do not use vibratory compaction on soil .
a single pass of a smooth drum roller in static mode may be used on soil before compaction with the padfoot roller .
maximum roller speed as specified in section numbnum must not be exceeded .
during compaction with a padfoot roller keep the roller drum clean and free of any soil buildup on the drum surface and between pads .
when constructing embankments or fills to top of subgrade elevation with soil overbuild by at least num inches in elevation .
fine grade the surface to fill any depressions left by the roller pads and to establish the final surface elevation .
compact the subgrade surface with a smooth drum roller in static mode .
finish subgrade in accordance with section num .
in pipe trenches locations adjacent to structures and locations where standard full scale compaction equipment is prohibited may cause damage or is not practical due to space or other constraints compact soil using equipment as specified in sections numcnum.d or numcnum as directed by the representative .
reduce lift thickness to numinch compacted depth or as directed by the representative to achieve the equivalent level of compaction as the full scale compaction equipment .
operate in a manner as to provide the required level of compaction while producing a dense stable soil mass that does not rut push or shove .
except for the top num feet compact soil for the full width of embankments or fills to not less than num of the maximum dry density .
compact the top num feet of soil for the full width of embankments or fills to num of the maximum dry density .
determine the inplace dry density of soil in accordance with ptm no .
num using the direct transmission method .
maintain soil within num of optimum and optimum moisture content at the time of compaction .
determine the moisture content in accordance with ptm no .
num .
compact soil to a stable condition so there is no rutting displacement or shear wave under compaction equipment .
a shear wave is bulging of the soil surface in front of and behind the roller .
numb numb num num change no .
num num.b granular material type num .
place type num granular material for the full width of the embankment or fill in uniform horizontal layers of not more than a compacted numinch depth .
compact material adjacent to structures as indicated on the standard drawings .
determine the optimum moisture content and maximum dry density in accordance with ptm no .
num .
except for pipe trenches locations adjacent to structures and locations where standard full scale compaction equipment is prohibited may cause damage or is not practical due to space or other constraints compact type num granular material using a smooth drum vibratory roller as specified in section numcnum.i .
for all other areas except for pipe trenches use dynamic andor vibratory equipment as specified in sections numcnum.d or numcnum as directed by the representative .
reduce lift thickness to numinch compacted depth or as directed by the representative to achieve the equivalent level of compaction as the full scale compaction equipment .
except for the top num feet compact type num granular material for the full width of embankments or fills to num of the maximum dry density .
compact the top num feet of type num granular material for the full width of embankments or fills to num of the maximum dry density .
as directed by the representative determine the inplace dry density of type num granular material in accordance with ptm no .
num using the direct transmission method .
the representative may allow the back scatter method to be used if the material is too coarse for the direct transmission method to be conducted effectively .
conditions when the backscatter method would be appropriate include when the drive rod can not be readily driven to the required depth to create the hole necessary to insert the nuclear gauge source rod due to coarse particles impeding or deflecting the drive rod or when the material is too coarse to create a smooth sided stable open hole using the drive rod .
compact type num granular material to a stable condition so there is no rutting displacement or shear wave under compaction equipment .
a shear wave is bulging of the material surface in front of and behind the compaction equipment .
maintain type num granular material within num of the optimum moisture content at the time of compaction .
determine moisture content in accordance with ptm no .
num .
num.c granular material type num .
place type num granular material for the full width of the embankment or fill in uniform horizontal layers of not more than a compacted numinch depth .
compact material adjacent to structures as indicated on the standard drawings .
except for pipe trenches locations adjacent to structures and locations where standard full scale compaction equipment is prohibited may cause damage or is not practical due to space or other constraints compact type num granular material using a smooth drum vibratory roller as specified in section numcnum.i .
for all other areas except pipe trenches use dynamic andor vibratory equipment as specified in sections numcnum.d or numcnum .
reduce lift thickness to numinch compacted depth or as directed by the representative to achieve the equivalent level of compaction as the full scale compaction equipment .
compact type num granular material for the full width of embankments or fills to a condition of nonmovement under the compaction equipment .
compaction acceptance will be determined by the representative .
nonmovement under compaction equipment is defined as creating a stable condition of the compacted material .
a stable condition occurs when there is no rutting displacement or shear wave under compaction equipment .
a shear wave is bulging of the material surface in front of and behind the compaction equipment .
maintain type num granular material in a surface damp condition but not wet no excess moisture at the time of compaction .
num.d rock .
do not place rock in embankments or fills without acceptance of the planned excavation and embankment or fill operations .
when used to form the base of an embankment or fill place rock the full crosssection width .
place rock on embankment side slopes where indicated .
before placing rock on other types of compacted material slope the top of the embankment or fill from centerline to the sides at a rate of approximately num inch per foot and compact the surface .
place rock in uniform loose layers to a depth not exceeding the approximate average size of the larger rock but limited to a maximum depth of num inches .
remove oversize rock or reduce in size until it can be readily incorporated in a maximum numinch layer .
do not dump rock in final position unless specified but distribute by blading or dozing keep voids pockets and bridging to a minimum .
place rock so larger pieces are evenly distributed and voids are filled as completely as possible .
compact with a smooth drum vibratory roller as specified in section numcnum.i .
compact rock to a condition of nonmovement under the compaction equipment .
compaction acceptance will be determined by the representative .
when rock and finer material are placed adjacent to each other at the same time place the finer material sufficiently above rock layers to allow for proper compaction of the finer material .
when the embankment or fill is to be constructed with rock choke the surface of the rock with select granular material numrc of sufficient thickness to completely fill all voids in the rock and cover with a class num type a numb num num num change no .
num geotextile .
place an additional layer of select granular material numrc to reach the finished subgrade elevation and to allow fine grading as specified in section num .
when transitioning from rock to other types of materials choke the rock surface with select granular material numrc of sufficient thickness to completely fill all voids in the rock .
place a second lift of select granular material numrc to a compacted thickness of num inches .
only one transition from rock to another type of material is allowed in an embankment or fill section .
num.e shale .
place shale in maximum numinch compacted lifts so larger pieces are evenly distributed and voids are filled as completely as possible .
remove oversize shale or reduce in size until it can be readily incorporated in a maximum numinch compacted layer .
compact as specified in section numbnum.c .
num.f random material .
place and compact random material as specified in section numbnum.e .
num .
wet andor unstable foundation areas .
where the embankment or fill foundation is in water or swamp areas or is saturated or unstable construct embankment or fill with rock to the indicated elevation or as directed .
num .
existing embankment or fill .
existing embankment or fill is defined as material placed and compacted during prior construction not associated with the current project or material placed and compacted as part of the current project during a prior construction season and has been in place at least one winter season .
when an existing embankment or fill requires additional material to bring it to the required elevation proof roll the entire existing surface as specified in section numa before placement of material .
num .
confined areas .
do not use rock shale random material or any other material having a maximum size greater than num inches or otherwise preventing the material from being placed in a compacted numinch layer in confined areas .
place material in uniform horizontal layers of not more than num inches in compacted depth in areas where small or hand operated compaction equipment as specified in sections numcnum.d and numcnum is required for compaction .
compact material to the density and at the moisture content based on the material type as specified in sections numbnum.a num.b and num.c .
determine the inplace dry density and moisture content based on the material type as specified in sections numbnum.a num.b and num.c .
num .
structure areas .
construct structure backfill behind bridge abutments and adjacent to structures with selected borrow excavation as shown on the standard drawings and as specified in sections numqnum.b .
material requirements for structure backfill are indicated on the standard drawings .
compact with equipment for the material classification and placement condition as specified in section numb and in accordance with the standard drawings .
do not place rock where deep foundations are to be installed .
num .
frozen material .
do not place or compact frozen material .
do not place embankment or fill material on any material that is frozen .
remove frozen material if the embankment or fill top freezes before placing additional material .
num .
wet material .
before compacting dry material to within num of optimum and the optimum moisture content for soil num of optimum moisture content for type num granular material and surface damp for type num granular material .
do not place material on embankment or fill that has become unstable from excessive moisture .
num .
dry material .
before compacting moisten material to within num of optimum and the optimum moisture content for soil num of optimum moisture content for type num granular material and surface damp for type num granular material .
c stability .
assume responsibility for the stability of embankments and fills .
replace material that in the representatives judgment has been damaged or displaced due to the following carelessness or negligence natural causes such as storms and floods shrinkage of material and all other reasons not attributable to other than movement of the natural ground upon which the material is placed .
dry reshape recompact and test material for moisture and density requirements if construction equipment causes movement rutting or displacement of the material .
num measurement and payment numa numd num num change no .
num a embankment .
when measurement is required embankment will be measured in its final position as specified in section numanum by the cubic yard .
embankment construction is incidental to excavation or borrow excavation except for aashto nos .
num or num or penndot nos .
numa or ogs meeting the requirements specified in section num and select granular material numrc meeting the requirements specified in section num. b select granular material numrc .
ton c granular material type num aggregates .
for fills and backfills incorporating aashto nos .
num or num or penndot nos .
numa or ogs meeting the requirements specified in section num or structure backfill measurement and payment are made according to the work specified .
d geotextile class num type a .
section numc num numa num num change no .
num section numblasting for rock cut slope excavation num descriptionthis work is excavation of rock using controlled blasting and production blasting to achieve a uniform face in the rock along the plane of the specified excavation backslope .
blasting required for rock cut slopes must be conducted in a safe manner to the line and grade shown on the contract drawings .
a controlled blasting .
blasting that uses explosives and proper blasting equipment placed in carefully spaced and aligned blastholes to produce a uniform surface in the rock along a specified excavation backslope .
controlled blasting methods include num .
presplit blasting .
a controlled blasting method in which the row of blastholes are drilled along the plane of the specified final excavation backslope .
presplitting uses reduced blasthole spacing diameter and explosive charges .
the initiation of blasting in the presplit blastholes precedes the initiation of the adjacent production blasthole explosives by a delay .
the delay decouples the final excavated rock face from the excavation and prevents energy from production blasts from propagating to and damaging the final cut face .
num .
trim blasting .
a controlled blasting method that cleanly shears a rock face when there is insufficient burden for production blasting .
it is essentially identical to presplit blasting but without production blast holes .
b production blasting .
rock fragmentation blasting that typically has more widely spaced blastholes than controlled blastholes .
production blastholes are drilled in a pattern throughout the main excavation area adjacent to the controlled blast row .
production blastholes are detonated in a controlled delay sequence toward an open face or relief produced by blastholes firing on an earlier delay .
production blasting fragments the rock in the area to be excavated to the size required for removal and placement .
num materials a general .
provide nonelectric explosives and initiating devices that are not damaged or deteriorated and have not been exposed to weather .
nonelectric explosives and initiating devices include but are not limited to all explosive materials initiators blasting caps detonating cord delays and timing devices and all other materials and devices necessary to perform the work .
while electric detonators are not permitted electronic programmable detonators are permissible for use .
provide copies of the technical data sheets and material safety data sheets for all materials to the department with the blasting plan .
all blasting caps for any individual shot must come from one lot number .
num .
stemming .
fine aggregate manufactured not natural type a cement concrete sand as specified in section num .
num construction a general .
use controlled and production blasting for excavations in rock when mechanical excavations methods can not produce a uniform excavated surface at the specified slope angle .
conduct all blasting explosive handling and monitoring operations in accordance with the latest osha standards num cfr parts num through num and pennsylvania code title num environmental resources article iv chapter num chapter num and chapter num and in compliance with all local requirements .
maintain a copy of all standards on site including health and safety requirements and make available upon request .
num .
all blasting operations must be performed by a blaster licensed in the commonwealth of pennsylvania meeting the following qualifications the blaster must submit to the department a list containing at least five successfully completed similar projects that together demonstrate a minimum of num years of experience in surface rock blasting including controlled blasting .
include a brief description of each project and the name and telephone number of the owners representative knowledgeable in each project listed .
the department will review and approve the blaster .
receipt of written approval must be obtained before any blasting operations including drilling of blastholes are initiated .
allow at least num calendar days for approval .
numa numb num num change no .
num num .
when blasting is used to excavate rock use controlled blasting techniques for all portions of any rock cut slope exceeding a vertical height of num feet and a slope equal to or steeper than numhnumv .
the department may require controlled blasting to form the faces of more gradual slopes or excavations even if the slopes could be formed by nonblasting methods .
presplit test sections must be conducted to determine the presplit blast pattern and design necessary to achieve the required results .
the conditions of each presplit section will be evaluated by the representative .
revisions to the presplit blast design must be made by the blaster as necessary to achieve the required results before drilling can proceed in adjacent presplit sections .
num .
production blasting must be designed to control flyrock minimize ground vibrations and noise and result in fragmented insitu rock that can be removed processed andor placed as required .
the production blasthole must be located and drilled in accordance with the requirements specified in section numg .
prepare the production blasting plan so as not to affect the controlled blastholes .
where blasting is adjacent to highways with lane closure restrictions the volume of rock can not exceed the contractors ability to remove the blasted material from the highway within the established maximum allowable closure time .
the sequence of blasting at any blast is as follows conduct and submit the preblast survey .
submit and obtain acceptance of the blasting plan .
submit and obtain acceptance of the blasting safety plan .
conduct and submit the water supply monitoring report .
notify appropriate entities of blasting schedule property owners utilities traffic flagging and police .
schedule and conduct the preblast meeting .
drill and conduct test section blasting before the start of any fullscale blasting operations .
obtain department approval and selection of the test section .
proceed with fullscale drilling and blasting .
submit required blasting report including vibration and airblast monitoring reports .
remove rock and scale if required .
inspect and evaluate rock faceexcavation results including any required modifications .
if applicable submit a modified blasting plan for adjacent blasts in that project work area .
conduct and submit the postblast survey .
conduct and submit the water supply monitoring report .
b preblast survey .
conduct an exterior and interior preblast survey on all structures buildings or utilities within num feet of the blasting site and within num feet of the blasting site if the blast is designed for a peak particle velocity ppv exceeding num inches per second confirm by vibration monitoring .
if no structure or building is located within these limits complete a survey on the closest structure or building within num mile of the blasting operations .
at a minimum complete one survey as directed by the department on the closest structure or building within num mile .
the preblast survey will serve as proof of the condition of the existing residential and commercial structures prior to blasting .
complete the preblast survey no sooner than num weeks before the beginning of blasting operations .
complete the exterior and interior preblast survey using form trnum .
include structural observations and descriptions locating any existing cracks including length and size .
where significant cracks structural defects or damage exists collect digital images to supplement the written description .
provide a scale and a date stamp on each digital image taken .
digital images must be taken and submitted electronically at a minimum nummegapixel resolution with the preblast survey .
request in writing property access from each property owner to complete a preblast survey .
if the property owner fails to permit access to the property for the preblast survey notify the department .
if the property owner declines the preblast survey submit to the department a notification letter and form trnum signed by the property owner .
if the property owner refuses to sign the qualified independent blasting consultant must indicate as such and sign the waiver .
a copy of the letter and waiver must be kept on file as part of the preblast survey records .
do not enter any private property without written permission .
the preblast survey must be conducted by a qualified independent blasting consultant in the presence of the property owner .
at the conclusion of the preblast survey the property owner must sign both exterior and interior preblast survey forms and be provided a copy .
submit the exterior and interior preblast survey forms including diagrams and digital images to the department at least num days before the start of blasting operations .
notify the respective utility company within a minimum of num days before blasting of any numb numd num num change no .
num utility within num feet of the blasting site and within num feet of the blasting site if the blast is designed for a ppv exceeding num inches per second .
provide notice in writing at num weeks and again num hours before blasting begins to all property owners where a preblast survey was performed .
inform the residents that blasting signals will be issued in accordance with osha standard num cfr part num to warn of imminent blasting .
the contractor is solely responsible for any damage resulting from blasting .
c blasting plan .
provide the representative a separate blasting plan at least num weeks before the start of drilling for blasting for each proposed rock cut excavation that requires blasting and at any time the drilling and blasting operations change .
the blasting plan will be reviewed by the department for conformance with this specification and any concerns will be discussed with the contractor before acceptance of the blasting plan .
do not drill any blastholes until the blasting plan is accepted by the department .
schedule and attend a preblast meeting at least num week before any explosives being brought onto the project site to review the following the blasting safety plan including requirements concerning explosives being brought onto the project site and the restrictions and requirements during the loading of explosives the sequence of operations before during and after each blast all required traffic control all inspection procedures of blast zones for misfires stability and blast material debris clean up and any other relevant issues .
at a minimum the following must attend the pre blast meeting the representative the blaster the contractor the qualified independent blasting consultants and any other personnel designated necessary by the representative .
submittal of the blasting plan is for quality control conformance and record keeping purposes .
review and acceptance of any blasting plan by the department does not release the contractor of full responsibility for the accuracy of the plans safety of operations quality of work or conformance to specification performance requirements when implemented in the field .
complete the blasting plan using form trnum and include in the submittal of the blasting plan along with any necessary documentation .
information and documentation to be submitted with the blasting plan must include but is not limited to the following a completed blasting activity permit approved by the dep bureau of mining and reclamation .
include any other necessary permits required to complete blasting activities in accordance with all current applicable federal state and local requirements .
station limits of the proposed shots critical distances and directions to structures buildings or utilities and preblast survey limits detailed on the plan view sheets .
also include scaled distance and estimated ppv .
one plan and section view for each rock cut excavation showing the proposed drill pattern for any blastholes including blasthole spacing blasthole diameters blasthole angles lift height drill depth buffer rows and burden .
accurately show to scale each cut area to be blasted .
loading diagrams detailing the type amount and specific gravity of explosives primers and initiators .
also include the location and depth of stemming .
initiation sequences of any blastholes including delay times and delay systems .
schedule and timeframes for notification of the blasting sequence .
manufacturers product data sheets for all explosives primers and initiators to be used in the work .
a maintenance and protection of traffic plan which details how traffic will be protected and managed during blasting .
methods to control site security vibration flyrock and airblast levels .
method and quality control of the depth direction and alignment of the drilled blastholes for blasting .
licensing information experience and qualifications of the blaster who will be directly responsible for the loading and firing of each shot .
the name and qualifications of the persons responsible for designing and directing the blasting operation the qualified independent blasting consultants proposed to conduct and complete the pre and post blast surveys and the airblast vibration and water supply monitoring reports .
d blasting safety plan .
provide the department a detailed description of transportation pickup and delivery locations blasting procedures and the use of explosives at the project work area at least num weeks before the start of drilling for blasting .
the blasting safety plan must include but is not limited to the following details about hazard communication programs for employees .
numd nume num num change no .
num equipment that will be used to monitor the approach of lightning storms and evacuation and site security plans in the event of a storm .
methods for preventing spills or losses of explosives drilling fluids oil or any other pollutants into the ground during all handling and blasthole loading operations .
include details of all containment and contingency plans for quickly and effectively cleaning up any spilled materials .
a safe and approved disposal method of all explosive packaging materials .
detailed contingency plans for handling misfires of explosives resulting from cutoffs or other causes .
fire prevention plan details including smoking policies procedures and limitations for work involving any open flames or sparks and description and location of all firefighting equipment and evacuation plans .
one hard or electronic copy of the blasters valid pennsylvania blasting license and the contractors atf blasting license .
other required county or state permits required for explosive use and storage .
a copy of the explosive transporters commercial drivers licenses with hazmat endorsements and an explanation of how the explosive transport vehicles will meet all applicable atf osha federal state county and local regulations .
if applicable andor when underground mining is identified during design provide air quality monitoring plans for local buildings .
post and maintain in a visible area all current licenses required for blasting and explosive handling .
a blaster meeting the qualifications specified in section numanum is required to perform all blasting .
provide a certificate of insurance to the department showing that the contractor retain the required insurance to the applicable limits to meet all local state and federal regulations .
store explosives on and off the project site in accordance with osha standard num cfr part num title num cfr num part num subpart k and in compliance with all local requirements .
adequate magazine records must be maintained for stored explosives .
onsite storage of bulk blasting agents such as ammonium nitrate and fuel oil anfo is prohibited .
the contractor is required to remain on site once the blastholes are loaded with explosives until any misfires are resolved or remediated and the blast is completed .
in no instance must explosives blasting agents detonators or loaded blastholes be left unguarded or unattended .
e blasting requirements .
requirements must be in accordance with the following for all blasting operations remove all overburden soil and loose rock along the top of the proposed cut and lay back to a stable condition before drilling and blasting .
the drilling of blastholes must be completed one pattern at a time .
do not conduct advanced drilling of any blastholes before completion of blasting on the previous blast section .
check measure and record the depth of all blastholes as soon as the drill is retracted from the blasthole .
if any blasthole is found not be open to the drilled depth redrill the short blastholes to the proper depth at no expense to the department .
if any blastholes are too deep use stemming as specified in section numanum to fill the blastholes .
horizontal blastholes are not permitted .
complete and submit with the blasting report the blasthole drill log using form trnum .
keep accurate drilling logs on each blasthole to show the depth of the geological features such as zones of soft or weathered rock mud or clay seams voids and color of drill cuttings .
also include the drilling rate .
revise the blasting plan to address concerns during drilling .
obtain department acceptance of the revised blasting plan before proceeding .
before loading of blastholes post warning signs at points of access to the blasting site .
blastholes must be covered and designed to keep material from falling into the blastholes after drilling .
place reusable plastic hole markers in each blasthole to identify all blasthole locations .
measure blastholes before loading any explosives into the blastholes to ensure each blasthole is open to the original drilled depth and free of obstructions before placing a charge .
use precaution to prohibit caving of material from borehole sidewalls during placement of the charges .
while loading the explosives into the drilled blastholes only the blaster and those persons necessary for the loading process are allowed within num feet of a blast .
stem all unloaded portions of the blastholes a minimum of num times the burden distance .
stemming material must be as specified in section numanum .
appropriate explosives and accessories must be employed for the various conditions to achieve the nume numf num num change no .
num specified cut slope design .
if blasting is permitted on structure foundations any overbreak beyond the desired bottom of footing elevation bofe must be repaired by excavating broken materials and leveling off to the bofe with class c concrete or as required .
furnish and use sufficient approved blasting mats when necessary to hold and suppress flyrock and prevent subsequent damage to property and roadway .
perform all necessary repairs to roadway structures utilities and any property damage as a result of blasting at no cost to the department .
the contractor is liable for all injuries or deaths of persons andor farmdomestic animals and any damage to property caused by blasting .
f controlled blasting .
num .
test section .
conduct test blast sections before the start of fullscale blasting operations in accordance with the requirements specified in section nume and with the following .
conduct initial test blast section as one presplit blast pattern using variable spacing of numinches over num feet numinches over num feet numinches over num feet and numinches over num feet using a maximum lift of num feet .
hole to hole spacing requirements for numinch and numinch presplit patterns must be maintained within num to num percent of the intended spacing .
for numinch and numinch presplit patterns hole to hole spacing must be within numinches of the intended spacing .
hole to hole spacing must be maintained throughout presplitting .
if the deviation of presplit blastholes exceeds the allowable tolerance provide the department alternative drilling methods in a revised blasting plan to reduce deviation within the above specified tolerances .
alternative drilling methods may include but are not limited to revised procedures drill tooling cutting bits or other equipment that provides specified spacing tolerances .
obtain department acceptance of the revised blasting plan before proceeding .
test sections must not exceed num feet .
the test section must demonstrate the suitability of the proposed blast plan relative to fragmentation requirements overbreak control flyrock control adequacy of stemming and other appropriate or necessary factors .
when results of the drill logs are unusual i.e .
encountering zones of soft or weathered rock mud or clay pockets voids rate of penetration and the color and character of drill cuttings revise the blasting plan as necessary and obtain department acceptance of the revised blasting plan before proceeding .
when rock of different characteristics is encountered a blasting test section must be performed .
excavate the blasted test section to fully expose the presplit face and provide the means to access the face so that the department can examine and evaluate the results of the blasted test sections .
the department will examine the completed test section and select the blasthole spacing that demonstrates the best presplit face quality .
if no acceptable conditions are found by the department upon examination of the test section revise and submit to the department a new blasting plan for review and acceptance .
drilling and blasting will be suspended until the blasting plan is accepted .
at no additional cost to the department conduct additional test sections at the same blasthole diameter and spacing used for the previous test section and by adjusting the explosive load until desiredacceptable results are obtained without exceeding the established ppv as specified in section numj .
unsatisfactory results include but are not limited to excessive fragmentation beyond the indicated lines and grade excessive flyrock and poor timing delays .
upon completion of test blasting obtain written approval from the department to proceed with full scale blasting operations .
if the contractor has conducted repeated test blasts using different drilling techniques reduced the height of the lift in an attempt to meet the borehole deviation limits provided evidence that the magnitude and direction of deviation between each blasthole has remained constant and ultimately determined that due to geologic conditions deviation tolerances are not achievable the department may review the findings and make an informed decision of any acceptable boredhole deviations .
the departments approval of the test blasting program and the techniques and procedures associated with test blasting does not relieve the contractor of any responsibilities to employ numf numg num num change no .
num appropriate safety measures and exercise proper supervision of blasting operations .
num .
presplit blasting .
complete all presplitting including test section blasting in accordance with the requirements specified in section nume and with the following employ a surveyor licensed in the commonwealth of pennsylvania to locate and mark each presplit blasthole shown on the blasting plan to produce an excavated slope to the lines and grade on the contract drawings .
drill presplit blastholes within num inches of the staked location .
blastholes drilled beyond this limit will be rejected .
control the angle and bearing at which the drill steel enters the rock with an electromechanical or electronic device smart level meeting accuracy conditions of plus or minus num degree by attaching to or resting on the drilling equipment .
blasthole drilling will not be permitted if this device is missing or inoperative .
complete a borehole deviation survey of each presplit blasthole before loading the blastholes using an electronic rodded borehole deviation measuring system with a probe resolution of numdegree accuracy .
electronic cable borehole deviation measuring systems are prohibited .
provide a report of each blasthole deviation survey to the department including blasthole alignment and graphical output data .
also the report must show that the alignment will produce the excavated face to the line and grade indicated on the contract drawings within the specified tolerances .
terrestrial surveying may be employed as necessary to produce this report .
the output software must be capable of plotting vertical profiles parallel and perpendicular to the slope .
no blasthole must deviate by more than num inches parallel and perpendicular from the planned slope .
hole to hole spacing must be maintained throughout presplitting as specified in section numfnum .
abandon presplit blastholes not meeting the accuracy requirements and a replacement blasthole will be required at no cost to the department .
completely backfill the rejected blastholes with minimum num pounds per square inch highearly strength grout .
the representative may require grout samples for laboratory testing to verify minimum strength .
drill presplit blastholes between num inches and num inches in diameter .
do not exceed a length of num feet in blastholes for any lift .
the department maintains the right to decrease the length of the presplit blastholes at any time due to poor performance .
drill presplit blastholes a minimum of num feet longitudinally beyond the limits of the production blastholes to be detonated or to the end of the cut .
if the cut height requires more than one lift a maximum offset of numinches between lifts will be permitted for drill equipment clearance .
begin the presplit blasthole drilling at a point that allows for the necessary offsets and adjust to compensate for any drift that may occur in the upper lifts .
use only explosives manufactured specifically for presplitting in presplit blastholes .
bulk anfo is prohibited in presplit blastholes .
the maximum diameter of the explosives must not exceed one half the diameter of the presplit blasthole .
detonation of explosives in each blasthole in a presplit shot may be simultaneous or delayed due to noise or vibration concerns provided the hole to hole delay does not exceed num milliseconds .
initiate the blasting in the presplit blastholes before initiating the production blasthole explosives by a minimum of num milliseconds .
num .
trim blasting .
if the horizontal distance between the existing rock face and the design cut face is less than num feet the contractor may use trim blasting .
perform trim blasting in accordance with the requirements specified in section numfnum and num except there are no production blastholes .
g production blasting .
complete all production blasting in accordance with the requirements specified in section nume and with the following do not exceed num inches in diameter for the production blastholes .
drill the production blastholes in the patterns and to the depths established in the blasting plan .
do not drill blastholes to a depth that exceeds num feet .
drill the row of production blastholes adjacent to trim blastholes drill the row of production blastholes on a plane parallel to the trim blastholes .
do not drill production blastholes within num feet of the trim blastholes .
drill the bottom of the production blastholes at an equal depthelevation to the bottom of the controlled numg numi num num change no .
num blastholes except for the bottom lift for subdrilling up to a depth of num feet .
drill a line of buffer holes on a parallel plane adjacent to the presplit blastholes .
buffer hole spacing can range from one half the production blasthole spacing to two times the presplit blasthole spacing .
drill buffer holes between num and num inches in diameter and num feet from the presplit line .
do not load the buffer holes with more than num of the full explosive load that could be placed in a num inch production blasthole .
maintain a burden distance which is not more than one half the bench height in order to control blasting effects .
required burden distance must be determined by the contractor so as not to over or under confine the blast .
burdens must be determined to prevent flyrock and backbreak of the presplit face .
drill the production blastholes within two blasthole diameters from the staked drill collar location .
survey the elevation at the collar of each drilled production blasthole to foundation grade and verify the production blastholes are not subdrilled below final foundation grade .
blastholes drilled outside either tolerance must be backfilled with stemming and redrilled at the proper location and grade as directed by the representative and at no additional expense to the department .
detonate production blastholes on a delay sequence toward the free face as specified in the blasting plan .
delay the detonation sequence from hole to hole within a row by a minimum of num milliseconds per foot of hole spacing .
delay the detonation sequence from row to row by a minimum of num times the hole to hole delay .
take all necessary precautions to minimize blast damage to the rock backslope during production blasting .
remove or stabilize rock along the cut face that is loose hanging or creates a potentially dangerous condition during or on completion of the excavation in each lift .
do not drill the next lift until this work is performed .
h blasting report .
complete and sign the blasting report using form trnum and submit to the department within num hours after making any blast and obtain department acceptance before drilling of the next blast section is initiated .
only the blaster who was reviewed and approved by the department may perform blasting operations including drilling of blastholes .
at a minimum the blasting report must include the following drill logs drilling remarks and loading and timing delays used in each blasthole of the blast .
all blast monitoring documentation which includes vibration and airblast monitoring data .
contractors evaluation of the blast performance .
two highdefinition minimum nump resolution and nump frame rate digital video recordings submitted in mpegnum file format or acceptable variant as determined by the representative on a cd dvd or flash drive of any test controlled andor production blasting .
the two videos must be recorded at opposite angles of the blast and if feasible from an elevated angle and a ground angle .
all damage incurred and details of complaints or comments .
blast area description weather contractorcrew and layout and timing diagram .
i maintenance and protection of traffic mpt during blasting operations .
coordinate mpt activities with the department for any portions of roadway that must have temporary closures or lane restrictions during blasts .
the mpt plan for any partial or full roadway closures and detours must be approved by the district traffic engineer dte .
at a minimum all traffic must be stopped during blasting operations on roadways where the contractor or the representative has determined that road users may be impacted by blasting operations .
traffic may be halted for periods not to exceed num minutes or unless otherwise approved by the representative .
traffic may not resume after a blast until the area is clear of any debris the excavated slope face is free of any loose material and the blasted material is stockpiled into a stable mass until it can be removed from the site .
an adequate barrier to temporarily separate blasted material must be in place between active roadway lanes and blasted material .
time between traffic stoppages will be determined by the department .
blasting operations will not be permitted during peak traffic hours as determined by the departments dte .
roadway closures are permitted monday through friday num a.m. to num p.m. or as specified by the dte .
no blasting is permitted during holiday periods or local events as determined by the departments dte .
notify the department rtmc and statelocal police two times before each blasting event .
the initial notification must be made num hours in advance of the expected blast time .
a second notification must be made num minutes before stopping traffic for the blast work .
sufficient flaggers must be present to control traffic on all impacted roadways .
when traffic is stopped for blasting monitor the traffic queue .
provide a shadow vehicle on each affected approach numi numj num num change no .
num one in each direction at least num feet in advance of the last vehicle in the traffic queue .
this vehicle must remain at least num feet in advance of the last vehicle as the length of the queue increases .
it may be necessary to provide two of these vehicles with drivers working as a team if adequate shoulder or roadside is not available for a single vehicle to safely drive in reverse along the roadway .
furnish erect and maintain on all affected roadways appropriate standard signing as shown in the mutcd part num figure numhnum blasting zone tanum .
these signs are in addition to any temporary traffic control devices required by an existing temporary traffic control plan or required by publication num .
provide patrol vehicles one in each direction to drive through the blast area to determine the site has been completely cleared before the blast is detonated .
employ suitable precautionary measures and devices to prevent roadway damage including pavement drainage features signing traffic barrier andor guide rail lighting traffic control devices and any other roadway element .
precautionary measures and devices may include barriers blasting mats and other protective and control measures and devices .
as soon as the blasting has been completed inspect the work area for any unsafe conditions .
an inspection of the roadway by one patrol vehicle in each direction must be completed before traffic is released .
provide excavation equipment on standby to clear any rock debris from the roadway immediately following inspection .
j vibration monitoring .
complete vibration monitoring by a qualified independent blasting consultant .
use a minimum of five portable seismographs for each blast that adhere to the international society of explosives engineers performance specifications for blasting seismographs .
use seismographs capable of measuring particle velocities for three perpendicular components of vibration within a frequency response range from num to num hz .
use seismographs that have received a factory calibration within the nummonth period preceding the blast recorded .
the following procedures and requirements must be followed complete the vibration monitoring report using form trnum .
place four of the seismographs north south east and west of the blast at approved locations by the department .
place the remaining seismograph at the nearest critical structure subject to blast induced damage .
monitor and record ppv and frequency for each blast .
provide the data recorded for each shot to the department before the next blast .
do not blast within num feet of the closest structure .
do not blast within num feet of less than numday old concrete .
do not blast within num feet of newly placed concrete until it has reached numday strength unless approved by the department .
for blasting greater than num feet away from new concrete the ground vibration limits indicated in table a apply .
table a age of concrete maximum ppv less than num days no blasting after num days num insec after num days num insec before test blasting calculate the value of maximum powder charge per delay permissible using an initial conservative scaled distance of num for the distance between the critical structure and shot .
the scaled distance is calculated by dividing the true distance feet from the blast to a point of concern by the square root of the maximum charge weight in pounds per delay .
plot the ppv measured from each seismograph versus the scaled distance between the blast and seismograph location on a logarithmiclogarithmic graph .
from this plot determine the sitespecific working scaled distance factor for a maximum particle velocity of num inches per second .
the representative and the qualified independent blasting consultant will confirm that the ppv of each component does not exceed the safe limits of the nearest structure subject to vibration damage .
the limits for any of the three mutually perpendicular components of ppv are indicated in table b .
table b frequency maximum ppv numhz num insec numj numm num num change no .
num numhz num insec for all subsequent blasts the qualified independent blasting consultant will evaluate the resulting ppv measured by the seismographs by plotting the recorded ppv versus the scaled distance on a logarithmic logarithmic graph and submit to the department for approval .
if at any time a maximum particle velocity of num inches per second is exceeded a modification to the initially established working scaled distance is required .
stop all blasting operations if the vibration limits are exceeded until the contractor reports to the department that no damage has occurred to structures covered in the preblast survey and that corrective measures are in place to lower vibrations to required limits to minimize the potential for any damage from future blasting .
k airblast monitoring .
monitor airblast between the main blasting area and the nearest structure subject to blast damage or annoyance .
monitor airblast at a second location as determined by the representative .
the following information is required for the completion of the airblast monitoring use airblast monitoring equipment of the type specifically manufactured for the purpose of airblast measurements .
maintain a peak overpressure below num db num pounds per square inch for residential structures .
provide a dated record of the peak overpressure measurements to the department immediately after each shot or use the same reporting procedures and time intervals designated for vibration monitoring .
stop blasting operations if the established overpressure limits are exceeded until the airblast monitoring specialist reports to the department that no damage has occurred or will occur and that corrective action has been taken to lower the peak airblast .
l water supply monitoring .
monitor water supply and submit water supply monitoring reports to the department before and after blasting operations and when issues arise during blasting operations .
the water supplies must include all wells springs or other ground water supplies used for human consumption .
retain a qualified independent blasting consultant to oversee and complete the water supply monitoring program .
complete the water supply monitoring report using form trnum .
the following information is required for the completion of the water supply monitoring program determine the quantity and quality of water by identifying and monitoring water supplies within num feet of the blasting locations .
if geologic conditions warrant water supplies beyond num feet may be included if there are concerns for potential impact or if deemed appropriate for risk management .
two weeks before the start of blasting operations and between num and num weeks after blasting operations conclude where permitted by the owners for all water supplies identified measure and record water levels well depths existing flow rates well yield and any other pertinent information .
two weeks before the start of blasting operations and between num and num weeks after blasting operations conclude complete field and laboratory analyses for the following field water quality data parameters and any other requested parameters from all identified water supplies ph temperature specific conductance turbidity total coliforms fecal coliformse .
coli nitrate nitrite chloride hardness iron and sulfates .
collect water samples using sample collection and preservation techniques specified by the testing laboratory .
complete water analyses by a dep certified laboratory .
within num weeks after completion of blasting operations provide the department a final report of the conclusions and results of the water supply monitoring program and if applicable indicate any impacts to local water supplies from blasting activities .
the contractor is not responsible for damages to the water supplies provided the blasting is done as specified in this specification and the blasting plan .
m postblast survey .
conduct an exterior and interior postblast survey within num weeks after completion of all blasting and rock excavation of all utilities buildings or structures for which a preblast survey was performed unless a waiver wasis obtained from the property owner .
complete the exterior and interior postblast survey using form numm numa num num change no .
num trnum .
follow the procedures set forth in the preblast survey section numb to obtain arrangements for property access and submittal procedures to the department .
the postblast survey must be completed by a qualified independent blasting consultant in the presence of the property owner .
at the conclusion of the postblast survey the property owner must sign both exterior and interior postblast survey forms and be provided a copy .
submit the duly witnessed and signed exterior and interior postblast survey forms to the department .
include in the report any diagrams and nummegapixel resolution minimum digital images of structures indicating size and location of cracks separations or damage in foundations walls ceilings floors or other structural components .
also include documentation of any reported damage to water supplies including wells and springs and any differences from the exterior and interior preblast survey forms .
the contractor is responsible for damage resulting from vibration or noise above the established allowable limits and any other damages including damages from flyrock inadequate control or retention of blasted materials improper or poor blast area security or other damages resulting from improper or careless blasting practices or construction techniques .
num measurement and payment blasting for rock cut slope excavation is incidental to excavation or borrow excavation .
all material explosives labor tools and equipment needed for blasting operations including monitoring and survey activities will be considered incidental to the class of excavation specified and will not be paid for separately except as stated in numa .
a controlled blasting .
linear foot measured on linear foot of acceptable presplit or trim blasthole depth for blastholes drilled within the tolerance as specified in section numf .
num num num num initial edition section numspecial rolling num descriptionthis work is the special rolling of embankments .
num materialuse acceptable pneumatictired equipment for special rolling capable of varying the load from num tons to num tons .
use a roller constructed to transmit the load through four wheels equally spaced over the roller width mounted on two or four axles in line allowing oscillation of the individual wheels or pairs of wheels .
use a roller with tires capable of operating at inflation pressures ranging from num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch .
provide charts or tabulations showing the contact areas and contact pressures for the full range of tire inflation pressures and loadings for the particular tires furnished .
num constructionadjust the roller load and tire pressures for contact pressures to approximately the maximum supporting value of the layer being rolled .
when the special rolling of any layer shows an area to be unstable or nonuniform satisfactorily stabilize the area by providing additional compaction on these areas or by removing the unsuitable material replacing it with suitable material and recompacting .
operate the roller in a systematic manner so the number of passes can be readily determined and recorded .
normally operate the roller at a speed of not less than num num miles per hour .
perform special rolling only in the presence of the inspectorincharge who will approve or disapprove the stability of the embankment and recommend corrective measures .
num measurement and paymenthour no measurement and payment will be made for idle equipment time because of repairs servicing loading or unloading ballast increasing or decreasing tire pressure bad weather or for any other similar reason .
num numd num num change no .
num section numsubgrade num descriptionthis work is preparation of the roadbed to establish the top of subgrade elevation for both fills and excavations .
num construction a general .
form roadbed to the established top of subgrade elevation and compact as specified in section numb .
b preparation and proof rolling .
place and compact fill materials to top of subgrade elevation as specified in section numb for the type of material placed .
for newly placed fills maintain materials as specified in section numb .
where undercutting is not directed compact and proof roll existing subgrades or subgrades in cut areas as specified in section numanum .
seal all subgrade surfaces that have been constructed or disturbed at the end of each workday with a smoothdrum steel wheel roller in the static mode to promote continuous positive drainage and to minimize infiltration of surface water .
maintain and protect completed subgrade .
compact and proof roll the entire subgrade surface as specified in section numanum before placing the subbase when the completed subgrade has been in place for more than num days or at least one winter season .
promptly reshape and recompact or remove and replace damaged or unsatisfactory areas before placement of pavement structure .
c subgrade requirements .
install reference grade lines with ample supports or grade stakes offset along each side of the subgrade to control the elevation .
maintain reference grade lines until after completing the surface and correcting deficiencies .
check subgrade for grade and slope .
test the finished surface for irregularities by using a string line stretched tautly transversely across the subgrade area between the reference grade lines .
measure the vertical distance from the string line to the finished grade at various points along the string line from one side of the surface to the other .
test for surface irregularities at longitudinal intervals of not more than num feet .
as an alternative or whenever the representative suspects an area is deficient or irregular check the finished surface with a template and numfoot straightedge .
test the finished surface for irregularities by using a template cut to the required crosssection of the surface .
equip the template with metal or other vertical extensions attached to the top of each end to support a leveling device for checking the cross slope .
the bottom of the template is to be at the elevation of the top of the subgrade .
use a numfoot straightedge to test for longitudinal irregularities in the surface .
hold the straightedge parallel to the road centerline in contact with the surface .
move the straightedge from one side of the surface to the other .
advance along the surface in numfoot increments .
where subgrade is constructed using an automatic grading machine that cuts the subgrade and is controlled by a reference line or lines the longitudinal interval for checking the surface crosssection may be increased to not more than num feet .
where subgrade is constructed using grading equipment controlled by survey grade global positioning system gps laser technology andor combination thereof the longitudinal interval for checking the surface crosssection may be increased to not more than num feet provided the requirements of section numd are met .
correct surface irregularities exceeding num inch by loosening the surface and removing or adding material as required .
compact the corrected area and surrounding surface by rolling .
recheck the corrected subgrade area for grade and slope .
d gps or lasercontrolled equipment .
at least num week before the preconstruction conference submit a machine control grading qc plan to the department in accordance with section numb .
as a minimum the qc plan must demonstrate that the grading control equipment meets the performance requirements within acceptable tolerances .
at a minimum set construction stakes at right angles to the centerline on tangents and radial offsets on curves at num foot intervals the entire length of mainline .
in addition set a minimum of two constructions stakes on each ramp on each intersecting roadway and on projects less than num feet in length .
tabulate and provide offsets and elevations of all stakes using form dnum to the representative .
rough grade and fine grade stakes will be accompanied by a guard stake for easy identification .
numd numa num num change no .
num provide control points and conventional grade stakes at critical locations such as pcs pts superelevation points and other critical points required for the construction of drainage and roadway structures .
provide other points of reference necessary to establish quality control or for verification of accuracy by the department .
provide the same survey grade gps network to the department as that used during construction .
the department will review the network and monitor the project .
check and recalibrate if necessary the gps or laser machine control system at the start of each work day .
test the finished surface at all hinge points andor centerline edge of lane and edge of shoulders on the cross section at all critical locations and as established in the qc plan .
correct surface irregularities exceeding num inch by loosening the surface and removing or adding material as required .
compact the corrected area and surrounding surface by rolling .
recheck the corrected subgrade area for grade and shape .
upon successful quality control testing notify the representative the subgrade is ready for acceptance .
at a minimum the representative will test the finished surface at all hinge points andor centerline edge of lane and edge of shoulders on the crosssection at a random locations every num feet for acceptance .
correct all areas exceeding num inch .
if more than num of all acceptance tests are determined to exceed num inch in any phase of the project the representative may require stakes and stringline be established as specified in section numc .
provide all electronic data files used for the construction of the finegrade of the roadway to the representative .
num measurement and payment a subgrade .
subgrade is incidental to the immediate overlying pavement structure .
if required for shaping and finishing unpaved classes of work subgrade is incidental to those items of work .
num numd num num change no .
num section numgeotextiles num descriptionthis work is furnishing and installing geotextiles for the class specified .
num materialuse geotextiles as specified in section num for the specified class and type .
a bedding .
section num no .
num coarse aggregate type c or better .
b securing pins .
use steel securing pins minimum num inches long by minimum num inch in diameter and with a num numinch washer head .
if allowed alternate securing devices that provide equivalent or greater anchorage may be used .
c cover material .
use cover material as specified or indicated .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
remove and replace fabric areas damaged during construction .
lap replaced fabric as specified for the class of fabric used .
do not allow traffic or construction equipment directly on the fabric .
b class numsubsurface drainage .
provide smooth side and bottom trench surfaces so the fabric does not bridge depressions in the soil and is not damaged by rock projections .
lay the fabric flat in the prepared trench without stretching .
lay the top of the fabric back on the sides to allow for the placement of the aggregate backfill and pipe .
place and compact the aggregate backfill up to the pipe invert level and install pipe .
continue filling the remainder of the trench with compacted aggregate backfill as indicated .
backfill aggregate and install pipe in a manner to prevent damage to the fabric .
lap out or overlap the geotextile according to the standard drawings for the specific type of subsurface drain being constructed .
use fabric of a width to allow a minimum trenchwidth overlap across the backfill at the trench top where required .
overlap adjacent ends of rolls an amount equal to the trench width .
do not allow the fabric to be exposed for more than num weeks without covering with aggregate .
c class numsedimentation control .
use type a or b fabric as indicated or specified .
install as specified in section num or section num. d class numlayer separation and erosion control type a .
num .
layer separation .
prepare the surface and remove any object that may puncture the geotextile .
roll out the geotextile over the prepared surface .
place fabric in a loose and unstretched condition but without folds or wrinkles .
do not drag the geotextile on the ground during placement and handling .
overlap fabric rollends and edges a minimum of num inches with adjacent material .
place cover material by back dumping then spread the cover material ahead of all equipment .
do not make abrupt turns with tracked equipment that would result in pulling folding or tensioning of the fabric .
steel pins as specified in section num may be used to secure the fabric before placement of the cover material to prevent lifting of the fabric by wind .
compact the cover material as specified in section num .
num .
erosion control .
remove vegetation large stones and other debris from the area to be protected and grade the surface to a relatively smooth condition .
undercut areas of soft material and replace with acceptable compacted material as directed .
lay the fabric on the prepared area in a loose and unstretched condition .
overlap all adjacent edges a minimum of num feet .
for underwater placement overlap a minimum of num feet .
offset adjacent roll ends a minimum of num feet .
anchor the fabric in place by securing pins or other acceptable methods along overlaps at the spacing shown in table a .
overlap the fabric so the upslope fabric is overtop the downslope fabric and the upstream fabric is overtop the downstream fabric .
place securing pins on a maximum num foot spacing on the unlapped portions of the fabric such as perimeters .
securing pins may be eliminated for slopes flatter than num provided that aggregate rock or other acceptable means are used to secure the fabric .
numd numd num num change no .
num table a securing pin spacing slope steeper than num num to num flatter than num pin spacing along overlaps num feet num feet num feet cover the fabric with the covering material as soon as possible .
do not expose the fabric for more than num weeks .
place cover material in a manner that slippage of the cover material over the fabric does not occur .
do not drop rocks directly on the fabric from a height greater than num foot .
do not allow the rock placement procedure to puncture or damage the fabric .
when placing rock greater than num foot in size use a minimum numinch layer of bedding on top of the geotextile to prevent damage to the fabric .
e class numstabilization and grs abutment reinforcement type c. num .
stabilization .
fine grade the subgrade as specified in section numc as indicated and in compliance with the cross sections .
remove any object that may puncture the geotextile .
roll out the geotextile over the prepared subgrade .
place the geotextile free of wrinkles .
do not drag the geotextile on the ground during placement or handling .
overlap adjacent rolls in a minimum of num feet .
do not allow any equipment directly on the geotextile until it is covered to full depth of subbase .
place subbase material by back dumping then spread the subbase ahead of all equipment at full plan depth .
place subbase material so that equipment is never in direct contact with the fabric .
do not make abrupt turns with tracked equipment that would result in deformation of the fabric .
steel pins as specified in section num may be used to secure the fabric before placement of the subbase to prevent lifting of the fabric by wind .
compact the subbase material as specified in section num .
fill any wheel ruts that form during construction additional subbase to maintain plan profile .
do not remove the wheel ruts by blading the wheel ruts level .
num .
grs abutment reinforcement .
install as shown on the standard drawings .
f class numopen joint pipe wrap type a .
installed as specified in section num and as shown on drawing rcnum m. g class numclosed joint pipe wrap type b .
installed as specified in section num and as shown on drawing rcnum m. num measurement and payment a geotextiles class num .
linear foot measured by the length of trench .
b geotextiles class num .
square yard for the type indicated or specified except when used as silt barrier fence paid for under section num or section num. c geotextiles class num .
square yard for the type indicated or specified .
d geotextiles class num .
will be incidental to the pipe item .
num numb num num initial edition section numtemporary project air pollution control num descriptionthis work is disposal of burnable spoils by the use of an openpit incinerator by removal or by other acceptable disposal methods .
num constructiondo not perform this work without before obtaining written authorization from the deputy secretary for highway administration or authorized designee and if applicable fhwa .
a general .
use temporary air pollution control measures whenever burning is prohibited because it violates the air pollution control act act num as approved october num num or as amended .
b open pit incinerators .
for a project where open or free standing burning is not permitted the dep will allow the operation of an air curtain destructor open pit incinerator as defined in title num section num of the rules and regulations of the dep .
use the destructor for destroying wood waste generated by clearing and grubbing operations provided that the incinerators are properly designed located and operated .
permission may be granted for both units within and outside the air basin areas defined in title num section num of chapter num of the rules and regulations of the dep but each proposal is required to be reviewed on an individual basis by the appropriate regional air pollution control engineer .
if operating this unit creates an air pollution problem the dep will take enforcement action .
num measurement and paymentdollar the proposal will include an item and a predetermined amount of money for temporary project air pollution control .
the contract item will have a unit of measure of dollar a unit price of num and a quantity equal to the predetermined amount .
due to the contingent or unpredictable nature of the work being performed the provisions of section numd are not applicable to this item .
measured and paid for under the temporary project air pollution control item as follows a negotiated price .
at a price agreed upon with the department before performing the work .
if applicable agreement is also required with fhwa .
b force account basis .
section numd num numc num num initial edition section numsealing abandoned water wells and springs num descriptionthis work is the sealing of water wells or springs .
num material class c cement concretesection num except with a slump of num inches to num inches spring boxsection num spring box outlet pipesection num num construction a drilled or driven wells .
completely seal the well with concrete .
remove standing water in the well if possible before placing the concrete plug .
do not pull metal casings of wells .
if directed where multiple groundwater aquifers exist evidenced by a well casing length longer than normal pull the casing .
to prevent losing the hole when the casing is pulled proceed as follows num .
fill the lower uncased well portion with concrete before pulling casing .
num .
as each section is pulled fill that portion of uncased hole with concrete before removing the next casing section .
num .
continue until all of the casing is removed and the well is completely filled with concrete .
excavate material around the casing top at the finished elevation num foot deep and num foot in width around the casing .
fill the excavated area with concrete placed monolithically with the top of the well plug .
seal wells before demolition operations to prevent contamination .
b dug wells .
completely fill abandoned dug wells with concrete and finish flush with the surface .
c springs .
enclose springs with satisfactory spring boxes and with suitable overflow pipes to collect and direct the flow to inlets or parallel ditches .
num measurement and payment a sealed drilled or driven wells .
each b sealed dug wells .
each c sealed springs .
each num numa num num change no .
num section numgeofoam lightweight fill num descriptionthis work is furnishing transporting and placing geofoam lightweight fill for construction of embankments and for backfilling behind structures .
num material a expanded polystyrene eps geofoam blocks .
provide blocks from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements table a eps geofoam block physical requirementsnum property test method type num type num designation astm d num epsnum epsnum density pcf astm d num num num num num compressive strength at num deformation psi astm d num num num compressive strength at num deformation psi astm d num num num compressive strength at num deformation psi astm d num num num flexural strength psi astm c num num num oxygen index volume astm d num num num water absorption volume astm c num num max .
num max .
dimensions inch num by num by num h by w by l num by num by num h by w by l num all values minimum unless indicated otherwise .
provide blocks having the same dimensions as all other blocks except where necessary for project specific fill geometries .
blocks smaller than the dimensions indicated in table a can be provided where necessary to meet project specific geometries .
provide manufactured blocks that do not deviate from required or specified dimension of the blocks by more than num percent .
provide blocks having perpendicular faces except as required for project specific geometries .
do not deviate faces from perpendicular planes more than a num inch over a length of num inches .
provide blocks with planar faces i.e .
not warped or uneven that do not deviate from planarity by more than num inch over a length of num inches .
provide blocks manufactured using only virgin polystyrene resin .
do not use blocks manufactured with regrind or recycled material .
provide blocks manufactured with sufficient flame retardants to meet the minimum oxygen index indicated in table a .
unless blocks are fully encapsulated with a geomembrane provide blocks manufactured with an insecticide to prevent termite and other insect attack .
provide blocks that have been seasoned for a minimum of num hours after manufacture and prior to shipment .
while seasoning protect blocks from moisture and ultraviolet uv radiation at a temperature of numf numf .
prior to placement store blocks in a wellventilated facility .
allow the representative to inspect the storage facility upon request .
numa numf num num change no .
num provide blocks labeled with manufacturers name astm eps designation as specified in table a the date the block was molded the weight in pounds and density in pounds per cubic foot as measured after the required seasoning period .
b hydrocarbon resistant geomembrane .
provide a geomembrane from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements provide a geomembrane manufactured from a tripolymer consisting of polyvinyl chloride ethylene interpolymer alloy and polyurethane or a comparable polymer combination meeting the physical and chemical requirements specified in table b .
table b hydrocarbon resistant geomembrane physical requirementsnum property test method value thickness mils astm d num num unleaded gasoline vapor transmission rate ounces feetnumday astm d num num max .
grab tensile strengthnum pounds astm d num num elongation at break percent astm d num num toughnessnum pounds num puncture resistant ball tip pounds astm d num num shearnum pounds astm d num num factory seams bonded width each seam inches num pass cold crack numinch mandrel num hours f astm d num num passfail num all values minimum unless indicated otherwise .
num both machine and crossmachine direction numinch grip numinch by numinch sample num a calculated value grab tensile strength multiplied by percent elongation num modified per national sanitation foundation .
std .
no .
num provide a flexible geomembrane that covers and conforms to num degree edges and corners of blocks at ambient temperatures above numf without additional heating of the geomembrane .
c geotextile class num type a .
section num. d fine sand .
section numc type b no .
num bituminous concrete sand or sand with num passing the no .
num sieve and a maximum of num passing the no .
num sieve .
e bedding material .
section num aashto no .
num coarse aggregate section numc type a cement concrete sand or section numc type c mortar sand .
f capping material .
includes one of the following material meeting the requirements of section numanum.a except num of the material passing the num inch sieve .
section nume .
numg numc num num change no .
num g embankment .
section numanum.a .
num construction a delivery storage and handling .
deliver store and handle materials in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
during all stages of manufacture shipment storage and construction protect and handle blocks in a manner to prevent physical damage .
do not use any method of lifting or transporting blocks that create dents or holes in block surfaces or that cause losses of portions of block .
if blocks are to be stockpiled at the project site before placement designate a secure storage area that is located away from any heat source or construction activity that produces heat or flame .
personal tobacco smoking or flames of any kind are not allowed in the storage area .
store blocks off of the ground and out of standing water .
protect blocks from direct sunlight and uv rays .
do not place a cover directly over blocks that might allow the buildup of heat beneath the cover .
do not traverse blocks with vehicles or equipment and foot traffic by persons must be kept to a minimum .
if blocks are exposed to wind secure with sandbags or other similar soft weights that do not dent or otherwise damage blocks .
protect blocks from contact with and exposure to vapors from organic solvents including but not limited to acetone benzene and mineral spirits and petroleum based solvents including but not limited to gasoline kerosene and diesel fuel .
b onsite scale .
provide a scale onsite that is capable of weighing the blocks to verify block density .
provide a scale with a rated capacity of no more than two and one half times the weight of the heaviest block delivered to the site and accurate to a tenth of a pound .
provide documentation that the scale has been calibrated after being set up at the site .
verify block density by selecting a random block from each truck load of blocks delivered to the project .
if the random block is not within density requirements the entire truck load will be rejected .
individual blocks from a rejected truck load may be accepted if confirmed to be within density requirements .
record the following information date and time of measurement astm eps designation as specified in table a dimensions and weight of the block and the calculated density i.e .
block weight divided by block volume .
provide this information to the representative upon request .
c block layout submittal .
before placing blocks submit shop drawings to the representative for review and acceptance .
indicate on the shop drawings the proposed location and layout of all blocks location and thickness of bedding material capping material embankment material and pavement section and the location of the geotextile and geomembrane .
the proposed layout must meet the following requirements place type num blocks for the main body of the fill .
cap the top of the type num blocks with a minimum num inch thick layer of type num blocks .
type num blocks are not required to be used on the side slopes of the block fill .
use the maximum amount of full size blocks of minimum dimensions indicated in table a that the placement geometry allows .
place blocks with smallest dimension oriented vertically .
a minimum of two layers of blocks must be used i.e .
one layer of type num and one layer of type num except on sideslopes .
the plane on which any given layer of blocks is placed must be parallel to the longitudinal profile of the roadway .
within a given layer of blocks the longitudinal axes of all blocks must be parallel to each other .
numc nume num num change no .
num within a given layer of blocks vertical joints between adjacent longitudinal rows of blocks must be offset a minimum of num feet .
the longitudinal axes of blocks for layers above and below a given layer must be perpendicular to the longitudinal axes of blocks within that given layer .
the longitudinal axes of the uppermost layer of blocks must be perpendicular to the longitudinal profile of the roadway .
cover blocks with a minimum of num feet of material but not to exceed num feet .
total cover thickness includes the pavement section soil embankment and capping material .
if blocks are placed adjacent to a river stream creek etc .
place the bottom layer of blocks a minimum of num feet above the numyear storm elevation and a minimum of num foot above the numyear storm elevation .
d damage .
num .
blocks .
do not use blocks damaged during manufacturing shipping storage or construction that adversely affects their qualities .
replace damaged blocks at no expense to the department .
damaged blocks that can not be used are defined by any of the following volumetric damage of more than num of the volume of the single block surface damage of more than num of the load bearing area of the single block surface damage of more than num of the total block surface area continuous damage of more than num of the length of any side of a single block .
fill acceptable damaged areas on horizontal bearing surfaces with dry fine sand meeting the requirements of section numd .
num .
geomembrane .
repair any damaged geomembrane by welding patches according to manufacturers requirements and as approved by the representative .
extend patches a minimum of num inches beyond the limits of the damaged areas in all directions .
protect the blocks from damage during welding .
num .
geotextile .
remove and replace geotextile damaged during construction .
lap fabric over damaged areas and extend a minimum of num inches in all directions .
secure fabric lap with a geotextile seaming spray adhesive recommended by the manufacturer .
apply the adhesive to a minimum of num inches of the fabric lap .
do not bond the geotextile to the geomembrane during application of the adhesive .
e placement .
place blocks as indicated in the accepted block layout shop drawing or as directed by the representative .
before placement and for any period deemed necessary by the representative a representative from the manufacturer of the blocks must be on site to answer any questions regarding placement of the blocks .
before placement of blocks at or below original ground prepare the embankment foundation area in accordance with section numa .
before placement of the first layer of blocks place a leveling course consisting of a numinch loose layer of bedding material meeting the requirements of section nume .
grade the leveling course parallel to the longitudinal profile of the roadway .
the leveling course surface must be free of debris and water before placement of blocks .
place geotextile geomembrane and blocks as indicated in the accepted block layout shop drawing .
where possible place blocks with the factory skin i.e .
molded uncut surface as the outer layer .
if blocks are warpedcrowned but within the acceptable tolerance place blocks with crown upward at all times to prevent the ponding of water .
place blocks by hand .
do not use wheeled tracked or other equipment on the surface of blocks geomembrane or geotextile at any time .
equipment may be used to transport or lift blocks as long as its use does not damage the blocks .
nume numh num num change no .
num where custom shapes and smaller sizes than indicated in table a are needed and are not provided from the factory field cut these custom shapes and smaller sizes from full size blocks using a hot wire cutter .
do not use a chain saw hand saw or other mechanical shearing or cutting device to cut or shape blocks .
field cut blocks to within num inch of required or specified dimensions .
during placement of blocks secure the blocks with sandbags or other similar soft weights that do not dent or otherwise damage blocks until the soil cover is placed .
alternatively mechanical connectors or eps compatible adhesive approved by the block manufacturer may be used to secure blocks .
provide full contact between blocks .
do not leave standing water accumulated snow or ice or debris of any kind on previously placed blocks prior to placement of subsequent blocks .
do not use deicing salts sodium chloride or other products on the blocks that can cause degradation .
place blocks so that all vertical and horizontal joints between blocks are tight .
allow no gaps greater than num foot on vertical joints .
do not fill vertical joints with sand .
construct the top finished surface of the blocks to within a tolerance of num inch over a num foot interval of the design longitudinal profile of the blocks and design transverse slope of the blocks .
additionally construct the finished surface of the blocks beneath pavement sections to within num foot of the top of block design grade .
construct the finished surface of the blocks on side slopes to within num foot of the top of block design grade .
any adjustments for grade can be made using either type num or type num block so long as the type num blocks have a minimum thickness of num inches .
f encapsulating blocks with geomembrane and geotextile .
after placement of blocks continue bringing up the hydrocarbon resistant geomembrane to fully encapsulate all blocks in one continuous layer of geomembrane as indicated in the accepted block layout shop drawing .
field weld all geomembrane seams using a hot wedge welding machine .
do not use hot air or solvents to weld seams .
do not melt or otherwise damage the blocks during welding .
overlap seams according to manufacturers requirements but no less than num inches .
protect the blocks as needed during field welding of the geomembrane .
replace blocks damaged from welding of the geomembrane and repair the geomembrane at no expense to the department .
immediately after placement of the geomembrane continue bringing up the class num type a geotextile to fully cover the geomembrane .
overlap adjacent layers of geotextile a minimum of num inches .
secure all overlaps of geotextile with a geotextile seaming spray adhesive recommended by the manufacturer .
apply the adhesive to a minimum of num inches of the overlap .
do not bond the geotextile to the geomembrane during application of the adhesive .
prevent overspray of the adhesive onto the geomembrane .
if overspray occurs insert an additional piece of geomembrane that extends a minimum of num inches beyond the limits of the overspray to act as a bond breaker between the geomembrane and geotextile .
g capping material placement .
a numinch minimum compacted lift of capping material meeting the requirements of numf must be placed on top of the geotextile including on the horizontal surfaces of the side slopes before placement of embankment material .
place and compact capping material within num weeks after placement of the geotextile as specified in section num except as follows place the capping material over top of the fully encapsulated blocks by end dumping material just off the blocks and blading an numinch thick loose lift of material across the blocks with pneumatic tire equipment .
do not end dump capping material directly on the blocks .
do not stockpile capping material on previously placed capping material .
a single triaxle truck load of capping material may be dumped onto previously placed and compacted capping material .
spread capping material as quickly as practically possible .
do not drive directly on the blocks with any equipment do not use tracked equipment and do not make sharp sudden turns with pneumatic tired equipment that may damage the geotextile andor geomembrane .
repair any damage to the blocks geomembrane or geotextile that occurs before or during fill placement .
compact capping material using a smooth drum roller in static nonvibratory mode .
h embankment placement .
once a numinch minimum compacted lift of capping material is in place over top of the geotextile place and compact soil embankment meeting the requirements of section numanum.a as specified in section num and as indicated in the accepted block layout shop drawing .
place soil embankment to pavement subgrade elevation .
do not stockpile embankment material on previously placed capping or embankment material .
a single triaxle truck load of embankment material may be dumped onto previously placed and compacted capping or embankment material .
spread embankment material as quickly as practically possible .
place embankment over the side slopes of the block fill starting at the bottom of the slope in such a manner as to prevent damage to the blocks geomembrane and geotextile .
provide a minimum of num feet of embankment material cover vertically and horizontally over the blocks as measured from any exterior face of the block .
num numc num num change no .
num num measurement and payment a expanded polystyrene eps geofoam blocks .
cubic yard .
measure blocks in their final position .
payment will not be made for wasted material .
payment includes furnishing storing and placing type num and type num geofoam blocks bedding material fine sand capping material and any incidental materials such as mechanical connectors and adhesives .
b hydrocarbon resistant geomembrane .
square yard .
payment includes welding seams .
c geotextile class num type a .
section numc .
num numj num num change no .
num section numflowable backfill num descriptionthis work is furnishing transporting and placing flowable backfill .
flowable backfill may be a mixture of coarse aggregate fine aggregate water and air entraining agents either cement or pozzolans or a combination of both and may or may not include bottom ash or other admixtures .
the three types of flowable backfill are as follows a flowable backfill type b .
future excavation of the backfill may be necessary such as at utility trenches pipe trenches bridge abutments and around box or arch culverts .
b flowable backfill type c. excavation of backfills not anticipated including replacing unsuitable soils below structure foundations filling abandoned conduits tunnels and mines and backfilling around pipe culverts where extra strength is required .
c flowable backfill type d. construction in areas requiring lowdensity backfill material as in abutments over highly deformable soils backfilling retaining walls filling vaults and backfilling on top of buried structures .
num material a cement .
type i ip is or ii section num .
if using type ip cement adjust the quantity of flyash in the design as necessary .
if using type is cement adjust the quantity of ground granulated blast furnace slag in the design as necessary .
from a source listed in bulletin num. b flyash .
type f or c flyash section num except as follows flyashconforming to aashto m num or astm c num table num requirements except maximum loss on ignition is num and excluding the requirements of table numa num or numa .
from a source listed in bulletin num or tested and approved before incorporating into the flowable backfill mix .
c ground granulated blast furnace slag .
section num .
from a source listed in bulletin num. d fine aggregate .
type a b or c section num except having a maximum loss of num in the soundness test ptm no .
num .
the fine aggregate may be natural sand manufactured sand or foundry sand meeting section num .
from a source listed in bulletin num. e coarse aggregate .
type a b or c aashto num section num .
except num maximum for material finer than the no .
num sieve .
from a source listed in bulletin num. f bottom ash .
from a source listed in bulletin num .
coal ash having a maximum loss of num in the soundness test ptm no .
num and conforming to the following dry sieve gradation requirements sieve size passing numinch num no .
num num g water .
section num h admixtures .
section num. i air entraining admixtures .
from a manufacturer listed in bulleting num specifically for flowable backfill .
j geotextile class num type a .
section num numk num num num change no .
num k mix design .
submit a mix design and test results density strength and air content if applicable to the representative at least num weeks before construction .
alkalisilica remediation is not required regardless of the expansion value of the aggregates used in the mix design .
use table a as a guideline for the mix design or submit an alternate design based on density guidelines and conforming to the strength requirements of table a .
base the submitted mix design on an absolute volume of num cubic yard .
table a mix design properties criteria type b type c type d mix design cy cement lbs pozzolans lbs bottom ash lbs or coarse aggregate or fine aggregate air generating admixture num num num num num num num num slump inches aashto t num astm c num num min num min num min density pcf aashto t num astm c num na na num or as specified water absorption of aggregate aashto t num num max compressive strength psi ptm no .
num num days num max num min num quantities may be varied or alternate designs submitted to adapt mix to conform to density and strength requirements or to adapt to specific site conditions .
requires using a suitable lightweight aggregate or air entraining admixture .
provide a mix design that achieves the specified strength and density requirements .
approximate value .
use of air entraining agent may reduce these values .
some applications may require containing flowable backfill by constructing dikes from the mix by using less water to produce a numinch minimum slump if approved by the representative .
thickening of the mix in other areas is allowed if approved by the representative .
provide mix designs that conform to specific density requirements if specified .
if source of material is changed submit a revised mix design before using material .
conduct design mix testing at the highest flowability or slump being used for the project .
if applications involve exposed metal or metal coated with a layer of thin concrete num inch test the design mixes for corrosion resistance as follows resistivity aashto t num num day cure num ohmcentimeters ph of pulverized flowable backfill num to num chlorides of pulverized backfill after cure num ppm sulfates of pulverized backfill after cure num ppm sulfides of pulverized backfill after cure num ppm l certification .
certify the properties of flowable backfill as specified in section numbnum .
m forms .
section numhnum num construction numa numc num num change no .
num a general .
furnish indicated type of flowable backfill conforming to table a .
do not allow the flowable backfill to contact aluminized materials or compounds .
produce and transport according to section num excluding maximum temperature range of numf or by other approved methods from a facility accepted by the department .
the contractor may adjust the mix in the field provided it achieves the criteria specified in table a. b placement .
submit the sequence of operations at least num weeks before starting the work .
if required design the forms to sustain lateral fluid pressure equal to total weight of unhardened flowable backfill with a minimum num factor of safety .
construct formwork according to section numa .
do not place flowable backfill through flowing water .
remove and replace flowable backfill damaged by rain or flowing water .
if excavation can not be dewatered place flowable backfill by a tremie procedure approved by the representative .
break up lumps by remixing or other approved methods .
ensure that base drain outlets do not intersect areas where placing flowable backfill .
furnish solid base drain outlet pipes in areas intersecting the flowable backfill .
do not place flowable backfill at a material temperature below numf or if the temperature of either the air or the surface that the flowable backfill is placed on is numf or lower .
maintain the temperature of the inplace flowable backfill at no less than numf for a minimum of num hours or until the next lift is placed .
do not place additional lifts until surface bleed water dissipates or the preceding lift hardens sufficiently to support foot traffic or both .
protect finished surface from frost erosion and damage with suitable covers of soil aggregate concrete pavement or other material approved by the representative .
if required contain flowable backfill by constructing dikes from the mix .
for the mix for dikes use less water to produce a numinch minimum slump as directed by the representative .
dikes will remain an integral part of completed flowable backfill .
the contractor may thicken the mix in other areas if allowed by the representative .
num .
structure backfill .
when backfilling place flowable backfill in lifts to prevent lateral pressures from exceeding resisting capacity of structure .
do not place lifts that exceed numfoot unless approved by the representative .
protect structure foundation drains from intrusion and contamination of flowable backfill by using a separation membrane of class num type a geotextile .
during placement of flowable backfill protect existing structures drainage facilities utilities etc .
that are to remain within the fill area from movement or floating damage or misalignment .
repair or replace any damaged items as directed by the representative at no additional cost to the department .
provide preformed drain no more than num inches thick between the wall and the flowable fill and provide outlets at not more than num feet through the wall or as directed by the representative .
num .
pipe bedding and backfill .
backfill the trench as shown on the flowable backfill detail in the standard drawings .
place adequate support to provide the minimum required bedding from trench bottom to bottom of pipe and protect pipe from damage movement floating and improper alignment .
protect pipe from intrusion of flowable backfill .
if shown place class num type a geotextile membrane around pipe .
prevent floating of pipe by placing flowable backfill in lifts or use sandbags or other weights to ballast pipe until lift is set .
place the backfill evenly on both sides of the trench to avoid overstressing the pipe .
monitor pipe alignment according to section numc .
num .
utility trench backfill .
provide adequate tiedowns or weights if required for utility conduits to prevent floating .
protect utilities from damage and movement .
maintain proper alignment of conduits during placement of flowable backfill .
perform all utility work according to the permit requirements .
c testing and acceptance .
section numdnum section numdnum section numdnum and as follows test flowable backfill slump according to aashto t num test air content according to aashto t num do not apply an aggregate correction factor or t num and for yield according to aashto t num astm c num as part of the qc plan .
test flowable backfill for proper flowability using the slump cone .
conduct slump tests as often as necessary at least once daily or every num cubic yard to maintain the correct flowability at placement and if requested by the representative .
the contractor may add water onsite to maintain flowability as needed .
test flowable backfill for yield at least once daily or one test for every num cubic yard of material .
record all test results and submit to the representative .
numc numb num num change no .
num mold numinch by numinch cylinders according to ptm no .
num except specimens will remain in the mold until just before testing .
mold cylinders from the sample obtained for testing material flowability .
test for compressive strength according to ptm no .
num except use neoprene caps .
ensure the inspector witnesses compressive strength tests .
remove material that does not conform to table a strength requirements .
the representative may allow the material to remain in place with liquidated damages assessed at numcubic yard per lot of deficient flowable fill .
d opening to traffic .
for flowable backfill type b and type c material do not open to traffic until num hour after the surface bleed water has dissipated and as allowed by the representative .
open flowable backfill type d to traffic when directed by the representative .
num measurement and payment a flowable backfill .
cubic yard .
for the type indicated .
b class num geotextile type a .
section numc if using flowable backfill in place of a material incidental to another item of work then the flowable backfill is also incidental .
num numb num num change no .
num section numgeogrids num descriptionthis work is furnishing and installing geogrids for the class specified .
num material a geogrid .
section num for the class indicated .
b backfill .
provide backfill consisting of natural materials free of organic matter and other deleterious substances .
num .
backfill for class num geogrids .
num.a mechanically stabilized earth mse walls .
provide backfill for mse walls consisting of aashto no .
num coarse aggregate section num in areas that require free draining material or in areas that are at or below the num year flood elevation .
for all other areas of mse walls provide backfill meeting the following requirements sieve size percent passing num inch num no .
num num no .
num num determination of the fines content minus no .
num sieve material for mse wall backfill must be determined by wash test according to ptm no .
num .
this is in addition to ptm no .
num .
provide backfill meeting the quality requirements of type c coarse aggregate or better as specified in section numa table b except provide materials free of clay lumps friable particles coal and coke .
do not use metallurgical slag or cinders .
provide backfill with a maximum plasticity index pi of num as determined in accordance with aashto t num and t num .
provide backfill materials with a ph between num and num determined in accordance with aashto t num .
provide backfill with an angle of internal friction of not less than num degrees as determined in accordance with aashto t num on the backfill sample portion that is finer than the no .
num sieve .
coarse aggregate meeting the requirements of section num does not require testing for angle of internal friction .
prepare the shear strength test sample by substituting material coarser then the no .
num sieve with material that passes the no .
num sieve but is retained on the no .
num sieve .
the percentage of material finer than the no .
num sieve must remain as proportioned in the original sample prior to substitution .
shear testing may be performed on samples containing material larger than the no .
num sieve if the shear device conforms to aashto t num sections num and num .
num.b geosynthetic reinforced soil grs slopes .
for grs slopes that require a vegetated face provide a minimum of num foot of backfill at the face of the slope measured perpendicular to the slope face that meets the requirements of section numanum.a and that has a ph between num and num determined in accordance with aashto t num .
for all other areas of grs slopes with vegetated faces and all other grs slope types provide backfill with a ph between num and num as determined in accordance with aashto t num and unless indicated otherwise meeting one of the following material types soil meeting the requirements of section numanum.a wellgraded granular material meeting the following requirements sieve size percent passing num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num numb numb num num change no .
num provide backfill exhibiting an angle of internal friction meeting design requirements determined in accordance with aashto t num on the portion finer than the no .
num sieve .
prepare the shear strength test sample by substituting material coarser than the no .
num sieve with material that passes the no .
num sieve but is retained on the no .
num sieve .
the percentage of material finer than the no .
num sieve must remain as proportioned in the original sample prior to the substitution .
shear testing may be performed on samples containing material larger than the no .
num sieve if the shear device conforms to aashto t num sections num and num .
num .
backfill for class num and class num geogrids .
aashto no .
num coarse aggregate aashto no .
num coarse aggregate or penndot no .
numa coarse aggregate section num and as specified or indicated .
c class num type a geotextile .
section num .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated or specified and as follows a general .
prepare surface as indicated or required .
place geogrid to the vertical spacing lengths and areas indicated .
provide overlaps as specified .
place geogrids flat and free of wrinkles stretching and anchoring as necessary .
do not allow traffic or equipment on the geogrid until it has been covered with one lift num inch loose layer of backfill .
dump backfill of the type specified on top of the geogrid and then blade material across the grid to the required lift thickness .
maximum backfill drop height is num feet .
if using tracked equipment to spread backfill do not cross track or make sudden turns that result in deforming or damaging the geogrid .
compact backfill as specified in section num or as specified .
reject all geogrids with defects tears punctures flaws deterioration or damage incurred during manufacture transportation storage or installation as determined by the representative .
replace damaged geogrid at no additional cost to the department .
b handling and storage .
at a minimum follow astm d num for identification storage and handling of geogrid .
provide clear identification to every roll of geogrid that provides identification of product designation the manufacturers name lot number material quantity and clearly differentiates between rolls of similar geogrid .
protect all geogrid from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays temperatures greater than numf mud dirt dust and debris .
c class num uniaxial geogrid reinforcement .
place all uniaxial geogrid in the direction of primary reinforcement machine or roll direction .
the maximum allowable vertical spacing of geogrid is num feet for mse wall applications and num inches for grs slope applications and any other reinforcement applications .
overlap adjacent layers of geogrid as indicated or required but in no case less than num inches .
for concave wall or slope faces maintain the minimum overlap for num percent of the length of the geogrid from the wall or slope face edge of the geogrid .
do not splice or overlap geogrids in the primary reinforcement machine or roll direction .
d class num and class num biaxial geogrids .
prepare subgrade or foundation surface flat smooth and level free of any sharp protrusion or debris .
place a layer of class num type a geotextile on top of the prepared subgrade before placement of geogrid .
overlap edges of geotextile and geogrid both machineroll and cross machinecross roll directions a minimum of num foot .
maximum vertical spacing of geogrid is num inches .
num measurement and payment a geogrid .
square yard .
for the class indicated or specified .
any required or incidental overlaps of geogrid are not included in measurement and payment .
only the indicated plan view reinforced area per geogrid layer is included in payment .
backfill used in the installation of geogrid is included in the payment .
b class num type a geotextile .
section numc .
num numc num num initial edition section numgeocell load distribution mat num descriptionthis work is the construction of a geocell load distribution mat over soft or unstable subgrades .
num material a geocell .
section num of the depth and type indicated .
b anchors .
section numa grade num .
used to hold expanded geocell sections in a fully and uniformly extended position until backfilling of geocell is complete .
provide anchors in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as indicated except having a minimum bar diameter of num inches and a minimum length of num inches plus the geocell depth .
c mechanical fasteners .
used to fasten adjacent sections of geocell .
provide mechanical fasterners in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and capable of holding adjacent geocell panels in direct contact until pavement or other type of final surface is placed .
d coarse aggregate .
section num no .
numa .
e geotextile .
section num class num type a .
num constructioninstall the geocell according to manufacturers instructions and as follows a subgrade preparation .
prepare compacted subgrade to a uniform surface and to the lines and grade indicated .
b geotextile .
install geotextile on prepared subgrade .
provide a minimum num inch overlap between adjacent layers and extend a minimum of num inches beyond the indicated perimeter of the installed geocell .
c geocell .
store and transport geocell sections in an unexpanded configuration until ready to install .
position collapsed geocell sections in place and drive in the anchors starting at the outer edge cells .
drive anchors as required by the manufacturer or as required to fully expand a geocell panel to the required cell dimensions and to hold it in place until filling with subbase is complete .
drive anchors so that the anchor extends at least num inches below the bottom of the geocell .
allow enough anchor length above the top of the geocell for the anchor to be removed .
remove anchors after filling the cells with subbase and before compaction when used for subgrade support and pavement applications .
in situations where it is not practical to use anchors i.e .
over soft soil containing obstructions to driving anchors existing shallow utilities etc .
an installation frame may be needed to allow for the expansion of the geocells without anchoring in place .
the installation frame must be capable of fully expanding the geocells and holding them in place until the subbase is placed in the cells .
align adjoining geocell sections and overlap abutting perimeter cell welded ends .
keep top of geocell sections flush before fastening .
connect adjacent geocell sections with mechanical fasteners in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
mechanical fasteners must be capable of holding adjacent geocell panels in direct contact until pavement is placed .
fasten all adjoining cells of adjacent geocell sections and all overlapped abutting perimeter cell welded ends .
place subbase in cells of expanded geocell sections .
overfill cells sufficiently to ensure the top of the compacted subbase is at least num inch above the top of the geocell to allow fine grading as necessary or required and to protect the geocell from construction traffic and heat during paving operations .
limit the drop height of the subbase to a numc numc num num initial edition maximum of num feet to prevent damaging or displacing the cell wall .
do not operate equipment on unfilled geocell sections until cells have been overfilled with loose subbase .
compact subbase as specified in section num except when cells greater than num inches in height are used .
when cell height exceeds num inches compact as specified section num except allow compacted lift thickness num to num inches greater than the cell height .
num measurement and payment a geocell .
square yard .
includes mechanical fasteners and anchors .
b geotextile .
section num c subbase .
section numanum num numl num num change no .
num section num base courses section numplain cement concrete base course num descriptionthis work is construction of a normal or high early strength plain cement concrete base course .
when placed on subgrade it includes the preparation of subgrade as specified in section num .
num material class a cement concretesection num high early strength cement concretesection num pozzolansection num expansion joint fillersection num longitudinal construction joint materialsection num concrete curing materialsections num and numb pozzolan may be substituted for a portion of portland cement .
num constructionas specified in section num except interpret references to pavement to mean base course and for the following sections a general .
only section numanum applies .
d forms .
add the following forms are not required for base course widening num feet or less in width .
however use acceptable methods to contain the base course .
g slip form paving method .
delete references to reinforcement .
h handling and placing reinforcement .
delete this section .
i transverse joints .
only section numinum applies .
j longitudinal joints .
replace with the following where longitudinal joints are indicated or formed for convenience of construction form a tied joint as shown on the standard drawings for cement concrete pavement joints .
in full width construction sawing is not required .
k final strike off consolidation and finishing .
replace section numknum .
with the following rake or broom finish the surface .
l curing concrete .
modify as follows liquid membrane forming curing compound white will not be allowed .
liquid membrane forming curing compound black may be used provided the cement concrete base course is not accessible to traffic before the surface course is placed .
discontinue use of the compound if it becomes numl numc num num change no .
num unsatisfactory as a curing agent resume curing by other methods as specified .
n sealing joints and cracks .
delete this section .
o surface tolerance .
replace with the following after the concrete has hardened retest the surface of the base course using straightedges .
operate the straightedge as specified in section numknum .
remove high points in excess of num inch by means of grinding or cutting tools as directed .
remove and replace sections containing depressions of more than num inch when directed in writing .
remove the full width of lane in which a depression occurs for a length of at least num feet .
q opening to traffic .
replace with the following the representative will determine when base course may be opened to traffic .
however do not open to traffic until the base course develops a required minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch as determined by compressive tests made on cylinder specimens in accordance with ptm no .
num or as determined by maturity method in accordance with ptm no .
num. s tests for depth .
revise the traffic lane definition as follows a traffic lane will be as indicated or as determined by the representative .
t defective work .
replace with the following unless otherwise directed by the representative in writing remove and replace pavement defective in surface tolerance as specified in section numo defective in depth as specified in section nums defective in air content as specified in section numcnum .
or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of rain improper final finish or honeycombing which in the representatives opinion can not be repaired .
the minimum pavement removal and replacement length is num feet for the full width .
when removing and replacing pavement defective in depth start at the determined point of deficiency and proceed longitudinally until a section is reached where the deficiency is not more than num inch and as specified .
as directed construct transverse joints needed because of the pavement removal .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard a adjustment for deficient base course .
where a deficiency exists as determined by cores the department will pay as follows deficiency in depth determined by cores inches proportional part of contract price allowed num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num num num num num b defective base course left in place .
the department will not pay for defective base course left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive .
when the district executive directs that defective base course be left in place final payment for this base course will be at num of the contract price .
c concrete base course cores .
each the price includes the measuring apparatus which remains the contractors property upon completion of the project .
the department will not pay for additional cores drilled if the depth is deficient by more than num inch .
num nume num num change no .
num section numcement treated permeable base course num descriptionthis work is the construction of a cement treated permeable base course ctpbc on a prepared surface .
if placed on subgrade this work includes the preparation of subgrade as specified in section num .
num material a aggregate .
coarse aggregate type a or type b section num for aashto no .
num or no .
num except restrict the material passing the no .
num sieve to a maximum of num .
determine the loss by washing according to ptm no .
num .
do not use fine aggregate in the mixture .
the use of blast furnace slag or crushed gravel is allowed .
when using crushed gravel provide a minimum of num crushed particles with at least two faces resulting from fracture .
b cement .
type i or type ii cement section num. c water .
section num d pozzolan .
section numb e mixture design .
provide a mix design as follows submit for review by the representative a mix design using num pounds of cement per cubic yard based on the saturated surfacedry rodded unit weight of aggregate .
fly ash may be substituted for up to num of the required cement with a substitution ratio of num pound of fly ash for each num pound of cement .
design and proportion the cement and water based on the saturated surfacedry weight of the aggregate .
do not exceed a watercement ratio of num .
provide a mix with num coverage of aggregate without runoff .
mix and proportion as specified in applicable sections of section num .
certify as specified in section numb f concrete curing material .
section numa nume and numa type num g admixtures .
section num num construction a general .
the contractor may perform halfpavement or fullpavement width construction .
b weather restrictions .
section numb.num c concrete mixtures .
section numc d conditioning of rubblized pavementsubbase .
thoroughly sprinkle water on the rubblized pavementsubbase before placing ctpbc if necessary to ensure a moist condition .
sprinkle with as much water as it readily absorbs well in advance of ctpbc placement .
e placement and compaction .
use an approved asphalt paver or mechanical spreader equipped with screed plate vibrator and fully automated sensors to control profile and transverse grade .
use mechanical equipment for the entire lane width or as much lane width as practical .
adjust screed assemblies to provide the required cross section and depth .
compact the ctpbc using steelwheel power rollers having a manufacturers certified metal weight from num tons to num tons .
use of vibratory paver screed as sole means of attaining compaction is not allowed .
perform a minimum of one pass with the roller to achieve compaction and do not compact material to the point that the ctpbc is not free draining or the aggregate is crushed .
one roller pass is defined as one trip of the roller in one direction over any one spot .
perform handwork as directed .
do not disturb the freshly placed ctpbc .
do not allow more than num hour from nume num num num change no .
num the time water is added to the aggregate and cement to the time compaction is complete .
the contractor may use a retarding admixture to increase the time to num num hours .
f surface tolerance .
test the finished surface at locations the representative suspects are irregular and at transverse joints and paving notches .
test the surface in stages using a numfoot straightedge .
at each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface from one side to the other .
advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the pavement centerline by not more than num feet .
correct irregularities of more than num inch by loosening surface mixture and removing or adding ctpbc .
for irregularities that develop after compaction is completed correct the irregularity by a method that does not produce contaminating fines or damage the base .
do not grind or mill the ctpbc .
the area is defective if irregularities or defects remain after final compaction .
g curing .
begin curing immediately after compaction .
cure with white membrane forming curing compound as specified in section numlnum.c .
except apply at a rate of num gallon per num square feet num of the surface area or as directed .
as an alternative curing method the contractor may select to cover the ctpbc with white polyethylene sheeting material as specified in section numlnum.a .
maintain curing materials for num hours .
if the ctpbc temperature falls below numf during the num hour curing period extend the cure period by an additional num hours .
at no cost to the department remove and replace ctpbc if the ctpbc temperature drops to numf within num hours of the placement .
h protection of courses .
section num and as follows construction traffic is not allowed on the ctpbc for at least num days after the ctpbc has been placed .
do not place overlying pavement on the ctpbc during this time period .
after the num day period restrict construction traffic to only allow trucks and equipment required to place the next layer or any adjacent ctpbc lift or pavement course .
remove and replace areas damaged or contaminated at no cost to the department .
i protection against rain .
section numt j tests for depth .
after curing the ctpbc and at locations determined by the representative carefully dig or drill one fulldepth test hole for each num square yards of completed ctpbc .
the representative will measure the depth of the ctpbc .
where the depth is defective define the defective limits by digging or drilling additional test holes longitudinally and transversely until the depth meets requirements .
backfill test holes with ctpbc mixture .
k defective work .
ctpbc is defective when the depth is deficient by num inch or more from the indicated depth deficient in surface tolerance or when the surface contains defects caused by rain or improper finish that in the representatives opinion can not be repaired .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace defective ctpbc full depth at no additional cost to the department .
submit a plan to the representative with proposed methods to remove and replace the ctpbc .
remove and replace the ctpbc after review of the plan .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numa num num initial edition section numsuperpave asphalt mixture design standard construction hma base course num descriptionthis work is the standard construction of a plantmixed hma base course on a prepared surface using a volumetric mixture design developed with the superpave gyratory compactor sgc .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num as specified for standard construction and with additions and modifications as follows b weather limitations .
section numb .
replace with the following do not place base course on prepared surfaces that are wet or when the temperature of the air or the prepared surface is numf or lower .
if work is halted because of weather conditions the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of base course that are en route to the project .
h spreading and finishing .
revise as follows num.b spreading and finishing .
add the following if the indicated compacted depth of a superpave num mm hma base course is more than num inches place the hma base course in two or more layers of approximately equal compacted depth with no layer less than num inches or more than num inches .
if the indicated compacted depth of a superpave num mm hma base course is more than num inches place the hma base course in two or more layers of approximately equal compacted depth with no layer less than num inches or more than num inches .
l surface tolerance .
replace the requirement for defective pavement with the following the pavement is defective if irregularities are more than numinch .
m tests for depth .
replace with the following control the loose depth of each layer to construct the base course to the compacted depth indicated and within the specified tolerance .
on the top lift and in the presence of the inspector drill fulldepth cores at one random location selected by the inspector according to ptm no .
num in each num square yards of completed base course and at other locations the inspector suspects are deficient .
the inspector will measure the depth of the fulldepth cores according to ptm no .
num .
pavement deficient in depth by num inch or more and that can not be satisfactorily corrected is defective .
after the inspector completes depth measurements backfill compact and seal core holes with the mixture used to construct the course .
immediately start correcting courses or pavement that are deficient in depth at the core location and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within num inch of the design depth .
num measurement and paymentsection numa with modifications as follows a bituminous mixtures standard .
revise as follows num .
hma courses .
add the following num.f superpave asphalt mixture design hma base course .
square yard or ton num numb num num initial edition section numcrushed aggregate base course num descriptionthis work is construction of a stone or slag base course .
when placed on subgrade it includes the preparation of subgrade as specified in section num .
num material a coarse aggregate fine material .
type a or type b no .
num stone or slag section num except as follows stone having unsatisfactory cementing qualities may be used provided limestone fines in an amount of num are blended with the material .
acceptable granulated blast furnace slag meeting the gradation requirements for no .
num aggregate may be used .
granulated blast furnace slag formed when molten iron slag is rapidly quenched in water is acceptable providing it does not have a density greater than num pounds per cubic foot dry rodded density aashto t num .
slag material reasonably uniform and free from harmful amounts of clay silt vegetation or other objectionable substances is acceptable with a maximum size of num inches and not more than num passing the no.num sieve .
b coarse aggregate coarse material .
type a or type b no .
num stone or slag section num. c calcium chloride .
section num d water .
section num num construction a equipment .
num .
spreaders .
use mechanical spreaders .
num .
compaction equipment .
use rollers as specified in section numcnum.a .
use vibratory compaction equipment as required for method num. b general .
num .
shoulders .
either build up and compact shoulders for full width to or above the elevation of each layer of base course before placing base course or build up and roll shoulders simultaneously with compaction of each layer .
num .
templates string lines and straightedges .
use a template cut to the required cross section of the finished base course .
equip the template with metal or other vertical extensions attached to each end so the bottom of the template will be at the elevation of the top of the base course .
furnish at least three templates .
test the cross section for surface irregularities at intervals of not more than num feet .
use a numfoot straightedge to test for longitudinal irregularities in the surface of the base course .
hold the straightedge parallel to the road centerline in contact with the surface .
move the straightedge from one side of the base course to the other .
advance along the base course in numfoot increments .
num .
replacement areas .
areas will be marked where base course is required for existing pavement replacement .
remove pavement in these areas to neat lines as specified in section num .
num .
miscellaneous .
in areas where spreading and compacting with mechanical equipment is impractical spread and compact by another acceptable method .
if base course material is placed on existing pavement as an overlay or buildup construct in compacted layers .
if subgrade or subbase materials become mixed with the base course remove the mixture reshape and recompact the subgrade andor subbase reconstruct the unsatisfactory base course area .
numb numd num num initial edition use calcium chloride only when and as directed .
num .
initial layer of fine material .
spread an initial layer of fine material uniformly over the subgrade subbase or existing pavement as a bed and filler spread to a depth of num inches on subgrade or num inch on subbase or existing pavement .
do not place this initial layer of fine material on wet frozen or unsuitable subgrade or subbase .
c method num .
use this method when compacting with rollers only .
if the base course is more than num inches in compacted depth construct in two or more layers of approximately equal depth with no layer less than num inches nor more than num inches in depth .
num .
spreading coarse material .
spread uniformly on the initial layer of fine material to full width unless otherwise specified .
in areas inaccessible to spreading equipment spread material directly from trucks if allowed .
remove segregated material and replace with wellgraded material .
do not spread the material more than the distance completed in an average days work ahead of choking and compacting as specified in section numcnum and cnum respectively .
test each layer of material for surface irregularities as specified in section numbnum and correct irregularities before rolling .
num .
compacting coarse material .
on normal crown section begin rolling at the sides and progress to the center .
on superelevated curves begin on the low side and progress to the high side .
install string lines with ample supports offset along each side to control the elevation and depth of the base course .
maintain string lines until the base course is completed and the deficiencies have been corrected .
roll parallel with the roadway centerline uniformly lap each preceding track cover the entire surface with the rear wheels and continue until the material does not creep or wave ahead of the roller wheels .
place red flags at the initial limits of compacted coarse material completed .
the flags will be moved ahead as additional material is compacted .
do not apply filler to the coarse material outside of the flagmarked sections .
num .
application of fine material .
after thoroughly compacting coarse material spread fine material uniformly over the surface with spreading equipment to assure filling voids .
in areas inaccessible to equipment spreading with a squareedged shovel may be used spread in a sweeping motion alternately in opposite directions until the voids are filled .
do not enddump the material directly on the surface of the coarse material .
immediately following the spreading sweep and roll the material until remaining voids in the coarse material are filled and the base course is thoroughly compacted and set .
use brooms attached to the roller and hand brooms .
loosen and scatter excess fines formed in piles or cakes upon the surface .
spread and roll the material in sections of not less than num feet nor more than num feet in length unless otherwise directed .
compact and bond each section as specified in section numcnum before beginning another .
num .
compacting and bonding .
begin rolling the sides and progress as specified in section numcnum .
cover the entire surface with the rear wheels applying additional fines where necessary to fill voids and continue rolling until the base course is thoroughly compacted and set .
after completion of spreading and rolling of fines sprinkle with water and roll the surface of singlelayer construction or roll the surface of each layer of multilayer construction .
perform diagonal and crossrolling as required or directed .
continue the sprinkling and rolling applying additional fines until voids are filled and a slight wave of grout forms in front of the roller wheels .
use rollerattached brooms and hand brooms to distribute the grout uniformly filling the voids .
allow the rolled section to dry before proceeding with the surface course .
sprinkle and reroll the surface on succeeding days as required to thoroughly bond and to provide a satisfactory base course .
the inspectorincharge will determine the quantity of fines and water required to produce a smooth hard monolithic surface .
sprinkle water using acceptable methods .
d method num .
use this method when compacting with rollers and vibratory equipment .
if the base course is more than num inches in compacted depth construct in two or more layers of approximately equal depth with no layer less than num inches nor more than num inches in depth .
numd numb num num initial edition num .
spreading coarse material .
spread the coarse material as specified in section numcnum .
num .
compacting coarse material .
immediately after making surface corrections to the coarse material compact using vibratory equipment .
roll the layer as specified in section numcnum .
num .
application of fine material .
after the coarse material has been set and keyed by vibration and rolling spread fine material uniformly over the surface in an amount equal to about onehalf of that required to fill the voids in the coarse material .
operate the vibrator over the surface so the fines settle into the voids .
spread and vibrate the remaining fines in one or more applications to satisfactorily fill the voids however do not cause flotation of the coarse aggregate .
use manual methods to fill areas not completely filled by vibration .
num .
compacting and bonding .
after completing the vibration of the fine material sprinkle the surface with water and roll .
continue the operation as specified in section numcnum .
e surface tolerance .
test the finished base course for surface irregularities as specified in section numbnum .
correct all surface irregularities exceeding numinch by loosening the surface and removing or adding material as required .
compact the corrected area and surrounding surface by rolling .
f tests for depth .
cut or dig one test hole to the full depth of the completed base course where directed for each num square yards or less .
the representative will measure the depth of the base course .
the initial bed and filler layer of fine material is considered part of the base course for determining the final compacted depth .
remove and replace any area in which the depth is deficient by numinch or more .
additional test holes may be required if directed to determine the limits of replacement areas .
after the depth has been measured backfill test holes with acceptable material and compact .
g maintenance and traffic .
until placement of the surface course maintain the completed base course as specified in section numb .
maintain and protect base course opened to traffic by authority of the representative as specified in section numj .
allow only necessary local traffic and essential construction equipment on the base course unless otherwise directed .
repair or replace marred distorted or otherwise damaged pavement .
num measurement and payment a crushed aggregate base course .
square yard or ton b calcium chloride .
ton num numa num num change no .
num section numsuperpave asphalt mixture design standard construction wma base course num descriptionthis work is the standard construction of a plantmixed densegraded wma pavement base course on a prepared surface using a volumetric asphalt mixture design developed with the superpave gyratory compactor sgc using prescribed manufactured additives or modifiers andor plant process modifications .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num with additions and modifications as follows b weather limitations .
section numb .
replace with the following do not place base course on prepared surfaces that are wet or when the temperature of the air or the prepared surface is numf or lower .
if work is halted because of weather conditions the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of base course that are en route to the project .
h spreading and finishing .
num.b spreading and finishing .
section numhnum.b .
revise the second paragraph to read as follows if the indicated compacted depth of a num mm wma base course is more than num inches place the wma base course in two or more layers of approximately equal compacted depth with no layer less than num inches or more than num inches .
if the indicated compacted depth of a num mm wma base course is more than num inches place the wma base course in two or more layers of approximately equal compacted depth with no layer less than num inches or more than num inches .
l surface tolerance .
section numl .
revise the last sentence to read the pavement is defective if irregularities are more than numinch .
m tests for depth .
section numm .
revise to read as follows control the loose depth of each layer to construct the base course to the compacted depth indicated and within the specified tolerance .
on the top lift and in the presence of the inspector drill fulldepth cores at one random location selected by the inspector according to ptm no .
num in each num square yards of completed base course and at other locations the inspector suspects are deficient .
the inspector will measure the depth of the fulldepth cores according to ptm no .
num .
pavement deficient in depth by num inch or more and that can not be satisfactorily corrected will be considered defective .
after the inspector completes depth measurements backfill compact and seal core holes with the mixture used to construct the course .
immediately start correcting courses or pavement that is deficient in depth at the core location and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within num inch of the design depth .
num measurement and paymentsection numa with modifications as follows a standard wma construction .
num .
wma courses .
section numanum .
add the following num.f superpave asphalt mixture design wma base course .
square yard or ton num numa num num initial edition section numcrushed aggregate base course type dg num descriptionthis work is construction of a dense graded stone gravel or slag base course uniformly premixed with a predetermined quantity of water .
when placed on subgrade it includes the preparation of subgrade as specified in section num .
num material a aggregate .
type a or type b section num .
crush the gravel if used as required for bituminous surface courses .
acceptable granulated blastfurnace slag as specified in section num meeting the gradation requirements specified in table a may be used .
b calcium chloride .
section num c bituminous material .
emulsified asphalt class enum meeting the requirements of section num. d water .
section num e composition of mixture .
uniformly combine materials with a predetermined quantity of water so the final compacted mixture meets the specified gradation within limits of the reviewed jobmix formula .
num .
jmf .
establish the jmf within the limits of table a when tested in accordance with aashto t num add sufficient water to the mixture to provide optimum moisture content at the time of compaction .
do not vary this quantity by more than num percentage points from the optimum moisture as determined in accordance with ptm no .
num method b .
num .
uniformity .
the composition limits are shown in table a .
to maintain specified criteria throughout the progress of work at least twice daily analyze samples of the completed mixture taken at the plant or after spreading .
unsatisfactory results or changes in the supply source may require a change in the jmf .
the supply source may be changed if permitted .
maintain accuracy of control so at least num of test samples fall within the tolerance limits of table a .
remove and replace material failing to meet this requirement .
table a composition of mixture weight percent passing square openings based on laboratory sieve tests sieve size percent passing tolerance limits of the approved jmf num inches num numinch num num numinch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num .
testing .
section num num construction a equipment .
num .
plant .
obtain acceptance of the processing and mixing plant and its operation before start of work .
numa numg num num initial edition measure the coarse and fine material separately by either volume or weight and feed into the mixer in proper proportions and at a rate to insure correct blending .
measure added water by weight volume or a metering device and uniformly distribute in the mix .
use mixing plants equipped with automatic cutoff devices which stop the feed to the mixer if delivery of any component of the mix stops .
provide means to check and verify the accuracy of the proportioning and measuring devices .
stockpile aggregates for proportioning by any acceptable method in a manner that will prevent segregation and degradation of aggregates .
use massproportioning plants equipped with separate bins for each size aggregate .
num .
spreaders .
section numanum num .
compaction equipment .
sections numcnum.a num.b num.f and num.h .
b preparation of mixture .
before adding water proportion and uniformly blend required quantities of materials .
distribute measured water uniformly by means of a spray system and continue mixing until materials have been combined into a homogeneous mixture .
do not place materials containing either frost or frozen pieces into the mixture .
when directed add calcium chloride to the mixture before adding water to maintain required moisture .
proportion and uniformly blend calcium chloride at the rate of num pounds per ton of mixture for type num and num pounds per ton of mixture for type num. c delivery .
handle and transport mixture without segregation or loss of moisture .
use clean hauling vehicles free of harmful material .
to prevent loss of moisture during transportation cover mixture with suitable covers if necessary until deposited in the spreader .
frequent moisture control tests will be made at the point of delivery on the project as directed .
d replacement areas .
areas will be marked where base course is required for existing pavement replacement .
remove pavement in these areas to neat lines as specified in section num. e preparation of subbase or subgrade and shoulders .
num .
subbase or subgrade .
before placing base course complete and maintain subbase or subgrade at least num feet in advance of the leading spreader keep free of ruts irregularities and loose materials .
num .
shoulders .
either build up and compact shoulders for full width to or above the elevation of each layer of base course before placing base course or build up and roll shoulders simultaneously with compaction of each layer .
f spreading mixture .
if base course is more than num inches in compacted depth construct in two or more layers of approximately equal depth with no layer less than num inches nor more than num inches in depth .
place mixture to provide positive bond and uniform compaction between abutting lanes .
accomplish this by working spreaders in echelon or by alternating spreaders frequently between lanes to minimize moisture loss .
in locations where machine spreading is impractical spread manually or by other acceptable methods .
supply sufficient equipment to spread shape and compact mixture at the rate produced by the mixing plant .
complete all operations relating to construction of base course during daylight hours .
do not place mixture on a frozen surface when air temperature is below num f or when freezing temperatures are forecast to occur within the next num hours .
to insure proper bonding between layers of base course place succeeding layers as soon as practical .
keep base layers moist until covered by the next layer .
do not cut into an underlying completed layer except as directed for repairs or corrections .
maintain the proper moisture content in the mixture at all stages of construction including vertical faces of partwidth spread material to assure positive bonding of abutting lanes .
g overlay and build up .
where a base course is placed on existing pavement construct layers as specified in section numf unless otherwise directed .
numh numb num num initial edition h compaction and density .
compact each layer of base course to not less than num of maximum density determined in accordance with ptm no .
num method b .
determine field density in accordance with aashto t num .
when material is too coarse to use these methods compaction will be determined based on nonmovement of material under specified compaction equipment .
where density in any layer fails to meet specified requirements additional compaction will be required .
if the density can not be obtained by additional compaction thoroughly loosen remoisten reshape and recompact the entire area of the layer with low density .
if required density can not be obtained remove and replace the affected area with a new mixture that can be compacted as required .
i surface tolerance .
use a template cut to the required cross section of the finished base course .
equip the template with metal or other vertical extensions attached to each end so the bottom of the template will be at the elevation of the top of the base course .
furnish at least three templates .
test the cross section for surface irregularities at intervals of not more than num feet .
install string lines with ample supports offset along each side to control the elevation and depth of the base course .
maintain string lines until the base course is completed and the deficiencies have been corrected .
use a numfoot straightedge to test for longitudinal irregularities in the surface of the base course .
hold the straightedge parallel to the road centerline in contact with the surface .
move the straightedge from one side of the base course to the other .
advance along the base course in numfoot increments .
for surface irregularities exceeding numinch immediately correct as follows blade off high spots as directed provided the surface is left in a uniformly smooth and dense condition .
if high spots can not be removed by blading loosen the top layer through its full depth over the affected area remove excess material and provide moisture in proper quantity to reshape and recompact to the specified density .
if high spots can not be satisfactorily corrected by either of these methods remove the top layer over the affected area and reconstruct with a new mixture .
where it is necessary to add material to low spots loosen the top layer over the affected area .
incorporate additional material correctly graded into the loosened material .
reshape and recompact the entire area at the proper moisture content .
if the resulting surface is still unsatisfactory remove the top layer over the affected area and reconstruct with a new mixture .
do not skin patch or fill low spots with small amounts of material .
j tests for depth .
cut or dig one test hole to the full depth of the completed base course where directed for each num square yards or less .
the representative will measure the depth of the base course .
the initial bed and filler layer of fine material is considered part of the base course for determining the final compacted depth .
remove and replace any area in which the depth is numinch or more deficient .
additional test holes may be required if directed to determine the limits of replacement areas .
after the depth has been measured backfill test holes with acceptable material and compact .
k construction joints .
where additional base course is joined by the previous days work scarify and moisten the end of existing base course blend with new mixture and compact to form a continuous section without a joint .
m prime coat .
use a distributor as specified in section numb .
broom the base course to produce a granular texture free of loose material and treat the surface with a single application of bituminous material at a rate not to exceed num gallon per square yard of base course .
n maintenance and traffic .
until placement of the surface course maintain the completed base course as specified in section numb .
maintain and protect base course opened to traffic by authority of the representative as specified in section numj .
allow only necessary local traffic and essential construction equipment on the base course unless otherwise directed .
repair or replace marred distorted or otherwise damaged pavement .
num measurement and payment a crushed aggregate base course type dg .
square yard or ton b calcium chloride .
ton num num num num initial edition section numflexible base replacement num descriptionthis work is replacing the existing pavement with superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma base course .
num material a subbase .
section num b superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma base course num mm mix and num mm mix .
section num or wma base course num mm mix and num mm mix .
section num c asphalt cement pg num .
section num num construction as shown on standard drawings rcnumm rcnumm as specified in section num or section num and as follows mark the perimeter of the area to be replaced .
saw cut or mill the perimeter .
remove all material within the saw cut or milled area to the depth indicated .
compact the existing subgrade or subbase before placing the base course material .
clean all vertical surfaces of the area to be patched and coat the vertical faces with a uniform application of pg num .
place the hma or wma in a manner that does not cause segregation and to the lift thickness indicated .
compact to the density specified by use of approved compaction equipment as per section numc .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard or ton saw cutting excavation hauling and disposal bituminous tack coat bituminous material and sealing of the joints are considered as incidental .
num numa num num change no .
num section numaggregatebituminous base course num descriptionthis work is construction of a bituminoustreated aggregate base course .
when placed on subgrade this work includes the preparation of subgrade as specified in section num .
num material a aggregate .
type c or better no .
numa section num. b bituminous material .
one of the following as specified in section num class pg num or class pg num emulsified asphaltclass msnumenum or cmsnumenum c composition of mixture .
combine the aggregates and bituminous material in proportions required to produce an accepted composition .
produce a mixture with at least num bituminous material computed as a percentage by mass weight of the total mixture .
num .
jmf .
when asphalt cement is used in the mixture prepare and submit a jmf to the dmedmm for acceptance .
the jmf shall conform to the accepted composition and the following marshall values .
test the mixture according to ptm no .
num stability at numf at least num pounds .
flow from num to num .
these values are not required for daily plant control .
determine the design density from the accepted design criteria .
produce a mixture conforming to the jmf .
the representative may require a new jmf if unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary .
if using emulsified asphalt do not prepare a jmf .
determine the design density and the optimum liquid content according to ptm no .
num method b .
the liquid content of the mixture is the sum of the percentage of free water and the percentage of bituminous material .
num .
mixture production and acceptance .
section num or section num num construction a equipment .
num .
plant .
mix materials using continuousflow or batchtype central mix plants mechanical mixers or travel plants .
when liquids are automatically metered use equipment that will control the liquids within a variation of not more than num from the specified percentage .
for central plant mixing use a mixer equipped with batching or metering devices designed to measure the specified quantity of material .
num .
hauling .
to transport the base course from a central mix plant to the project use clean tight vehicles with protective covers that do not have rips or holes .
num .
spreaders .
use adjustable selfpropelled mechanical spreaders capable of placing and screeding base material without segregation .
num .
bituminous distributor .
section numb numa numf num num change no .
num num .
compaction equipment .
section numcnum b mixing and spreading .
num .
general .
spray water uniformly through the aggregate before or at the time of addition or application of the emulsified asphalts to ensure a moisture content from num to num when tested according to ptm no .
num method b .
for asphalt cements use heatdried aggregate with a maximum moisture content of num .
determine moisture content at the time of compaction according to ptm no .
num method b .
if necessary aerate the mixture to reduce the water content in emulsions so the total liquid content liquid bituminous material and water of the mixture does not exceed the optimum moisture content of the aggregate .
maintain the temperature range of the bituminous material when added to the mixture or applied to aggregate according to bulletin num .
do not add or apply bituminous material to the aggregate when the air temperature in the shade is numf or less or when weather conditions are unfavorable .
do not place the base course on a wet surface or on a surface with a temperature less than the air temperature specified above .
if using bituminous material other than asphalt cement do not place base course from september num to may num unless otherwise permitted .
construct base courses num inches or less in compacted depth in one layer .
construct base courses more than num inches in compacted depth in two or more layers of approximately equal compacted depth with no layer less than num inches nor more than num inches in depth .
allow only necessary shaping and processing equipment to travel over the spread mixture .
remove and replace mixture that is displaced or contaminated .
num .
central plant mixing and spreading .
thoroughly mix materials to produce a uniform mixture .
spread the mixture on the surface in a loose layer that will compact to the full layer depth .
num .
inplace mixing and spreading .
spread the aggregate on the surface in a uniform loose layer that will compact to the specified layer depth .
for travel plants equipped to meter the liquid bituminous material apply bituminous material to the aggregate during the first mixing pass of the travel plant .
adjust the travel speed and the number of passes to obtain a uniform mixture .
for travel plants not equipped to meter the liquid bituminous material apply the bituminous material to the aggregate in successive applications using a distributor .
after each application immediately cut in or blend the bituminous material with the aggregate .
after applying all the bituminous material mix the aggregate and bituminous material while also adjusting the travel speed and number of plant passes to obtain a uniform mixture .
c compaction .
compact the base course to at least num of the design density .
if using asphalt cement compact to at least num of the design density .
after placing the first layer of a multiplelayer base course apply a tack coat of bituminous material using a pressure distributor as specified in section numb .
apply the tack coat at a rate from num gallon per square yard to num gallon per square yard .
if asphalt cement is used in the mixture use class rsnum enuma or crsnum enumc emulsified asphalt in the tack coat .
d finishing .
mix compact and finish the base course in a continuous operation and complete finishing during daylight hours .
e construction joints .
at the end of each days work install a temporary wood bulkhead with a true vertical face the full depth and width of the base course to form a straight transverse construction joint .
instead of a bulkhead the contractor may install a construction joint by scarifying and blending a portion of the previous days work with the new mixture and recompacting to obtain uniformity .
where necessary or indicated construct longitudinal joints by sawing the completed work to a vertical face that is free of loose material .
f density .
take one field density test according to aashto t num or t num for each num square yards of each layer .
when the base course fails to comply with the specified density requirements apply additional compaction to obtain the required density .
if additional compaction does not obtain satisfactory density remove and replace the defective numf num num num change no .
num lot .
the representative may require additional density tests to determine if the defective area is less than the entire lot .
g surface tolerance .
section numc h tests for depth .
at locations determined by the representative carefully dig or drill one test hole to the full depth of the completed base course in each num square yards of completed base course .
the representative will measure the depth of the base course .
after the representative completes depth measurements backfill and compact base course mixture in the test holes .
immediately remove and replace sections in which the depth is deficient by num inch or more .
start correction at the point of determined deficiency and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth meets the numinch requirement .
j maintenance and traffic .
until placing the surface course maintain the completed base course as specified in sections num and num .
maintain and protect base course the representative opens to traffic as specified in sections num and num .
allow only necessary local traffic and essential construction equipment on the base course .
repair or replace marred distorted or otherwise damaged pavement .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numb num num initial edition section numaggregatecement base course num descriptionthis work is construction of a cement treated aggregate base course .
if placed on subgrade it includes preparing the subgrade as specified in section num .
num material a coarse aggregate .
type c or better section num except conforming to the following gradation determined according to ptm no .
num sieve size percent passing numinch numinch numinch no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num b cement .
type i ii iii is or ip section num. c water .
section num d bituminous material .
emulsified asphalt class rsnumenuma or crsnumenumc as specified in section num. e fine aggregate for protection and curing .
section num f mixture design .
mix the aggregatecement to comply with the following requirements if tested according to aashto t num mold specimens of the proposed mixture to maximum density .
cure the molded specimens in constant num humidity for num days .
after curing soak the specimens in water for num hours and then test in compression .
the required minimum compressive strength is num pounds per square inch .
if required test specimens of the mixture according to ptm no .
num .
the maximum allowable determined mass loss is num. g testing .
section num num construction a equipment .
section numa b mixing and spreading .
num .
general .
mix the aggregate and cement to prevent the formation of cement balls when the water is added .
add cement if the percentage of moisture in the aggregate does not exceed either the quantity that allows uniform and thorough mixture of aggregate and cement during the mixing operation or the optimum moisture content determination for the mixture .
use the quantity of moisture in the mix that allows uniform blending and provides a stable base course during compacting or finishing .
however at final mixing do not vary the moisture content by more than num from the optimum moisture determined in the field .
the contractor may use bulk cement with acceptable equipment and handling methods .
do not spread cement or place mixture if the aggregate or the base course area is excessively wet or frozen .
do not perform any work if the air temperature is numf or below .
numb numh num num initial edition if base course is more than num inches in compacted depth construct in two or more layers of approximately equal depth with no layer less than num inches or more than num inches in depth .
a maximum compacted depth of num inches will be allowed if the required compaction density can be attained for the full depth of each layer .
allow only the necessary shaping and processing equipment to travel over the spread cement or mixture remove and replace cement or mixture that becomes displaced or contaminated as directed .
num .
central plant mixing .
mix as specified in section numbnum .
place mixture in adjacent lanes within num minutes unless using formed longitudinal joints .
start compaction operations within num minutes after adding water to the mix .
num .
inplace mixing .
spread the required quantity of aggregate on the prepared area in a uniform loose layer .
apply cement if the moisture content of the aggregate allows uniform blending of the materials .
spread the specified quantity of cement on the aggregate and blend until the cement is uniformly distributed through the aggregate .
after thoroughly blending the aggregate and cement apply and incorporate water into the mixture .
control the water application so no excessive concentration exists on or near the surface .
provide an adequate water supply and sufficient pressure distributing equipment to ensure a continuous mixing operation .
after applying the required water continue mixing until obtaining a thorough and uniform mixture .
c compaction .
compact the loose base course mixture to at least num of the maximum dry weight density .
the representative will determine optimum moisture content and maximum dry weight density in the field according to aashto t num .
do not vary the mixture percentage of moisture at the start of compaction by more than num from the optimum .
to eliminate cleavage planes in multilayer construction lightly scarify the surface of the existing layer to no more than numinch deep before placing the next layer .
place and compact multiple layers to complete the total depth the same day .
keep the surface of the first layer moist until the next layer is placed .
d finishing .
mix compact and finish the base course in a continuous operation and complete finishing during daylight hours .
during the shaping operation if directed scarify and recompact the surface to eliminate imprints left by equipment .
complete the surface compaction and finishing within num hours after adding the water and produce a smooth dense surface free of compaction planes cracks ridges or loose material .
e construction joints .
section nume f protection and curing .
after completing the base course sweep it free of foreign material .
moisten and roll to integrate loose and dry surface material as directed .
apply bituminous material at a rate from num gallon per square yard to num gallon per square yard .
sufficient moisture is required in the surface of the base course to prevent penetration of the bituminous material .
if necessary apply water immediately to fill surface voids before applying the bituminous material .
apply bituminous material only if the air temperature is numf or above .
apply as soon as possible and no later than num hours after completing the finishing .
keep the surface of the base course moist until applying the bituminous material .
maintain and protect the bituminous material so the entire surface is uniformly covered to prevent rapid drying for a curing period of num days .
if traffic is to be maintained before receiving the surface course spread fine aggregate immediately after applying the bituminous material at a rate of num pounds per square yard to num pounds per square yard .
if required use an acceptable method to protect the completed base course from freezing until applying the surface course .
g density .
density determinations will be made as specified in section numf .
as directed remove and replace sections where the density is num pounds per cubic foot or more below that specified .
h surface tolerance .
section numc numi num num num initial edition i tests for depth .
section numh and as follows the contractor may correct sections deficient in depth by scarifying the surface and placing additional material as specified for multilayer construction .
j maintenance and traffic .
section numj num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numb num num initial edition section numaggregatelimepozzolan base course num descriptionthis work is construction of a lime and pozzolan treated aggregate base course .
when placed on subgrade it includes the preparation of subgrade as specified in section num .
num material a aggregate .
section numa b lime .
section num c pozzolan .
section num d water .
section num e bituminous material .
section numd f mixture .
mix the aggregatelimepozzolan to comply with the following requirements liquid limit of the mixture not exceeding num determined in accordance with aashto t num .
plasticity index not exceeding num determined in accordance with aashto t num .
weight loss not exceeding num and strength not less than num pounds per square inch when tested by the department for freezethaw durability and strength in accordance with ptm no .
num. g testing .
section num num construction a equipment .
section numa b mixing and spreading .
num .
general .
do not vary by more than num percentage points the moisture content in final mixing from the optimum moisture determined in the field .
however do not exceed the moisture content which permits uniform blending or which causes the base course to become unstable during compacting or finishing operations .
bulk lime and bulk pozzolan may be used provided acceptable equipment and handling methods are used .
do not spread pozzolan andor lime or place mixture when aggregate or base course area is excessively wet or at a temperature of numf or below .
do not perform any work when the air temperature is numf or below .
do not place base course after september num in districts num num except juniata and mifflin counties num except union and snyder counties num num schuylkill monroe and carbon counties num blair cambria and somerset counties and num do not resume prior to may num .
do not place after october num in districts num mifflin and juniata counties num union and snyder counties num except schuylkill monroe and carbon counties num num num except blair cambria and somerset counties num and num do not resume prior to may num .
if base course is more than num inches in compacted depth construct in two or more layers of approximately equal depth with no layer less than num inches nor more than num inches in depth .
a maximum compacted depth of num inches will be allowed if the required compaction density can be attained for the full depth of each layer .
allow only the necessary shaping and processing equipment to travel over the spread material .
remove and replace mixture that becomes displaced or contaminated as directed .
num .
central plant mixing .
section numbnum .
numb num num num initial edition num .
inplace mixing .
spread the required quantity of aggregate on the prepared area in a uniform loose layer .
spread the specified quantity of pozzolan on the aggregate and blend until the pozzolan is uniformly distributed through the aggregate .
at the time of application of pozzolan do not exceed the moisture content of aggregate required for uniform blending of material .
spread the specified quantity of lime and blend until lime is uniformly distributed through the pozzolan and aggregate .
after aggregate lime and pozzolan have been thoroughly blended apply water and incorporate into the mixture .
control the application of water so there is no excessive concentration on or near the surface of the mixture .
provide an adequate water supply and sufficient pressure distributing equipment to insure a continuous mixing operation .
after applying required water mix until a thorough and uniform mixture is obtained .
on projects where the application of lime andor pozzolan creates a critical dust condition the pozzolan andor lime may be moistened also the specified quantities of pozzolan and lime with or without a portion of the aggregate may be preblended with water before applying to the spread aggregate or adding to the mixer if permitted .
do not add water in excess of the quantity required in the final mix .
c compaction .
compact the loose base course mixture to at least num of the maximum drydensity .
the optimum moisture content and maximum drydensity will be determined in the field in accordance with ptm no .
num method b .
do not vary the mixture percentage of moisture at the start of compaction by more than num percentage points from the optimum .
to eliminate cleavage planes in multilayer construction lightly scarify the surface of the existing layer to not more than numinch depth before placing the next layer .
place and compact multiple layers so the total depth is completed within num days .
keep the surface of the first layer moist using a water truck until the next layer is placed .
d finishing .
section numd except that the finishing operation is not limited to num hours .
e construction joints .
where additional base course construction is to be joined to the previous days work scarify and moisten the end of the existing base course blend with new mixture and compact to form a continuous section without a joint .
f protection and curing .
protect and cure as specified in section numf .
bituminous courses may be placed without waiting for the completion of the num day curing period .
g density .
section numf h surface tolerance .
section numb i tests for depth .
section numh supplemented as follows sections deficient in depth may be corrected by scarifying the surface and placing additional material as specified for multilayer construction .
j maintenance and traffic .
section numj num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numb num num change no .
num section numroller compacted concrete base course num descriptionthis work is the construction of roller compacted concrete rcc base course on a prepared subgrade and subbase for under an asphalt wearing course or a surface treatment using a stiffer low slump concrete mix conventional or highdensity asphalt paving equipment and various size rollers to obtain the required thickness and density .
num materialsection num except f concrete curing material .
section num and section num num constructionsection num except i joints .
section numi except num .
control joints .
section numinum with the following addition after saw cutting the rcc control joints and before placing the asphalt wearing course or surface treatment remove loose debris from the saw cutting operation and apply additional emulsified asphalt along the control joints as specified in section numjnum .
j curing .
section numj except num .
curing compound .
do not use curing compounds .
num .
emulsified asphalt .
apply emulsified asphalt as specified in section numb over the rcc pavement surface .
provide a uniform voidfree application across the rcc pavement surface .
use equipment that does not damage mar or alter the surface of the compacted rcc pavement surface when applying the emulsified asphalt .
have the equipment approved by the representative before placing the emulsified asphalt .
k surface tolerance .
section numk except num .
finishing .
the rcc pavement surface does not need diamond grinding before placing the asphalt wearing course or surface treatment .
l open to traffic .
section numl except when the cure period is complete the rcc pavement may be open to local traffic before placing the asphalt wearing course or surface treatment .
num measurement and payment a roller compacted concrete base course .
square yard b defective pavement left in place .
when the district executive directs in writing to leave defective pavement in place the payment will be at num of the contract price .
num numb num num change no .
num section numcold recycled bituminous base course coldinplace num descriptionthis work is the ongrade construction and material processing of a cold recycled bituminous base course base course that uses bituminous material combined with rap ram or virgin aggregates .
construction typically includes milling to an indicated depth adding and mixing emulsified asphalt placing compacting and testing .
num material a reclaimed material .
reduce oversized materials until num of the material passes the numinch sieve .
incorporate all reclaimed material into the recycled bituminous base course .
num .
ram .
as specified in section num table a or num table b .
the contractor may use ram from the project or from stockpiles off the project .
num .
rap .
processed paving material containing bitumen and aggregates .
b bituminous material .
add bituminous material to the reclaimed material according to the approved mix design .
use one of the following bituminous materials conforming to the applicable requirements of bulletin num emulsified asphaltmsnumenum cmsnumenum ssnumenuma cssnumenumc ssnumhenuma cssnumhenumc hfmsnumhenum hfmsnumenum hfmsnumsenum or polymer modified grades of the above materials may be used when approved by the engineer .
c aggregate .
section num type a no .
num no .
num and no .
num. d mixture design .
take samples of reclaimed materials and perform testing to establish the mix design .
if ram is included in the depth indicated for removal take separate samples of rap and ram .
establish the mix design according to bulletin num and submit the mix design to the dmedmm for review at least num weeks before the planned start of mixture production .
e mixture .
combine the reclaimed material aggregates and bitumen according to the mix design and at the mix design recommended optimum moisture and emulsion content .
if rap gradations and composition vary sufficiently make field adjustments as recommended in the mix design to obtain satisfactory coating and the specified compaction .
num. review of qc plan .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and submit for review at the start of the project .
do not start actual work until the qc plan has been reviewed and approved by the engineer .
num construction a equipment .
provide equipment to produce recycled bituminous base course mixture as follows num .
provide a selfpropelled milling machine having a down cutting drum screeningcrushing plant and pugmill mixer .
use singleunit or multipleunit machine with plant andor mixer as trailers .
use pugmill mixer with liquid additive system and spray bar capable of volumetrically controlling liquid additive based on milling depth milling width and machine speed .
num .
use equipment capable of automatically metering liquids with a variation of not more than num by weight of liquids .
num .
maintain all equipment as specified in section numc .
b mixing .
do not place base course from september num to april num in districts num num num num num and num and from october num to april num in all other districts .
with written approval of the representative the contractor may numb numa num num change no .
num place base course when no freezing temperatures occur for num hours before paving and when the project ambient air temperature is numf and rising .
maintain adequate total liquids in the mixture to ensure thorough mixing of the reclaimed material and aggregates with the bituminous material .
if necessary add water at the mill head using a calibrated meter .
c compaction .
after processing uniformly spread shape grade and compact the base course to the lines grades and depth indicated .
before compaction cure the base course as necessary .
provide compacted layers between num inches to num inches in depth .
use rollers as specified in section numc .
begin rolling at the low side of each layer except initially leave num inches to num inches from unsupported edges unrolled to prevent distortion .
determine the maximum density by constructing at least one control strip of approximately num square yards under the guidance of a nuclear gauge operator .
after each pass of the compaction equipment take a nuclear density reading according to aashto t num .
continue compaction until the representative determines additional passes do not appreciably increase the density .
after compaction take a minimum of ten density tests at random locations and determine the average control strip density .
compact the base course to a minimum density of num of the average control strip density .
determine the inplace density of each numsquare yard area according to aashto t num .
if the density of an area is less than the minimum density and if additional compaction does not achieve the minimum density rescarify adjust the moisture content and recompact .
if the density is still below the minimum and the base course is uniform in texture stable and acceptable define the area as a new control strip .
take a minimum of ten density tests at random locations and determine the average inplace density .
the new minimum density is num of the average inplace density .
if the representative determines that the contractor achieved the minimum density with minimal compaction the representative may require the contractor to construct a new control strip to verify or establish a new minimum density .
if the completed base course is unacceptable stop base course construction .
resume construction only after correcting the cause of unacceptable construction .
d finishing .
unless otherwise allowed complete base course construction during daylight hours .
e protection .
protect completed portions of base course that are opened to construction equipment from marring distortion and other damage .
immediately correct damage to the base course caused by construction equipment to the representatives satisfaction .
f surface tolerance .
if directed test the completed base course for smoothness and accuracy of grade both transversely and longitudinally using a numfoot straight edge or template .
test a numsquare yard area at three locations .
at each location determine the maximum space under the straight edge or template .
correct each num square yard area where the average of the maximum space at the three locations exceeds num inch .
g maintenance and traffic .
maintain the completed base course and control traffic as specified in section numn .
use a pilot car for speed control if damage such as raveling is likely to occur .
h curing .
cure the base course for at least num week before placing the wearing course or binder course .
in addition if requested by the representative and before placing a wearing or binder course determine the moisture content of the completed base course according to ptm no .
num .
do not place the overlying course if the average moisture content exceeds num. i not used .
j tests for depth .
measure milling depth at time of pulverization .
make at least one measurement for each num square yards or less of work done and record measurements to ensure that specified milling depth is met .
correct or replace any section deficient by numinch or more from specified depth at no expense to the department .
num measurement and payment a cold inplace recycled bituminous base course .
square yard numb numc num num change no .
num b coarse aggregate for cold recycled bituminous base course .
ton c bituminous material .
gallon num numf num num initial edition section numcold recycled bituminous base course central plant mix num descriptionthis work is the construction of a cold recycled bituminous base course base course central plant mix using a combination of rap ram or virgin aggregates mixed with bituminous material in a continuous or batch type mixer .
num materialsection num and as follows a stockpiling .
store reclaimed material in a manner that preserves its quality and suitability .
separate different types of rap to prevent contamination .
build stockpiles in horizontal layers to minimize segregation .
keep stockpile height to a maximum of num ft. num construction a equipment .
provide equipment to produce recycled bituminous base course mixture as follows num .
provide a central plant consisting of a rap feed hopper conveyor belts twin shaft pugmill metered liquid additive and water systems pumps and spray bars .
other equipment may include additive storage tanks beltscales a stacker belt conveyor and a storage bin .
provide a screeningcrushing unit if the maximum size of rap can not be controlled otherwise .
provide equipment capable of mixing reclaimed material and bituminous material into a homogeneous mixture without stripping the bituminous material .
provide a continuousflow or batchtype mixer accepted by the engineer and equipped with batching or metering devices to measure the specified quantities of the materials .
use a positive displacement pump capable of accurately metering the flow rate of additive into the reclaimed material down to num gallons per minute .
provide a positive interlock system that automatically shuts off the pump when material is not in the mixing chamber .
provide a meter capable of registering the flow rate and quantity of additive introduced into the reclaimed material .
num .
use equipment capable of automatically metering liquids with a variation of not more than num by weight of liquids .
num .
maintain all equipment as specified in section numc .
b mixing .
maintain adequate total liquids in the mixture to ensure thorough mixing of the reclaimed material and aggregates with the bituminous material .
add water to the rap by a calibrated meter as necessary to aid in mixing compaction .
c transporting and placing .
transport the mixture in clean tightly sealed vehicles .
the representative may require vehicle protective covers .
use mechanical spreaders to place the loose mixture on the prepared surface to a uniform depth .
unless allowed do not use motor graders .
do not place base course from september num to april num in districts num num num num num and num and from october num to april num in all other districts .
with written approval of the representative the contractor may place base course when no freezing temperatures occur for num hours before paving and when the project ambient air temperature is numf and rising .
d compaction .
section numc e finishing .
section numd f protection .
section nume numg numc num num initial edition g surface tolerance .
section numf h tests for depth .
control the loose depth of each layer to construct the base course to the compacted depth indicated and within the specified tolerances .
the representative will designate one test location in each num square yards of completed base course and at locations the representative suspects the depth is deficient .
at each test location record one depth measurement .
if the depth is deficient num inch or more from the indicated depth the pavement is defective .
immediately start removal of the defective pavement beginning at the core location and continuing longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within num inch of the indicated depth .
i maintenance and traffic .
section numg j curing .
section numh num measurement and payment a cold recycled bituminous base course central plant mix .
square yard or ton b bituminous material .
section numc c coarse aggregate for cold recycled bituminous base course .
section numb num nume num num change no .
num section numfull depth reclamation num descriptionthis work consists of inplace pulverizing and mixing a combination of existing roadway material layers stabilizing additives and imported aggregate or rap material as required to specified depths and grading and compacting the mixed materials to form a new pavement base layer upon which an asphalt overlay or a surface treatment is applied .
this work is defined as fulldepth reclamation fdr and often includes the incorporation of additional materials based on an approved fdr mix design .
num material a reclaimed material from existing roadway .
pulverize and mix existing roadway material layers which may include bound pavement layers aggregate subbase material and subgrade material such that num of the material passes the numinch sieve .
b aggregate .
num .
general .
provide fine or coarse aggregate from approved aggregate producers listed in bulletin num or provide reclaimed aggregate material ram meeting the specified size e.g .
no .
num as required by the approved mix design .
num .
fine aggregate .
section num type a or b .
num .
coarse aggregate .
section num type a b or c. c reclaimed asphalt pavement rap material from other roadways or projects .
provide rap material with num passing the numinch sieve .
process the rap so that the final mixture conforms to section nume .
d stabilizing additives .
provide one or more of the stabilizing additive materials listed below as included in the approved mix design .
potential additives are not limited to the materials listed below .
those listed below include references to sections with additional information .
num .
asphalt material .
num.a emulsified asphalt .
section num class cmsnum ssnumh cssnumh or cssnumhpm .
num .
chemical .
num.a portland cement .
section num num.b hydrated lime .
section num num.c fly ash .
section num num.d pozzolan .
num.d.num lime pozzolan .
section num num.d.num pozzolan .
section num num .
calcium chloride .
section num num .
magnesium chloride .
use only as permissible on a project approval basis .
e water .
section num numf numa num num change no .
num f fdr mix design .
select one or more stabilizing additives based on the composition of the existing roadway materials according to publication num pavement policy manual .
a formal design protocol should be followed to optimize the performance of the pavement section .
after selecting the appropriate stabilizing additives develop a mix design following the appropriate mix design procedures for the stabilizing additives as follows table a mix design procedure for primary stabilizing additive type primary stabilizing additive mix design procedure asphalt pub .
num bulletin num chemical portland cement fly ash hydrated lime pozzolan aci num calcium chloride ptm no .
num when used as the primary stabilizing material calcium chloride should be applied as a minimum num solution at a rate between num to num gallons per square yard for each inch of depth reclaimed .
calcium oxide is used to activate the cementitious performance of pozzolan .
g asphalt material .
section num emulsified asphalt class aep enum prime or edp .
num constructioncomply with applicable environmental standards .
appropriate equipment and techniques should be used to adequately protect adjacent properties from fugitive dust or other material components of the fdr process .
dry additive will not be applied when the wind conditions in the opinion of the site inspector are such that blowing additives become objectionable to traffic or adjacent property owners .
manual andor gravity tail gate spreading of the additives is unacceptable .
stabilization may be accomplished using asphalt material portland cement or other chemical stabilization materials or calcium chloride consistent with recommendations of the fdr best practices found in publication num and approved in the project mix design .
a equipment .
provide the necessary equipment to pulverize reclaimed material to a maximum particle size of num inches in the greatest dimension blend shape and compact the fdr materials .
num .
reclaimer .
provide a selfpropelled traveling rotary reclaimer or equivalent machine capable of cutting through existing roadway to depths of up to num inches or as required by the design with one pass .
the equipment must also be capable of pulverizing inplace the existing pavement subbase and subgrade materials at a minimum width of num feet and mixing any added materials to the specified depth .
the cutting drum must have the ability to operate at various speeds rpm independent of the machines forward speed to control oversized material and gradation .
use a machine equipped with a computerized integral liquid proportioning system capable of regulating and monitoring the water application rate relative to depth of cut width of cut and speed .
connect the water pump on the machine to the water supply tanker or distributor by a hose and mechanically or electronically interlock the flow of water with the forward ground speed of the machine .
mount the spray bar to allow the water to be injected directly into the cutting drummixing chamber .
provide equipment capable of mixing water dry or liquid stabilizing additives emulsion and the pulverized pavement into a homogenous mixture .
keep the cutting drum fully maintained and in good condition at all times throughout the project .
equipment such as road planers or coldmilling machines designed to mill or shred the existing roadway rather than crush or fracture them is not allowed .
num.a use equipment capable of automatically metering liquids in the mixture and ensure thorough mixing of the reclaimed materials .
use equipment that is also able to record the volumes metered .
num.b maintain equipment as specified in section numc .
num .
placement equipment .
use a motor grader or another method approved by the representative .
numa nume num num change no .
num num .
compaction equipment .
provide suitable compaction equipment as follows use a pneumatic tire roller weighing num tons for breakdown and intermediate rolling for numinch depth or less and for final compaction of reclamation greater than numinch depth .
use a vibratory padfoot roller when the fdr depth is greater than num inches .
perform finish rolling using a single or tandem steel drum static roller of num to num tons .
b weather limitations .
do not place fdr materials when air temperature falls or is anticipated to fall below numf within the subsequent required numday cure period .
do not perform reclamation in rain or if rain is anticipated within num hours of completion of the work .
c quality control .
provide a qc plan for the fdr work a minimum of num weeks before the start of work .
identify the equipment personnel and processes to be used during the work .
ensure that all equipment is operational and functional before deployment to the job site .
all equipment must be properly calibrated before application .
this calibration should be verified through the test strip .
operators of water and additive applicators must keep proper records of the amount of material applied and the times of application .
d test strip .
before starting full production work construct a numfoot test strip demonstrating the fdr process including final compaction and shaping .
verify application rates for all materials incorporated into the frd process including stabilization materials and water .
identify and correct any aspects of the work not conforming to the contract requirements before proceeding with full production work .
if aspects of the work are not found to be adequately controlled to produce the desired mixed and refinished reclaimed roadway construct additional test strips until the necessary control is established .
after completing the test strip and demonstrating that the minimum density can be achieved determine nnum density of the fdr according to ptm no .
num for each num square yard lot .
e reclamation .
num .
pulverization .
before the application of any stabilizing additives pulverize the roadway to the size and depth specified .
adding calcium chloride during pulverization is acceptable .
num .
mixing .
combine the fdr material aggregates if necessary rap if necessary stabilizing additives and water according to the mix design and at the mix design recommended moisture content .
maintain adequate liquids in the mixture to ensure thorough mixing of the reclaimed material aggregates rap and stabilizing additives .
if conditions change make field adjustments to obtain a satisfactory fdr material .
if slurries are used equip the distributor and tanker trucks with a recirculating pump andor agitation system to prevent settling of the materials before application .
num .
compaction .
compact the fdr material to a minimum density of at least num of the laboratory compacted maximum density at optimum moisture content .
demonstrate that the minimum specified density can be achieved during paving of the compaction control strip .
after completing the compaction control strip as specified in section numenum.a and demonstrating that the minimum density can be achieved determine nnum density according to ptm no .
num for each numsquare yard lot .
commence rolling at the low side of the course .
leave num to num inches from any unsupported edges unrolled initially to prevent distortion .
compact the entire reclaimed area using the number of uniform passes of compaction equipment determined from the control strip ensuring that uniform density is achieved throughout .
complete compaction of chemically stabilized reclaimed material within num hours of the wateradditive mixing operation .
num.a compaction control strip .
determine the inplace density requirements by the construction of at least one numfoot long control strip during initial reclamation .
the compaction control strip may be contained within the project startup test strip .
take nuclear density reading tests according to ptm no .
num after each pass of the compaction equipment .
continue compaction with each piece of equipment until no appreciable increase in density is obtained by additional passes .
upon completion of compaction make a minimum of ten tests at random locations according to ptm no .
num to determine the average inplace density of the compaction control strip .
provide density results to the representative for verification to the minimum density requirements specified in section numenum .
if the density of the compaction control strip is less than the minimum density of at least num of the laboratory compacted maximum density at optimum moisture content but the base course is uniform in texture stable and otherwise acceptable provide additional compaction .
if additional compaction does not achieve the minimum density nume numg num num change no .
num construct another compaction control strip to verify that the minimum density is achievable with the fdr process and mix design in use .
take a minimum of ten tests at random locations according to ptm no .
num to determine the average in place density of the new compaction control strip .
the minimum density for the new control strip is num of the control strip density .
num.b moisture content .
verify the original moisture content of the road material to be reclaimed before starting work .
make any appropriate adjustment between the moisture content determined at the time of mix design sampling and current moisture content by adjusting the design recommended water application rate .
the moisture content for compaction must achieve the optimum moisture content as determined from the project mix design but can not exceed optimum by more than num .
num .
finishing .
shape the fdr material surface not to exceed numinch irregularity of the lines grades andor cross slope of the proposed roadway .
avoid excessively working the chemically stabilized fdr material which may detrimentally affect the ultimate strength of the stabilized layer .
num .
cure .
cure the fdr material until the numday strength requirement is met .
do not allow heavy traffic on the reclaimed material during the numday cure period .
appropriate traffic signs must be posted to prevent heavy traffic on the constructed base until completion of base curing and application of the overlay .
for chemical stabilization maintain the reclaimed layer in a damp condition by the daily application of water to the surface or the application of an emulsified asphalt prime material at a rate between num to num gallons per square yard followed by a fog seal at the rate of num gallons per square yard .
the rate of curing depends on many factors .
in favorable weather conditions no rain sunshine low humidity high temperature curing can take place at a considerably faster rate .
sufficient curing and strength gain could take from num or num days to at least num weeks depending on the type and amount of materials used and the climatic conditions .
verify by coring or test pit that curing has occurred throughout the full depth of the fdr before the application of an overlay or wearing course .
fdr should be proof rolled with a vehicle similar to the heaviest vehicle expected in traffic or base opening on a strength measurement of the fdr prior to opening to traffic .
same day return to car traffic at posted safe speeds is possible .
in general the constructed base could be opened to light traffic vehicles under num tons num hours after completion of the base construction with proof rolling .
roadway should be at num of the design optimum moisture content or num total moisture content whichever is reached first prior to overlay .
no damage should be apparent at slow speed less than num miles per hour .
immediately correct any such damage to the satisfaction of the representative .
otherwise verify strength by testing .
num .
surface tolerance .
test the completed stabilized base for smoothness and accuracy of grade both transversely and longitudinally .
satisfactorily correct any numsquare yard lot where the average surface irregularity exceeds num inch under a numfoot template or straightedge based on a minimum of at least three measurements within the lot .
provide a minimum final surface cross slope of numinch per foot or as otherwise required by the project design .
f maintenance and protection of traffic mpt .
relocate traffic using approved traffic control devices and procedures consistent with section num .
provide mpt until the road can be opened to traffic as specified in section numh .
g acceptance .
acceptance will be based on each numsquare yard lot complying with requirements for surface tolerance as specified in section numenum for density as specified in section numenum and strength as follows .
any lot failing to meet the acceptance criteria will be identified for rework .
with the approval of the representative additional cores may be taken to determine the extent of the failing area .
once a failed area has been identified develop and obtain approval of a new mix design .
failed areas must be reclaimed again with the additional stabilizing material as necessary to achieve the required acceptance criteria .
fill any core holes remaining outside the reworked area with an approved repair material listed in bulletin num .
take a minimum of three samples for strength testing for each lot size of num square yards .
follow ptm num for selecting sample locations .
cores should be num inches in diameter at a diameter to length ratio of num .
if possible a core length of at least num of the design reclamation depth should be tested .
also at least one fulldepth sample per project mile should be extracted .
if taking this sample is not possible with the numday core samples take additional numg num num num change no .
num cores for strength testing after a numday cure time .
adjust the calculation of compressive strength as affected by the aspect ratio of the cylindrical specimen according to ptm no .
num or astm c num .
num .
asphalt stabilized fdr .
achieve a minimum indirect tensile strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to bulletin num .
num .
chemical stabilized fdr .
achieve an unconfined compressive strength of num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch in num days when tested according to aci num for the roads to be surfaced with less than a numinch overlay or asphalt surface treatment .
achieve an unconfined compressive strength value of num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch in num days for roads to be surfaced with an asphalt overlay of num inches or greater .
material tested to strengths greater than num pounds per square inch may result in shrinkage cracking and rework will be required .
h opening to traffic .
do not open the road to unlimited traffic until the specified numday strength has been achieved .
limited local light vehicular traffic may be allowed once the reclaimed material has obtained a stable condition .
repair any damage resulting from local traffic .
do not allow trucks to use the road until the above referenced numday strength has been achieved .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard for the stabilization method selected with the approved mix design .
num numd num num change no .
num section numsubbase num descriptionthis work is preparation of subgrade as specified in section num and construction of a compacted aggregate subbase .
num material a aggregates .
unless otherwise indicated or directed type s or better no .
numa andor no .
ogs as specified in sections num and num .
num construction a equipment .
num .
spreaders .
section numanum num .
compaction equipment .
sections numc num.i or num b general .
for quantities greater than num tons prepare and submit a subbase delivery plan to the representative if directed .
indicate the construction equipment and methods necessary to deliver and place the subbase in a manner that is not detrimental to the subgrade .
do not begin subbase operations until the representative reviews the subbase delivery plan .
prepare the subgrade as specified in section num before placing subbase .
correct any deficiencies in the subgrade as specified in section num before placing the subbase .
do not place subbase material on soft muddy or frozen areas .
if directed correct unsatisfactory subbase conditions developing ahead of the base and paving operations by removing the subbase correcting the subgrade problem and replacing the subbase .
c mixing .
use acceptable methods to mix materials and water before delivery to the project .
use a blend of materials from different sources only if allowed .
use material containing enough moisture to prevent segregation during stockpiling hauling and placing and to minimize water added during compaction .
maintain subbase in a wellmoistened condition from before placement to compaction .
d placement .
before placing subbase construct berms to confine the material .
place the subbase before paving and as indicated .
control the subbase elevation and depth as specified in section numc except do not use templates if the subbase is trimmed using an automatic grading machine .
place the material on the subgrade using spreaders and without causing segregation .
in areas where using mechanical spreaders is impractical use an acceptable method to spread the material .
for rigid pavement and shoulders place a course of no .
numa aggregate to a minimum compacted depth of num inches directly on the subgrade and place a course of no .
ogs aggregate to a minimum compacted depth of num inches on top of the no .
numa aggregate .
for flexible pavement and shoulders place the indicated type of aggregate courses at the position and depth indicated for the pavement structure .
place each layer of no .
numa aggregate to a minimum compacted depth of num inches and place each layer of no .
ogs aggregate to a minimum compacted depth of num inches .
construct subbase in layers not more than num inches in compacted depth however when granulated slag is used limit each layer to not more than num inches in compacted depth .
if permitted and when using granulated slag the contractor may place a maximum compacted layer of num inches when the full layer depth is compacted as specified in section numb .
if the subbase is constructed in widths less than the full pavement width neatly trim the edge of completed subbase before placing the abutting subbase .
for simultaneous construction of more than one pavement course complete and maintain the subbase at least num linear feet in advance of placing the succeeding pavement course .
in areas inaccessible to spreaders or in special areas and if permitted deposit the subbase material on the prepared area .
spread in a manner not causing segregation to a uniform full depth of the layer being placed .
nume numa num num change no .
num e compaction and density .
compact to a condition of nonmovement as specified in section numb .
compact from the sides to the center with each pass uniformly overlapping the previous pass .
f surface tolerance .
section numc g test for depth .
at each density test location and after completing the density test carefully dig one test hole to the full depth of the completed subbase .
the representative will measure the depth of the finished subbase .
if the subbase depth is deficient by num inch or more from the depth indicated the subbase is defective .
the representative may require additional test holes to determine the limits of the defective area .
scarify the subbase to a depth of num inches blend in additional material and recompact .
after recompacting the representative may require test holes to verify the subbase depth is within num inch of the indicated depth .
backfill the test holes with subbase material and compact .
h maintenance and traffic .
section numj and as follows do not allow traffic including construction traffic on a subbase constructed of no .
ogs aggregate .
if a subbase constructed of no .
numa aggregate is used as a haul road or if a subbase is exposed to weather in excess of num calendar days retest for surface irregularities and depth and correct deficiencies as specified in section numc and numg .
do not leave subbase or subbase covered with treated permeable base course exposed during winter shutdowns .
place the required asphalt base course over all prepared subbase for flexible pavements and place the required reinforced or plain cement concrete over all prepared subbase with or without treated permeable base course for rigid pavements prior to the shutdown of paving operations for the construction season .
if subbase is in place over winter without a protective layer bituminous base course for flexible pavements or cement concrete for rigid pavements proof roll as specified in section numanum prior to placement of flexible or rigid pavement .
remove subbase in any areas indicating instability and remove and replace or repair the subgrade .
replace the subbase after repairs are completed on the subgrade .
if the majority of or all subbase exhibits instability during the proof rolling remove subbase and repair subgrade .
replace subbase in its entirety .
remove subbase repair subgrade and replace subbase at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and payment a subbase .
for the type indicated and as follows num .
area basis .
square yard the department will not pay the entire quantity of subbase complete in place until the base course or pavement is constructed over the subbase .
however the department will pay for up to num of the estimated quantity of subbase placed in advance of the succeeding operations if the contractor satisfactorily completed and is properly maintaining the subbase .
num .
volume basis .
cubic yard num .
mass weight basis .
ton num nume num num change no .
num section numasphalt treated permeable base course num descriptionthis work is the construction of an asphalt treated permeable base course atpbc on a prepared surface .
when placed on subgrade it includes the preparation of subgrade as specified in section num .
num material a bituminous material .
asphalt cement class pg num as specified in section num. b coarse aggregate .
type a section num .
when using crushed gravel provide a minimum of num crushed particles with at least three faces resulting from fracture .
c fine aggregate .
type a or type b section num. d additives .
num .
hydrated lime .
before adding the asphalt cement add hydrated lime to the aggregate to reduce stripping potential .
furnish hydrated lime conforming to astm c num and add the lime as follows add at least num hydrated lime by weight of the total dry aggregate .
provide a separate bin or tank and feeder system to store and accurately proportion the lime in dry form into the aggregate .
provide a convenient and accurate means of calibrating the proportioning device .
interlock the proportioning device with the aggregate feed or weight system .
mix the lime and aggregate to uniformly coat the aggregate with lime .
furnish aggregate containing at least num free moisture .
do not stockpile lime treated aggregate .
control the feeder system by a proportioning device accurate to within num of the specified amount .
provide a flow indicator or sensor and interlock with the plant controls such that production is interrupted if there is a stoppage of the lime feed .
before production obtain approval of the method to introduce and mix the lime and aggregate .
num .
heatstable antistripping additive .
the contractor may use an antistripping additive other than hydrated lime .
blend the additive with the asphalt cement before adding the additive and asphalt cement to the mixture .
use the manufacturers recommended dosage of the additive but not less than num by weight of the asphalt .
select an additive that does not harm the completed bituminous concrete mixture and that is compatible with the aggregate and asphalt supplied for the project .
e mixture design and production .
num .
design .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions according to table a below .
marshall test requirements do not apply .
design a jmf with an initial target bitumen content of num by weight .
if necessary adjust nume numc num num change no .
num the bitumen content within the range specified in table a below to uniformly coat the aggregate and ensure the aggregate has no observable runoff of excess bitumen .
test materials proportions and the mixture at the bituminous concrete plant laboratory .
verify conformance with the uniformity requirements specified in this section .
when required the department will perform the tests at the lts .
provide a jmf that conforms to all department requirements .
submit a copy of the jmf to the dmedmm at least num weeks before the scheduled start of producing the mixture for the project .
if the department has not used the jmf on previous projects provide test results from previous mixture production that show the mixture conformed to all jmf production tolerances .
num .
qc plan .
prepare and submit a qc plan as specified in section num at the start of the project and at least annually thereafter .
do not start atpbc production until after the representative reviews the qc plan .
num .
production .
during the first day of production take at least three bitumen content and gradation tests to verify the mixture conforms to the jmf .
after the first day perform tests for bitumen content and aggregate gradation according to the qc plan and ptm no .
num .
produce atpbc conforming to the gradation requirements in table a and with a bitumen content within num of the jmf nnum .
ensure the aggregate is uniformly coated with bitumen and no runoff of excess bitumen is observed .
num .
acceptance of the mixture .
obtain material certification from the material producer using the results of qc tests for bitumen content and gradation .
provide the certification to the inspectorincharge within num working day after taking qc tests .
table a composition of mixture total percent by mass weight passing square openings based on laboratory sieve tests sieve size percent passing num mm num numinch num num mm numinch num num num mm numinch num num num mm no .
num num num num mm no .
num num num num m no .
num num num bitumen content num num for approved gravel and slag mixtures the representative may allow the contractor to exceed the upper limit .
num construction section num with modifications as follows b weather limitations .
replace with the following do not place atpbc on surfaces that are unstable frozen or below a temperature of numf .
do not place atpbc when the air temperature is below numf or during rain .
if work is halted because of weather conditions the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of atpbc that are enroute to the project .
c bituminous mixing plant .
add the following num .
plant requirements .
the contractor is not required to provide equipment for developing the design and control test .
num .
preparation of mixture .
before mixing dry the aggregate as necessary .
heat the bituminous material so that combining with aggregate produces a completed mixture .
coat the aggregate with the bituminous material to form a film of adequate thickness to provide the required binding properties .
produce atpbc at a temperature below numf numc numn num num change no .
num that also provides suitable viscosity for adequate coating of aggregate particles and that does not cause segregation of asphalt and aggregate during transportation .
do not stockpile atpbc .
the atpbc must be placed within num hours from when it is made .
f rollers .
replace with the following use steelwheel power rollers with a manufacturers certified metal weight of num tons to num tons .
h spreading and finishing .
replace with the following use a slip form paver as specified in section nume or a mechanical spreader .
spread and strike off the mixture for the entire lane width or as much lane as practical .
place the mixture in maximum numinch compacted lifts .
adjust screed assemblies to provide the cross section and depth indicated .
construct the profile to the design grade line .
use fully automated sensors to control profile and transverse grade .
allow the mixture to cool to numf before placing subsequent layers or pavement courses .
perform handwork at locations directed by the representative .
i compaction .
replace with the following perform rolling as soon as the mat has cooled sufficiently to avoid shoving or lateral movement of the atpbc .
seat atpbc using an num ton to num ton steelwheeled roller or vibratory roller operated in the static mode only .
compact atpbc by applying four roller passes .
one roller pass is defined as one trip of the roller in one direction over any one spot .
additional passes are allowed only to eliminate any surface irregularities or creases .
do not compact the material to the point that it is not free draining or the aggregate is crushed .
j mat density acceptance .
delete this section .
k joints .
replace with the following num .
longitudinal joints .
spread the atpbc to overlap the edge of the lane previously placed by num inch to num inches .
maintain the uniform uncompacted depth adjacent to a compacted lane necessary to provide a smooth joint after compaction .
num .
transverse joints .
at the end of each days work and when more than a num minute interruption occurs in atpbc paving operations install a temporary vertical bulkhead to form a straight transverse construction joint .
the joint shall be the full depth and width of the atpbc .
instead of a temporary bulkhead the contractor may saw construction joints .
l surface tolerance .
replace the requirements for correcting irregularities with the following test the finished surface at locations the representative suspects are irregular and at transverse joints and paving notches .
test the surface in stages using a numfoot straightedge .
at each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface from one side to the other .
advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the pavement centerline by not more than num feet .
correct irregularities of more than num inch by loosening surface mixture and removing or adding atpbc .
for irregularities that develop after compaction is completed correct the irregularity by a method that does not produce contaminating fines or damage the base .
do not grind or mill the atpbc .
the area is defective if irregularities or defects remain after final compaction .
m tests for depth binder and wearing courses .
replace with the following carefully dig or drill one numinch diameter test hole to the full depth of the atpbc for each num square yards or less of completed base course .
the representative may require additional test holes in areas the representative suspects are deficient in depth .
the representative will measure the depth of the base course .
using material acceptable to the representative backfill the test holes and compact the material to fill the test hole flush with the completed base course .
remove and replace sections deficient in depth by num inch or more .
start correction at the point of determined deficiency and continue correction longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within num inch of the indicated depth .
n protection of courses .
replace with the following numn num num num change no .
num section num and as follows traffic is not permitted on the asphalt treated permeable base material except for trucks and equipment required to place the next layer .
replace areas damaged or contaminated as directed and at no cost to the department .
if necessary recompact the atpbc before starting subsequent paving .
protect the surface from damage before and during the concrete paving process .
o defective work .
replace with the following unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace atpbc deficient in surface tolerance deficient in depth defective in asphalt content or excessive in percent passing the num m no .
num sieve .
the atpbc is defective in asphalt content if production tolerances are exceeded percent of coated aggregate particles is less than num or the mixture contains observable runoff of excess bitumen .
with written permission from the district executive the contractor may fill low areas during construction of the next pavement course .
acceptance testing and qa testing does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for defective material or workmanship .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard or ton num numa num num initial edition section num flexible pavements section numevaluation of bituminous pavement ride quality and payment of incentive num descriptionthis work is evaluating a bituminous pavement surface profile and determining the ride quality incentive associated with the pavement surface profile .
a general requirements .
determine the ride quality of finished pavement surfaces including overlaid bridge approach slabs and overlaid bridge decks .
in the presence of the inspector measure the pavement surface profile according to ptm no .
num .
provide the resultant international roughness index iri data to the representative .
the representative will determine payment for each ridequality lot based on the iri .
measure the pavement surface of the following excluded areas separate from the pavement surface profile of ridequality lots .
the representative will not include measurements from excluded areas to determine lot incentive payment .
pavement surfaces not constructed as a fulldepth overlay as indicated such as the vertical transition areas at the limits of paving and at the approaches to bridges .
bridge decks unless overlaid .
ramps less than num feet in length .
tapered pavement less than num feet wide .
shoulders medians and other pavement surfaces indicated .
pavement from num feet before and up to num feet after any appurtenances such as water boxes manholes railroad tracks and inlets extending out into the pavement .
partial lots less than num feet .
roadways with a posted speed limit of num miles per hour or lower .
pavement that is not reconstructed with at least two of the following operations profile milling scratch course leveling course binder course and wearing course and on bridge decks only a waterproofing membrane .
b lot size .
a full lot is num feet of a single pavement lane .
the representative will designate lots starting at the beginning limit of paving and continuing to the ending limit of paving for each pavement lane and ramp that is num feet or wider .
do not include the length of excluded areas in the num feet .
the representative will designate a partial lot at the ending limit of paving and at an excluded area when the lot length is less than num feet .
the representative will evaluate a partial lot as a percentage of a full lot .
num construction a equipment and operator .
provide pavement surface profile measuring equipment that has been verified by the department according to ptm no .
num .
in the presence of the inspector calibrate the distance sensor and check the profile system calibration before each days testing .
provide an operator that is department certified according to ptm no .
num .
numb numd num num initial edition b testing .
num .
lots .
provide the traffic control and station marking necessary to accommodate testing .
remove objects and equipment from the surface and sweep the surface as necessary to remove debris .
in the presence of the inspector determine the pavement surface profile for each lot according to ptm no .
num .
at the completion of testing immediately submit the lot iri data as defined in ptm no .
num to the representative .
num .
excluded areas .
provide the traffic control necessary to accommodate testing .
test the entire surface of each excluded area in stages using a numfoot straightedge .
at each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the roadway centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface profile from one side of the excluded area to the other .
advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the roadway centerline not more than num feet .
c acceptance .
num .
lots .
the representative will compare the lot iri to table a in section num to determine if the lot requires corrective action .
additionally perform corrective action on any individual bump must grind where the irregularity is more than num inch when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
num .
excluded areas .
perform corrective action where irregularities are more than num inch when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
to improve the ride quality and at the departments expense the representative may require grinding of excluded areas that conform to the acceptable straightedge surface tolerances specified in section numc .
d corrective action .
num .
do not produce a deviation such as a ridge or valley with the adjacent pavement of more than num mm num inch when measured on the transverse profile .
correct a sufficient length of pavement to correct the pavement surface profile without producing additional high or low points .
retest the lots and excluded areas after completing corrective action .
perform additional measurements of the pavement surface profile as necessary for the representative to determine which lots do not require additional corrective action .
correct surfaces to a uniform texture and cross section .
num .
perform all corrective action before testing for pavement depth .
use one or more of the following methods num.a .
carbide grinding .
use carbide grinding for correcting areas num feet in length or less .
use grinders of the walkbehind type that have cutting heads of carbide tipped shackles stars or blades and have a locking depth control to produce a uniform pavement surface texture .
provide a pavement surface texture consisting of parallel grooves between num inch and num inch wide width a land area between grooves of num inch and num inch .
operate the grinder by making multiple passes if necessary with a maximum depth of any single pass of num inch .
grind longitudinally or transversely across the pavement surface .
num.b diamond grinding .
as specified in section num and modified as follows d tolerance .
delete this section .
unless otherwise approved grind the entire lane width .
num.c removal and replacement .
remove the surface course of the entire pavement lane width by milling and replace at least the minimum layer depth of the specified surface course .
place more than the minimum layer depth if necessary to correct the pavement surface profile .
nume num num num initial edition e defective work .
a ridequality pavement lot is defective if the iri of the lot exceeds the maximum acceptable iri specified in table a of section num .
any individual bump must grind exists in the lot where the irregularity is more than num inch when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
the surface adjacent to another ridequality lot contains a ridge or valley of more than num inch .
the specifications for pavement construction require removal and replacement of pavement within the ridequality lot .
unless the department and contractor agree to leave a defective lot in place as specified in section num remove and replace defective areas and retest the ridequality lot .
num measurement and paymentdollar the proposal will include an item and a predetermined amount of money for evaluation of bituminous pavement ride quality and payment of incentive .
the contract item will have a unit of measure of dollar a unit price of num and a quantity equal to the predetermined amount .
due to the incentive or bonus status of the payment being made the provisions of section numd are not applicable to this item .
measured and paid for under the evaluation of bituminous pavement ride quality and payment of incentive item as follows if the lot is not defective table a and the iri for each lot will be used to determine the incentive payment for ride quality .
the incentive payment for a lot subjected to corrective action will be determined using table a and the iri for the lot after the contractor completes corrective action .
the incentive payment for a partial lot will be determined as a percentage of a full lot .
after corrective action the contractor may leave a defective lot in place if the district executive provides written approval and the contractor accepts a num downward adjustment rebate of the amount paid for the lot .
costs associated with evaluating pavement ride quality will not be paid for separately .
num num num num initial edition table a payment schedule for ride quality incentive schedule a for expressway work using three operations iri inchesmilelot amount num num num num num num num num num corrective action required maximum acceptable iri schedule b for expressway work using two operations and nonexpressway work using two or more operations iri inchesmilelot amount num num num num num num num num num corrective action required maximum acceptable iri num nume num num initial edition section numevaluation of bituminous pavement longitudinal joint density and payment of incentivedisincentive num descriptionthis work is evaluating bituminous pavement longitudinal joint samples on the surface wearing course for determining densities and the incentivedisincentive .
this work also includes any necessary corrective actions required as a result of the evaluation .
num construction a general requirements .
longitudinal joint density lots will be established as specified in section numb .
these incentivedisincentive lots are completely independent from lots defined in other sections of these specifications for pavement acceptance .
the representative will determine the payment addition or deduction along with any necessary corrective actions for each longitudinal joint lot based on the test results of the density cores .
b lot size .
a full lot is num feet of longitudinal joint and will consist of num sublots of num feet .
the representative will designate lots as the longitudinal joints on the project are constructed beginning on the first day wearing course paving abuts a previously placed wearing course forming a longitudinal joint .
joints constructed with tandem pavers will be included unless otherwise indicated .
as paving progresses and longitudinal joints are constructed drill one core per sublot until a full lot is obtained according to section nume .
do not include the length of excluded joints in the num feet lot .
a single lot need not be contiguous and may include multiple joints throughout the project limits .
partial lots with less than three sublots will be combined with the previous lot .
partial lots with three or more sublots will stand as a separate lot .
c quality control strip .
on the first day paving abuts a previously placed mat forming a longitudinal joint eligible for evaluation determine the effectiveness of the material placement and compaction operations as well as the mixture design on longitudinal joint density .
in addition to any incentivedisincentive payment sublot cores obtain five numinch diameter core samples located randomly on the longitudinal joint for qc density testing .
test the cores according to ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num and provide the results of the tests to the representative within num hours .
the contractor may elect to make adjustments to the mixture design or placement and compaction operations to ensure adequate in place density is being achieved .
if proposing changes that impact the field quality control plan or job mix formula submit any modifications or revisions to the department for review .
d excluded areas .
the following joint areas are to be excluded from the longitudinal joint lots .
the representative will not obtain samples from excluded areas to determine lot incentivedisincentive payment .
joints where one or both sides of the pavements forming the joint were accepted for density by means other than pavement cores joints where one side of the joint is formed by existing pavement not constructed under this contract areas within num foot longitudinally of an obstruction during construction of the wearing course manholes inlet grates utilities bridge structures pavement notches etc .
small areas such as intersections gore areas or transitions or anywhere the representative determines paving and phasing methods do not allow for consistent longitudinal joint construction .
prior to paving submit requests in writing to the representative for consideration of any areas to be excluded on this basis .
the representative will make the final determination .
e sampling .
the inspector will select one location in each sublot according to ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
the contractor may take one companion core per sublot for quality control purposes .
for vertical joints center joint cores on the line where the joint between the two adjacent lifts abut at the surface .
for notched wedge joints center joint cores numinches or one half the joint taper width away from the joint line in the direction of the wedge .
with the inspector present drill numinch diameter cores as soon as possible but no later than the day following the construction of the longitudinal joint at each sublot location .
do not compress bend or distort samples during cutting handling transporting and storing .
if samples are damaged immediately obtain replacement samples as directed by the nume num num num initial edition inspector from within num inches of the original sample location .
within num hours after coring backfill the holes with mixture of the same jmf or with mixture used for subsequent courses and compact and seal the mixture .
identify the samples by longitudinal joint lot and sublot number location dates of placement mixture type and as acceptance samples sample class as .
provide the daily theoretical maximum specific gravity value from section numenum.d.num for the mix on each side of the longitudinal joint .
the average of the two values will be used for the density calculation of each sublot in accordance with ptm no .
num .
immediately package and deliver the samples to the inspector according to the qc plan .
use sample containers of sufficient strength to prevent samples from being damaged during transport .
each joint core will be comprised of portions of two lanes with the potential for two different jmfs within each core .
the representative will only include samples within a lot having the same jmf combination on one form tr num for testing at the lts .
the representative will submit separate samples and forms trnum for sublots with different jmf combinations or after work stoppages of more than num days .
the lts will test the density samples according to ptm no .
num and if necessary ptm no .
num to determine the percent compaction .
f percent within tolerance pwt .
once all test results for a lot have been received the representative will compute the pwt and average in place density for each lot according to section numanum.a and as follows .
the lower specification limit l will be num .
no upper specification limit u for density will be factored into the pwt determination .
g corrective action .
seal the entire length of the longitudinal joints within each lot where the average in place lot density is less than num at no additional cost to the department .
seal the surface at the longitudinal joints with hot pg num asphalt cement .
heat and maintain asphalt cement sealant between numf and numf .
do not place sealant when the air temperature is below numf unless otherwise allowed by the representative .
apply the sealant only to joints in pavement surfaces that are clean dry and free of any loose material and debris .
clean with a power broom as required .
utilize a pressure applicator with a wand or nozzle capable of applying hot asphalt sealant in a straight and consistent width band of num inches num inch and thickness of num inch num inch at specified temperature range .
center the sealant band within num inch of the joint .
immediately level high spots with a squeegee or wand .
remove and dispose of excess sealant at no cost to the department .
reseal areas of the joint that are inconsistently or not completely covered at no additional cost to the department .
complete any required rumble strip installation at joints before sealing operations .
replace pavement markings that are marred by sealing operations at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and paymentdollar the proposal will include an item and a predetermined amount of money for evaluation of bituminous pavement longitudinal joint density and payment of incentivedisincentive .
the contract item will have a unit of measure of dollar a unit price of num and a quantity equal to the predetermined amount .
when bituminous pavement longitudinal joint density evaluation indicates that a disincentive adjustment is applicable the appropriate amount will be deducted from money due or to become due to the contractor through the processing of a contract adjustment .
due to the incentive or bonus status of the payment being made the provisions of section numd are not applicable to this item .
measured and paid for under the evaluation of bituminous pavement longitudinal joints and payment of incentive item as follows for each lot table a will be used to determine the incentivedisincentive payment for longitudinal joint density .
the incentivedisincentive payment for a lot containing other than num sublots will be determined as a percentage of a full num feet lot by the following nnum num of the table a amount nnum num of the table a amount nnum num of the table a amount nnum num of the table a amount num num num num initial edition for a full lot with a pwt num the contractor will receive a prorated positive incentive payment up to a maximum of num calculated according to table a .
lots with average density num will receive the maximum incentive regardless of pwt .
for a full lot with a pwt num the contractor will receive a prorated negative adjustment disincentive up to a maximum of num for the longitudinal joint lot calculated according to table a .
lots with pwt num and average density num will be assessed a disincentive up to a maximum of num per sublot regardless of pwt .
costs associated with providing joint pavement cores will not be paid for separately and will be considered incidental to the construction items for the wearing courses eligible for the longitudinal joint evaluation .
costs associated with corrective action such as traffic control or other costs will not be paid for separately .
table a lot by lot payment schedule for longitudinal joint incentivedisincentive lot pwt amount pwt num pwt num x num incentive pwt num to num num pwt num numpwtnum x num disincentive num numc num num change no .
num section numsuperpave mixture design standard and rps construction of plantmixed hma courses num descriptionthis work is the standard and rps construction of plantmixed hma on a prepared surface using a volumetric mixture design developed with the superpave gyratory compactor .
num materials a bituminous material num .
virgin mix mix containing num to num rap or mix containing num recycled asphalt shingles ras .
furnish material conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performancegraded asphalt binder aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num .
obtain material from a source listed in bulletin num for the specified grade .
provide qc testing and certification as specified in sections numb and numbnum .
provide the representative a copy of a signed bill of lading for bituminous material on the first day of paving and when the batch number changes .
num .
mix containing more than num rap or mix containing both num ras and num or more rap .
the lts will evaluate the asphalt cement in the rap and if applicable the ras source material .
the lts will determine the class grade of asphalt cement that the contractor is required to use in the mixture .
furnish material conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performancegraded asphalt binder aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num .
obtain material from a source listed in bulletin num for the specified grade .
provide qc testing and certification as specified in sections numb and numbnum .
provide the representative a copy of a signed bill of lading for bituminous material on the first day of paving and when the batch number changes .
b aggregate and ram .
num .
general requirements .
provide aggregate from sources listed in bulletin num .
aggregate and ram shall conform to the quality requirements for superpave asphalt mixture design as specified in bulletin num .
for wearing courses provide aggregate with at least the srl designation specified .
to achieve the specified srl the contractor may provide a blend of two aggregates if the blend has an srl designation equal to or better than that specified .
blends are num by mass weight of each aggregate .
blend the aggregates using an approved method .
do not use num mm asphalt mixtures in applications that require an srl designation higher than l. num .
fine aggregate .
section num except table a gradation does not apply and as follows determine the uncompacted void content according to aashto t num method a or use the value listed in bulletin num and conform to aashto m num table num .
determine the sandequivalent value according to aashto t num and conform to aashto m num table num .
num .
coarse aggregate .
type a section num except table c gradation does not apply and revise the following quality requirements of table b abrasion maximum percent as specified in bulletin num chapter numa table numa thin and elongated pieces maximum percent as specified in aashto m num table num for flat and elongated crushed fragments minimum percent as specified in aashto m num table num for fractured faces coarse aggregate c recycled asphalt material numc nume num num change no .
num num .
rap .
if rap material is proposed for use in the mixture use at least num rap consisting of cold milled or crushed hotmix bituminous mixture .
include a plan to control rap and the procedures to handle rap of significantly different composition in the producer qc plan .
maintain all processed material free of foreign materials and minimize segregation .
process the rap so that the final mixture conforms to section nume .
num .
manufacturer waste recycled asphalt shingles ras .
if ras material is proposed for use in the mixture use num ras by mass weight of the total mixture consisting of manufacturer waste shingles that are rejected asphalt shingles or shingle tabs that are discarded in the manufacturing process of new asphalt roofing shingles .
do not use postconsumer asphalt roofing shingles that are removed from the roofs of existing structures .
due to significant composition differences keep rejected asphalt shingles manufactured with fiberglass felt or paper or organic felt separate .
do not use both fiberglass felt and paper or organic felt asphalt roofing shingles in the same mixture .
obtain certification as specified in section numbnum from the manufacturer of the waste shingles certifying that the waste shingles were discarded during the manufacturing process of new asphalt roofing shingles and certifying the type of felt used during manufacturing of the waste shingles .
maintain and provide the representative access to all certification records for manufacturer waste shingles .
process and ras material by shredding screening or other methods so that num percent passes the num mm num inch sieve .
ras may be uniformly blended with fine aggregate as a method of preventing the agglomeration of ras material .
if ras and fine aggregate are blended blend at num by mass weight of each material .
include a plan to stockpile and control ras and the procedures to handle ras of significantly different composition in the producer qc plan .
maintain all processed material free of foreign materials and minimize segregation .
process the ras so that the final mixture conforms to section nume .
d filler .
section numcnum .
do not use flyash if the design traffic is greater than or equal to num million equivalent single axle loads esals .
e mixture composition for standard and rps construction .
num .
virgin material mixtures .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions in proportions to produce a jmf that conforms to the material gradation and volumetric superpave asphalt mixture design requirements as specified in bulletin num chapter numa for the specified nominal maximum aggregate size nmas and design esals .
submit a copy of each completed jmf signed by a certified hma level num plant technician to the dmedmm at least num weeks before the planned start of mixture production .
include a list of all material sources and the hma producer in the jmf .
provide the calibration factors c and num c required by ptm no .
num with the jmf .
do not start mixture production until after the dmedmm reviews the jmf .
submit a new jmf with a change in material sources or if a new jmf is necessary to produce a mixture conforming to this specification .
num.a producer qc plan .
each producer must prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and conforming to the additional qc requirements of this specification .
submit the qc plan to the dmedmm annually at least num weeks before the planned start of mixture production and do not start production until the dmedmm reviews the qc plan .
num.a.num qc organization chart .
names of personnel responsible for qc .
area of responsibility of each individual .
list outside agencies e.g .
testing laboratories and a description of services provided .
num.a.num testing plan with action points .
list of all tests to be performed .
frequency of testing .
list action points to initiate corrective procedures .
nume nume num num change no .
num recording method to document corrective procedures .
procedures for conducting jmf verification testing .
num.a.num materials storage and handling .
aggregaterapramras stockpiles .
coldfeed systems for aggregatesrapramras .
additives or modifiers for mixture modified asphaltliquid additive storage tanks .
surgestorage silos for mixture .
do not store more than one jmf in a surgestorage silo at any given time .
all measuring and conveying devices including calibration procedures .
haul vehicle loading procedures .
num.b plant technicians .
during mixture production provide a certified hma level num plant technician at the plant and an oncall certified hma level num plant technician both meeting the requirements outlined in publication num .
instruct and train the certified technicians to perform all tests and to control plant operation .
the department may use its own certified hma plant technicians to verify tests and to work in close cooperation with the producers technicians .
all technicians must carry a valid certification card during mixture production .
num.c annual jmf verification .
during initial production of each jmf verify according to the qc plan that the mixture conforms to this specification .
if the mixture does not conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in tables a and b within num days of production suspend shipping the mixture to the project .
do not ship the mixture to the project until after the representative reviews and verifies that results conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in tables a and b .
during jmf verification mixture acceptance is according to the approved acceptance level of table c. num.d production .
after jmf verification sample and test the mixture according to the qc plan .
for daily production of each jmf greater than num tons determine asphalt content gradation and theoretical maximum specific gravity from the same sample at least once each day .
for daily production of each jmf greater than num tons determine asphalt content gradation theoretical maximum specific gravity and perform volumetric analysis of compacted specimens from the same sample at least once each day .
perform additional sampling and testing as directed .
produce a mixture within the following production limits num.d.num apparent moisture content .
if the water absorption of a coarse aggregate as determined by aashto t num exceeds num sample the mixture according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
determine the apparent moisture content in the mixture according to ptm no .
num .
produce a mixture with the apparent moisture content not to exceed num .
num.d.num asphalt content .
include in the producer qc plan a frequency of obtaining mixture samples according to ptm no .
num and performing asphalt content tests to verify that the mixture conforms to the tolerances of table a .
test the samples according to either ptm no .
num ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num .
after obtaining a minimum of three test results determine compliance with the multiple sample tolerances in table a .
after obtaining five or more test results determine compliance with the multiple sample tolerances in table a using the running average of the last five consecutive test results .
printed ticket results may be used in place of laboratory test results for qc of asphalt content of the mixture if the producer is currently approved to use printed tickets according to bulletin num .
during mixture production maintain num of printed ticket results for each day of production within num percentage points of the jmf .
if rap or nume nume num num change no .
num ras is used in the mixture determine asphalt content by testing samples of the completed mixture .
num.d.num gradation .
sample the completed mixture or sample the combined aggregate from the hot bins of a batch plant or the combined aggregate belt of a drum plant according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
if mineral filler rap or ras are used in the mixture determine gradation by testing samples of the completed mixture .
test the completed mixture according to ptm no .
num or according to ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
test combined aggregate samples according to ptm no .
num .
produce a mixture within the tolerances of table a .
determine compliance with the multiplesample tolerance after obtaining a minimum of three test results for the mixture .
after obtaining five or more test results for the mixture determine compliance with the multiplesample tolerances using the running average of the last five consecutive test results .
num.d.num theoretical maximum specific gravity .
sample the mixture according to ptm no .
num at the frequency required in bulletin num .
condition and test the samples according to bulletin num .
calculate the percentage of unfilled voids and the theoretical maximum density of the mixture using the most recently determined theoretical maximum specific gravity value or average value as specified in bulletin num .
certify the theoretical maximum specific gravity value to the inspector daily using form csnumb .
if the theoretical maximum specific gravity value varies num or more from the previous test or from the jmf value immediately notify the dmedmm .
num.d.num volumetric analysis of compacted specimens .
sample the completed mixture according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
prepare a minimum of two specimens from each sample according to aashto t num .
produce a mixture with volumetric properties conforming to the tolerances of table b .
determine the bulk specific gravity of the specimens as specified in aashto t num and calculate air voids va and voids in mineral aggregate vma at ndesign according to aashto r num and as specified in bulletin num .
determine compliance with the multiple specimen tolerances using the average of the results for all specimens prepared from the sample .
table a jobmix formula composition tolerance requirements of the completed mix single sample n num multiple samples n num gradation passing num mm num inch and larger sieves num num passing num mm num inch to num m no .
num sieves inclusive num num passing num m no .
num sieve num num asphalt content num mm hma mixtures and smaller num num num mm hma mixtures and larger num num temperature of mixture f class of material type of material minimum maximum pg num asphalt cement num num pg num asphalt cement num num pg num asphalt cement num num all other pg binders asphalt cement as specified in bulletin num specifications for bituminous materials nume numf num num change no .
num table b jobmix formula volumetric tolerance requirements of the laboratory compacted mix property each specimen multiple specimens air voids at ndesign va num num minimum vma for num mm mixes num minimum vma for num mm mixes num minimum vma for num mm mixes num minimum vma for num mm mixes num minimum vma for num mm mixes num minimum vma for num mm mixes num num.e corrective actions .
immediately take corrective actions if one or more of the following occurs qc test results on a single sample nnum for percent passing the num mm no .
num sieve the num m no .
num sieve or asphalt content are not within the tolerances in table a .
the average of multiple samples nnum for percent passing any sieve or asphalt content as determined according to section numenum.d are not within the tolerances in table a. qc test results on each specimen or on multiple specimens are not within the tolerances in table b .
independent assurance ia or qa sample results tested at the producers plant are not within the tolerances of tables a or b .
after taking corrective actions sample the completed mixture within num tons of production .
after sampling test the mixture and provide test results to the representative within num tons of production .
if less than three samples are tested for mixture composition determine conformance with table a by comparing each result to the multiple sample tolerances .
if the mixture does not conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in table a and the single and multiple specimen tolerances in table b suspend production and shipping to the project and determine the cause of the problem .
provide a written explanation of the problem and a proposed solution to the department .
after the representative reviews the proposed solution and authorizes production to continue resume production and perform jmf verification according to the qc plan .
during corrective actions and jmf verification mixture acceptance is according to the approved acceptance level of table c. num .
mixtures with ram num or more rap andor num ras .
section numenum and as follows num.a ram and rap srl .
for hma wearing courses limit the total combination of ram and rap to a maximum of num of the mixture by mass weight unless documentation of the srl designation of the coarse aggregate in the ram and rap materials is provided to the dmedmm and the ram and rap meet the specified srl or can be blended for srl as specified in section numbnum .
num.b rap andor ras asphalt content and gradation .
determine the average asphalt content and gradation of the rap andor ras stockpiles according to bulletin num .
determine the proportions of rap ram ras and virgin materials necessary to conform to the jmf requirements .
maintain and provide the representative access to records of all sampling testing and calculations .
f mixture acceptance .
numf numf num num change no .
num num .
general .
for standard construction the department will accept the mixture according to the appropriate level in table c. for rps construction the department will accept the mixtures by lot acceptance as specified in section numhnum .
table c mixture acceptance acceptance level acceptance method certification acceptance producer certification of mixture section numfnum lot acceptance mixture acceptance sample testing section numhnum num .
certification acceptance .
acceptance by certification is appropriate for the following mixtures conditions or applications scratch courses leveling courses less than num inch depth and driveway adjustments .
mixtures used by department maintenance forces .
mixtures purchased by local or municipal governments .
mixtures placed in quantities not exceeding num tons in a continuous placement operation unless otherwise directed by the representative .
all num mm asphalt mixture applications will be accepted by certification acceptance .
other mixtures conditions or applications as approved by the representative .
num.a general .
obtain certification from the mixture producer .
use all qc tests during mixture production as acceptance tests .
certify mixtures using form csnumb .
include or attach the qc test results on the form .
provide the form to the inspectorincharge within num working day after completing the qc tests .
certify mixtures as specified in section numbnum and the requirements below .
num.b certification of mixture .
certify each mixture daily if qc test results conform to the single sample and multiple sample jmf production tolerances of table a .
the acceptance values will be asphalt content percent passing the num mm no .
num sieve not applicable for nummm asphalt mixtures percent passing the num m no .
num sieve if using printed ticket results in place of laboratory test results for asphalt content certify that at least num of each days printed ticket results for asphalt content are within num percentage points of the jmf .
if the mixture does not conform to the above requirements do not certify the mixture .
instead provide all qc test results to the inspectorincharge .
if using printed ticket results for asphalt content provide the percentage of daily printed ticket results within num percentage points of the jmf to the inspectorincharge .
payment will be determined according to table h based on the qc test results .
if a days production is interrupted by corrective action material produced after the corrective action may be certified if qc test results conform to production tolerances .
num.c maintaining approval to certify mixtures .
the department may suspend a plants approval to certify mixtures if qc is not performed according to the producer qc plan mixtures are not produced according to bulletin num a mixture can not be certified on num consecutive production days or as described below .
the department may take ia samples of the completed mixture at the plant .
in the presence of the department test the ia samples for asphalt content and gradation according to the test methods indicated in the producer qc plan .
take immediate corrective actions if the mixture does not conform to table a .
the department may take qa samples of the completed mixture at the plant or on the roadway directly from the uncompacted mixture placed by the paving equipment specified in section nume .
the department will test qa samples according to ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num modified method d if previously identified problematic aggregates are used in the mixture for conformance to table a .
if the results of the qa samples do not comply with table a review the producer qc plan and the qc test results that followed the qa samples for conformance to table a .
if qc results do not conform to table a perform the corrective actions necessary to provide a mixture conforming to table a .
numf numb num num change no .
num after completing corrective actions or the sample review the department will perform an onsite evaluation of the producers plant operation and qc and then take a sample of the completed mixture at the plant .
in the presence of the representative test the sample .
if the sample does not comply with table a the department will suspend certification .
immediately suspend shipping mixtures accepted by certification to the project .
after testing verifies that the produced mixture conforms to tables a and b and with the representative present conduct jmf verification according to the producer qc plan .
after successfully completing jmf verification resume both certification and shipping mixtures accepted by certification to the project .
num construction a preplacement requirements .
num .
paving operation qc plan .
prepare a paving operation qc plan as outlined on form csnum for field control and evaluation of bituminous concrete paving operations .
submit the qc plan to the representative before or at the preconstruction conference .
the qc plan shall describe the construction equipment and methods necessary to construct and test the bituminous concrete courses as specified in section num .
do not start paving until after the representative reviews the qc plan .
num .
preplacement meeting .
at least num weeks before placing bituminous paving mixtures schedule a bituminous preplacement meeting with the representative to review at a minimum the specification paving operation qc plan sequence of paving operations mixture acceptance density acceptance and the care and custody of bituminous acceptance samples .
b weather limitations .
do not place any bituminous paving mixtures from november num to march num unless an extension of the paving season as specified in section numbnum is granted in writing by the district executive .
do not place bituminous paving mixtures when surfaces are wet or when the air or surface temperature is num f or lower .
if work is halted because of weather conditions the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of mixture that are en route to the project .
num .
paving season extensions .
an extension of the paving season from october num to november num or from april num to march num will be granted by the district executive provided the following conditions are met a written request is submitted to the district executive for an extension .
requests to pave after october num must be submitted by october num .
requests to pave prior to april num must be received by march num .
the request must justify the need for the extension while also demonstrating a paving plan that is able to accomplish the desired scope of work on or before the required completion date .
the following information is submitted within num calendar days after the actual notice to proceed date o all active department projects for which the contractor is responsible including project locations and applicable milestone dates o paving crew andor paving equipment allocations o a project paving plan defining dates hours and production rates to ensure continuous material delivery placement and compaction operations .
use warm mix asphalt wma in accordance with temperature restrictions specified in section num table a .
if necessary replace original contract hma bituminous pavement items with wma bituminous pavement items provided each wma item is added to the contract at a unit price that is less than or equal to the unit price for the hma contract item it is to replace .
any necessary changes to means methods or materials are at no additional cost to the department .
complete all work by the required completion date or construction engineering liquidated damages as specified in section numa will apply .
a final acceptance certificate will not be issued for work completed under the paving season extension in november prior to the following may num .
an extension of the paving season will not be granted for the month of march on projects with an actual notice to proceed date in april of that calendar year .
an extension of the paving season will not be granted for the month of november on projects with paving scheduled to continue into the next paving season except when doing so would enable the department to facilitate numb numf num num change no .
num roadway use and the convenience of traffic .
num .
wearing courses .
do not place wearing courses specified with design esals of num million or greater or wearing courses specified with pg num from october num to march num in districts num num num num num monroe and carbon counties num cambria and somerset counties and num and from october num to march num in districts num num except monroe and carbon counties num num num except cambria and somerset counties num and num .
no exceptions to paving weather limitations will be allowed unless directed in writing by the district executive .
c bituminous mixing plant .
obtain bituminous mixtures from a plant fully automated and recordated and currently listed in bulletin num .
the necessary facilities for inspection include a plant office as specified in section numa except the minimum floor space is num square feet .
for recycled mixtures add the following requirements num .
batch plant .
modify the batch plant to measure the mass weight of the rap andor ras before adding it into the pug mill .
design the coldfeed bins conveyor systems charging chutes and all special bins to prevent rap andor ras from segregating and sticking .
dry the virgin aggregate and ram and then heat the virgin aggregate and ram to a temperature that after adding rap andor ras produces a completed mixture within the temperatures specified in table a for the class and type of material used .
ensure that virgin aggregate is free of unburned fuel oil when delivered to the pug mill .
num .
drum mixer plant .
modify the drum mixer plant to prevent rap andor ras from directly contacting the burner flame and prevent rap andor ras from overheating .
design the coldfeed bins conveyor systems charging chutes and all special bins to prevent rap andor ras from segregating and sticking .
produce a completed mixture within the temperatures specified in table a for the class and type of material used .
d hauling equipment .
haul the mixtures in tightly sealed vehicles that do not contain petroleum oils solvents or other materials that adversely affect bituminous concrete .
provide covers of sufficient size and quality to protect the entire load under all conditions .
maintain the proper and uniform placement temperature specified in section numhnum .
provide insulation on all sides of the truck body a doublewalled truck body or a heated truck body when the air temperature is below num f from october num to april num. e paving equipment num .
bituminous pavers .
provide selfcontained powerpropelled units with activated screeds or activated strike off assemblies and with automatic screed controls capable of producing a finished surface of specified evenness and texture .
provide heated units capable of spreading and finishing the mixture to the widths and depths indicated .
provide units capable of being operated at forward speeds consistent with satisfactory placement of the mixture equipped with receiving hoppers having sufficient capacity for uniform spreading and equipped with distribution systems that place the mixture uniformly in front of the screeds .
use hydraulic or other extension types against abutting lanes or longitudinal joints only if the unit feeds and activates the extension by the same method as the main screed .
at the outside edge of pavement widths that can not be uniformly placed the contractor may use a nonactivated extension when approved by the inspectorincharge .
do not use equipment that tears shoves or gouges the mixture or that causes tracks indented areas flushing segregation or other permanent blemishes .
do not use blade graders or drags .
num .
bituminous wideners .
provide selfcontained powerpropelled units with strikeoff assemblies capable of producing a finished surface of specified evenness and texture .
provide units capable of spreading and finishing the mixture to the widths and depths indicated .
provide units capable of being operated at forward speeds consistent with satisfactory placement of the mixture equipped with receiving hoppers having sufficient capacity for uniform spreading and equipped with distribution systems that place the mixture uniformly in front of the strikeoff assemblies .
do not use equipment that tears shoves or gouges the mixture or that causes tracks indented areas flushing segregation or other permanent blemishes .
f rollers .
use steelwheel pneumatictire vibratory or oscillating rollers as specified or allowed in section numcnuma numb numc nume numf numh or num .
operate rollers according to manufacturers recommendations .
use vibratory and oscillating rollers with separate controls for frequency and amplitude .
numg numh num num change no .
num g preparation of existing surface .
num .
conditioning of existing surface .
before delivering bituminous mixtures remove and dispose of loose and foreign material and excess joint sealer and crack filler from the surface of existing pavement or previously placed pavement courses .
if necessary use a broom .
before placing a wearing course correct irregularities in the binder course .
if practical do not allow traffic on the binder course to prevent contamination .
remove and replace binder course that can not be cleaned to the representatives satisfaction .
paint existing vertical surfaces of curbs structures gutters and pavements that will be in contact with bituminous mixtures with a uniform coating of bituminous material class enum aashto ssnum or cssnum enum aashto ssnumh or cssnumh class aet applied in two or more applications or of the class and type designated for the bituminous course .
before overlaying existing surfaces apply a tack coat as specified in section num unless otherwise indicated .
apply a tack coat to previously placed courses if the representative determines a tack coat is necessary to ensure bonding between the two courses .
num .
scratch and leveling courses .
where indicated place a separate scratch or leveling course ahead of resurfacing operations .
use a scratch course to fill wheel ruts and other local small depressions even with the surrounding pavement .
use a leveling course to provide a relatively uniform working platform for placing binder or wearing courses .
num .
paving notches .
mill the existing pavement surface at tiein locations of the wearing course in accordance with the standard drawing rcnumm or as otherwise indicated .
perform milling as specified in section num. h spreading and finishing .
num .
general requirements .
num.a placing .
unless otherwise allowed deliver place and compact bituminous paving mixtures during daylight hours .
ensure the mixture does not contain lumps of cold material .
deliver and place mixtures at the laying temperatures specified in table a for the type and class of material used .
utilize a material transfer vehicle mtv as specified in section numcnum for rps pavements unless otherwise approved by the representative .
num.b spreading and finishing .
spread and strike off the mixture for the entire lane width or as much lane width as practical .
adjust screed assemblies to provide the required cross section and depth .
after spreading do not add mixture to the pavement mat that is segregated below the minimum temperature contains either a deficiency or an excess of asphalt content or is otherwise unsuitable to add to the pavement mat .
if the course is more than num inches in compacted depth construct it in two or more layers of approximately equal depth with no layer less than num inches or more than num inches in compacted depth .
for binder or leveling courses that have isolated areas exceeding numinch compacted depth use a scratch or leveling course to eliminate the isolated areas before fulldepth paving .
immediately after placing the bituminous mixture work the exposed outer edges to eliminate sharp ragged and open edges to eliminate an unfinished appearance and to reduce edge breakdown .
immediately repair edge breakdowns .
in areas where mechanical spreaders can not be used place and screed the mixture with suitable hand tools .
do not use rakes .
adjacent to flush curbs gutters and other abutting structures place the wearing course mixture uniformly higher so that after compaction the finished surface is slightly above the edge of the abutting structure .
remove harmful material clean and seal the surface of wearing courses adjacent to curbs to form a bituminous gutter .
seal the mixture surface with a hot bituminous material of the class and type listed in table a .
evenly apply the bituminous material a minimum width of num inches from the curb .
the contractor may use class aet class enum aashto ss num or cssnum or enum aashto ssnumh or cssnumh emulsified asphalt instead of hot bituminous material if allowed by the inspectorincharge .
control the application rate so residual asphalt completely fills surface voids and provides a watertight joint along the curb .
if necessary apply emulsified asphalt in two or more applications .
after sealing remove excess sealant material .
numh numh num num change no .
num num.c field technician .
provide a certified hma field technician with the qualifications outlined in publication num to control the placement of bituminous mixtures .
instruct and train the certified hma field technician to control the paving operation so that the completed paving work complies with the specified requirements .
a certified hma field technician must be onsite and carry a valid certification card during placement of all hma mixtures .
num .
mixture lot acceptance standard and rps construction .
lot acceptance is appropriate for standard construction placed in quantities that allow consistent operation of the plant and is appropriate for rps construction .
num.a lots and sublots .
material will be accepted in the field on a lot by lot basis .
lots will be established cumulatively and will be specific for each jmf .
each lot consists of five equal sublots nnum .
a completed sublot has a mixture acceptance box sample as specified in section numhnum.b and either a core collected according to ptm no .
num or other density acceptance as specified in section numj .
a normal lot size is num tons with five num ton sublots nnum unless operational conditions or project size dictate otherwise .
if operational conditions or project size dictate readjustment of the lot will be made as specified in table d. breakdowns or stoppages of short periods due to such causes as weather or equipment failure will not be considered as reasons to adjust the lot size .
the original lot will be continued when work resumes after short stoppages of less than num days .
if a lot is terminated due to a stoppage of num days or more adjust the lot size and number of sublots as specified in table d. if work stoppages exceed num days a new lot will be established .
table d readjustment of lot size and associated number of sublots remaining quantity following last full lot action less than num tons without a combination of one mixture acceptance sample and one core quantity combined with the previous lot nnum less than num tons with a combination of one mixture acceptance sample and one core one new sublot defined and quantity combined with the previous lot nnum num tons to less than num tons without a combination of two mixture acceptance samples and two cores one new sublot defined and quantity combined with the previous lot nnum num tons to less than num tons with a combination of two mixture acceptance samples and two cores two new sublots defined and quantity combined with the previous lot nnum num tons to less than num tons without a combination of three mixture acceptance samples and three cores two new sublots defined and quantity combined with the previous lot nnum num tons to less than num tons with a combination of three mixture acceptance samples and three cores new lot defined nnum num tons to less than num tons without a combination of four mixture acceptance samples and four cores new lot defined nnum num tons to less than num tons with a combination of four mixture acceptance samples and four cores new lot defined nnum num tons to less than num tons without a combination of five mixture acceptance samples and five cores new lot defined nnum num tons to less than num tons with a combination of five mixture acceptance samples and five cores new lot defined nnum for contract items bid on an area basis compute equivalent tons based on design depth of paving course and design density as specified in section numbnum.b .
if mat density is accepted using pavement cores and mixture acceptance is by lots .
num.a.num partially completed lots nnum or less .
when process conditions change to an extent that a partially completed lot can not be combined with the most recently completed lot samples will be independently evaluated on the partially completed lot .
for asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve mixture acceptance samples will be evaluated individually using section nume table a nnum criteria .
for density mat density acceptance samples will be evaluated individually using the criteria in table e. if samples tested for asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve meet the nnum criteria of table a and samples tested for density meet the criteria in table e payment will be num percent of the contract unit numh numh num num change no .
num price .
if samples tested for asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve do not meet the nnum criteria of table a the material will be considered defective work .
if samples tested for density are no more than num percent below the minimum or no more than num percent above the maximum limits of table e payment will be num percent of the contract unit price .
if samples for density are more than num percent below the minimum or more than num percent above the maximum limits of table e the pavement will be considered defective work .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace defective work .
table e density limits for partially completed lots mixture nmas density limits all rps num mm num mm num mm and num mm wearing or binder courses num and num all standard num mm num mm num mm and num mm wearing or binder courses num and num all num mm and num mm base courses num and num num.a.num for jmfs placed in quantities less than num tons .
for jmfs placed in quantities of greater than num tons and less than num tons the tonnage will be considered a lot .
the lot will be divided into five equal sublots .
for jmfs placed in quantities of num tons or less the tonnage may be considered a lot if density acceptance is by pavement cores however mixture acceptance will be by certification .
the lot will be divided into three equal sublots .
num.b mixture acceptance samples .
the inspector will select different sample locations in each sublot according to ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
in the presence of the inspector obtain one loose mixture sample for each sublot directly from the uncompacted mixture placed by the paving equipment specified in section nume and immediately package .
for num mm and smaller nmas mixtures package individual samples in cardboard boxes dimensioned approximately num num inches x num num inches x num num inches .
for num mm and larger nmas mixtures package individual samples in cardboard boxes dimensioned approximately num inches x num num inches x num inches .
do not package samples in cardboard boxes with any one dimension greater than num num inches or any one dimension smaller than num num inches .
immediately after packaging and in the presence of the inspector identify the samples by ecms project number lot and sublot number location station and offset date of placement mixture type and as acceptance samples sample class as .
leave at least one side of the cardboard sample box free of any writing or marking for lts use in testing the samples .
immediately after identifying submit the samples to the inspector .
for quality control purposes a maximum of one loose sample per sublot may be obtained .
no loose mixture or core samples may be taken by the contractor for mixture composition testing after the mixture acceptance samples are obtained .
do not obtain any other pavement samples except those which are directed by and surrendered to the department unless allowed in writing from the district executive .
num.c mixture acceptance sample testing .
utilize lts testing unless otherwise indicated in the proposal .
these procedures apply to standard and rps construction .
num.c.num lts testing .
the lts will test the mixture acceptance samples according to ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num modified method d if previously identified problematic aggregates are used in the mixture to determine asphalt content and the percent passing the num m no .
num sieve .
the lts will use the calibration factors cf and num cf provided with the jmf for ptm no .
num .
the lts will analyze the test results for extreme values according to ptm no .
num at the num significance level .
if discarding an extreme value reduces a lot to less than three remaining test results the department will accept the lot as specified in section numhnum.a.num .
the department will accept lots with three or more test results as specified in section numanum or section numb .
if the asphalt content or the percent passing the num m no .
num sieve is not within the single sample nnum or multiple sample nnum tolerances in table a for two consecutive lots or a total of three lots stop all production of the jmf .
determine the cause of the problem and provide a proposed solution to the department .
do not resume production of the jmf until the representative reviews the proposed solution and authorizes production to continue .
numh numh num num change no .
num num .
pattern segregation .
pattern segregation is continuous or repeated areas of nonuniform distribution of coarse and fine aggregate particles in the finished mat .
the department will address pattern segregation as follows num.a evaluating pattern segregation .
if the representative observes pattern segregation that may result in defective pavement then the inspector will notify the contractor of the observed pattern segregation .
the contractor may continue to work at his or her own risk while he or she immediately and continually adjusts the operation to eliminate the pattern segregation from future work .
as a minimum and in the presence of the representative determine the average depth of pavement surface macrotexture according to ptm no .
num in areas with the pattern segregation and in areas with nonsegregated pavement .
the pattern segregation is unacceptable if the difference in average pavement texture depth between the nonsegregated and segregated areas exceeds num inch .
the representative will determine if the pavement is defective as specified in section numhnum.c .
num.b test section .
if the macrotexture tests identify unacceptable pattern segregation then immediately suspend placing the bituminous course .
evaluate the cause of pattern segregation according to the paving operation qc plan and as directed .
provide proposed corrective actions to the representative and do not resume placing the bituminous course until after the representative reviews the proposed corrective actions and authorizes paving to continue .
determine if the pattern segregation resulted in defective pavement as specified in section numhnum.c .
after the representative allows paving to resume place a test section not to exceed num tons .
if the corrective actions do not eliminate observed pattern segregation the department will suspend paving even if it is before the contractor places the entire test section .
propose additional corrective actions and construct another test section .
resume normal paving operations after constructing an entire test section without pattern segregation as determined by the representative .
num.c defective pavement .
at locations selected by the inspector and with the inspector present drill a minimum of three numinch diameter cores from the area of pattern segregation and a minimum of three cores from the pavement representing a nonsegregated area .
do not compress bend or distort samples during cutting and handling and immediately provide the cores to the inspector .
the inspector will transport cores to the producers laboratory .
with the inspector present test the cores at the plant for density asphalt content and gradation .
the department may request additional tests as part of its evaluation of pattern segregation .
determine the maximum theoretical density according to bulletin num the core density according to ptm no .
num and asphalt content according to ptm no .
num if previously identified problematic aggregates are used in the mixture ptm no .
num modified method d or other test method identified in the producer qc plan .
an area of pattern segregation contains defective pavement if the summation of absolute deviations from any two sieves is num or more from the jmf the core density is defective the mixture is defective in asphalt content or the mixture is defective for percent passing the num m no .
num sieve .
remove and replace the full width of the affected lane and a minimum of num feet beyond each end of the area with unacceptable pattern segregation .
construct replacement pavement conforming to the appropriate surface tolerances as specified in section numlnum or section numl .
num .
flushing .
provide a mix that will not flush .
flushing is continuous or repeated areas of excessive asphalt on the pavement surface .
the department may recognize flushing until the department approves the project through final inspection .
the department will address flushing as follows num.a evaluating flushing .
when the representative observes flushing then the representative will immediately notify the contractor of the observed flushing .
numh numj num num change no .
num the contractor may continue work at its own risk while it immediately and continually adjusts the operation to eliminate flushing from future work .
in the presence of the representative determine the average depth of pavement surface macrotexture according to ptm no .
num in areas of suspected flushing .
if the average texture depth is less than or equal to num inches then the pavement will be considered to be flushed and is defective .
num.b test section .
if the macrotexture tests identify flushing then immediately suspend placing the paving course .
evaluate the cause of flushing according to the paving operation qc plan and as directed .
provide proposed corrective actions to the representative and do not resume placing the paving course until after the representative reviews the proposed corrective actions and authorizes paving to continue .
remove and replace the defective wearing course at no cost to the department for the full width of the affected lane and a minimum of num feet beyond each end of the area of defective wearing course .
construct replacement wearing course conforming to the appropriate surface tolerances as specified in section numl .
after the representative allows paving to resume place a test section not to exceed num tons .
if the corrective actions do not eliminate observed flushing the department will suspend paving even if it is before the contractor places the entire test section .
propose additional corrective actions and construct another test section .
resume normal paving operations after constructing an entire test section without flushing as determined by the representative .
i compaction .
compact the mixture to achieve the density acceptance requirements and to eliminate all roller marks .
compact the mixture while it is in proper condition and adjust roller speed amplitude frequency pattern and roller size to eliminate displacement shoving cracking and aggregate breakage .
satisfactorily correct displacement resulting from reversing roller directions and other causes .
without using excess water maintain wheels of steelwheel rollers moist and clean to prevent the mixture from adhering to the wheels .
use suitable methods to clean wheels of pneumatictire rollers .
use pneumatictire rollers for compacting scratch courses .
for areas inaccessible to rollers compact with mechanical vibrating hand tampers .
remove areas that are loose broken mixed with dirt or show an excess or deficiency of bituminous material .
replace removed mixture with fresh hot mixture and compact the mixture even with the surrounding pavement surface .
j mat density acceptance .
num .
general .
the department will accept the mat density of standard construction according to one of the levels in table f. areas may be accepted by nonmovement or optimumrolling pattern based on the criteria in sections numjnum and numjnum .
do not place mixtures for nonmovement or optimumrolling pattern acceptance until the department has approved the densityacceptance level .
the department will accept the mat density of rps construction by lots and pavement cores as specified in section numjnum .
the department will accept mat density of all num mm asphalt material by nonmovement or optimumrolling pattern .
table f density acceptance density acceptance level acceptance criteria nonmovement table h optimumrolling pattern table h pavement cores table i num .
nonmovement .
the inspectorincharge will approve density acceptance by nonmovement for the numj numj num num change no .
num following materials conditions or applications scratch courses or leveling courses less than numinch in depth or equal to or less than num pounds per square yard .
areas of paving or patching less than num feet in width or narrow enough to cause bridging of the area by approved compaction equipment .
the inspectorincharge will accept density by nonmovement for the following materials conditions or applications if they are determined by the representative to be noncritical for density materials placed in small quantities not exceeding num tons in a continuous placement .
mixtures placed on unstable or nonuniform bases .
mixtures used for patching road widening shoulders driveway adjustments and other miscellaneous applications determined by the representative .
shoulders where density is critical will be accepted by pavement cores as specified in section numjnum.a .
the department will accept the density when the mixture does not move under the compaction equipment .
num .
optimumrolling pattern .
the inspectorincharge may accept density using an optimumrolling pattern for the following materials conditions or applications materials placed in small quantities not exceeding num tons in a continuous placement .
mixtures placed on unstable or nonuniform bases .
leveling courses or other courses that are greater than or equal to numinch in depth or greater than or equal to num pounds per square yard .
mixtures used for patching road widening driveway adjustments shoulders where density is not critical and other miscellaneous applications determined by the representative .
shoulders where density is critical will be accepted by pavement cores as specified in section numjnum.a .
mixtures placed at less than the minimum compacted depths in table g. with the representative and the contractors certified hma field technician present determine density with an approved nuclear gauge according to ptm no .
num or determine density with an approved electrical impedance gauge according to ptm no .
num .
nuclear gauges must be operated by a licensed nuclear gauge operator .
in the presence of the representative establish the optimumrolling pattern for each course according to ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num .
document optimumrolling patterns using the appropriate form trnumb or form trnumc and provide the completed forms to the representative .
compact the course according to the optimumrolling pattern .
during paving the representative may require the contractor to verify the target density established by the optimumrolling pattern .
if the target density is not achieved establish a new optimumrolling pattern as directed .
the representative will suspend paving when the optimumrolling pattern is not being followed .
use one of the following gauges or approved equal troxler electronics model numb or model numb campbell pacific nuclear model mcnum seaman nuclear model mcnum transtech systems inc. pqitm model num or model num troxler electronic laboratories pavetrackertm submit a copy of the certificate of nuclear gauge annual calibration according to astm dnum and numj numk num num change no .
num documentation of training of the nuclear gauge operator .
recalibrate any nuclear gauge that is damaged or repaired .
num .
pavement cores standard and rps construction .
num.a general .
pavement cores are required for accepting the density of rps construction .
pavement cores are appropriate for accepting the density of standard construction if all of the following materials conditions or applications exist materials placed at compacted depths greater than or equal to the minimum depths specified in table g. materials placed on stable and uniform bases .
table g mixture minimum compacted depths mixture minimum depth num mm wearing course num num in .
num mm wearing course num num in .
num mm binder course num num in .
num mm binder course num in .
num.b lots and sublots .
section numhnum.a .
num.c density acceptance samples .
the inspector will select different sample locations in each sublot according to ptm no .
num ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
with the inspector present drill numinch diameter cores as soon as possible but no later than the day following placement .
do not compress bend or distort samples during cutting handling transporting and storing .
if samples are damaged immediately obtain replacement samples as directed by the inspector from within num inches of the original sample location .
within num hours after coring backfill the hole with mixture of the same jmf or with mixture used for subsequent courses and compact and seal the mixture .
in the presence of the inspector identify the samples by ecms project number lot and sublot number location station and offset date of placement mixture type and as acceptance samples sample class as .
provide the daily theoretical maximum specific gravity value from section numenum.d.num for the density calculation of the lot .
if density samples from the lot are taken from more than num days placement the average of the daily theoretical maximum specific gravity values from the days the lot was placed will be used to calculate the density .
immediately deliver the samples to the inspector and provide sample containers of sufficient strength to prevent samples from being damaged during transport .
the representative will submit samples for one lot in one container .
for quality control purposes a maximum of one pavement core per sublot may be obtained unless the representative allows additional cores .
no cores may be taken by the contractor after the acceptance cores are obtained .
do not obtain any other pavement cores except those which are directed by and surrendered to the department unless allowed in writing by the district executive .
num.d acceptance sample testing .
these procedures apply to standard and rps construction .
num.d.num lts acceptance testing .
the lts will test the density acceptance samples according to ptm no .
num and if necessary ptm no .
num to determine the percent compaction .
the department will determine acceptance with respect to density as specified in section numanum or section numb .
if cores are not taken within num day after placing the mixture or if the density for two consecutive lots or for a total of three lots does not meet the density payment factor percentage of num stop paving operations for the project as directed .
review and evaluate the operation and determine the cause of the problem .
do not resume paving until after the representative reviews the proposed solution and authorizes paving to continue .
k joints .
num .
longitudinal joints .
num.a general .
offset joints in a layer from the joint in the layer immediately below by approximately num inches .
numk numk num num change no .
num plan joint locations to ensure that the joint in the top layer is at the approximate pavement centerline for twolane roadways and within num inches of the lane lines for roadways with more than two lanes .
avoid joint locations directly beneath planned pavement marking applications where possible .
before placing abutting lanes paint the entire area of the joint with a uniform coating of bituminous material the pgbinder used in the pavement course or pg num .
painting of the joint face is not required for scratch courses .
place and compact the mixture at the joint according to the paving operation qc plan .
ensure the surface across the joint and along the joint is within the surface tolerances specified in section numl .
adhere to the following additional requirements for the construction of longitudinal joints that will not be evaluated as specified in section num assure a true line when paving .
place and closely follow lines or markings for this purpose .
when compacting loose mixture at an unsupported edge make the first roller pass with the edge of the roller drum extending beyond and overhanging the unsupported edge by num to num inches .
do not allow pneumatictire rollers to cause lateral movement at any unsupported edge .
when placing uncompacted mixture adjacent to a previously compacted lane operate the paver so that the material overlaps the edge of the previously placed lane by num to num num inches .
ensure that mixture behind the screed is tightly pushed against the free face of the existing lane .
maintain the uncompacted mixture uniformly higher than the existing lane by at least num inch per inch of material being placed to assure full compaction .
when possible use automated joint matchers when constructing joints between traveled lanes .
do not bump back or lute the overlapped material unless overlap inadvertently exceeds the specified tolerances .
when compacting the loose mix at the longitudinal joint keep the roller drum approximately num to num inches from the joint for the first pass forward .
on the backward and subsequent passes overlap the joint num to num inches .
ensure that the joint receives at least as many roller passes as the rest of the mat .
if traffic or other cause distorts the lane edge restore the lane edge to its original shape using acceptable procedures .
num.b vertical joints .
the contractor may use vertical joints for base binder and wearing courses .
if traffic or other cause distorts the lane edge carefully saw a vertical lane edge before painting .
place the abutting lane on the same day and if necessary leave only short lane sections normally less than num feet in length where the abutting lane is not placed the same day .
num.c notched wedge joints .
the contractor may use notched wedge joints for wearing and binder courses with nmas mixtures of num mm or smaller .
remove and dispose of all loose and foreign material before opening the lane to traffic .
construct the joint according to standard drawing rcnumm .
if the joint is next to opposing traffic place the abutting lane within num working day after placing the mixture .
if the joint is next to traffic in the same direction place the abutting lane within num working days after placing the mixture .
if both lanes that make the joint are not placed on the same day amend the maintenance and protection of traffic plan and install additional signing for uneven lane at no additional cost to the department .
install uneven lane signs according to publication num publication num and mutcd and nummile before the notched wedge joint area and every nummile within the uneven pavement area .
num .
transverse joints .
construct joints perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
the contractor may saw transverse joints .
if used install bulkheads straight and perpendicular to the surface .
if a bulkhead is not used and the roller moves over the rounded edge of new mixture locate the joint a sufficient distance from the rounded edge to numk numa num num change no .
num provide a true surface and cross section .
paint the joint face with a thin coating of bituminous material the pgbinder used in the pavement course or pg num before placing fresh mixture against the joint face .
painting of the joint face is not required for scratch courses .
num .
other joints .
where placing a wearing course abutting to existing pavement at locations such as paving notches lane additions or utility openings seal the joint with hot bituminous material of the class and type designated for the wearing course .
evenly apply the sealant a minimum of num inches on both sides of the joint .
the contractor may use a class aet class enum aashto ssnum or cssnum or enum aashto ssnumh or cssnumh emulsified asphalt instead of hot bituminous material .
before sealing clean and remove harmful material from the area to be sealed .
control the application rate so residual asphalt completely fills surface voids and provides a watertight joint .
if necessary use two or more applications of emulsified asphalt .
remove excess bituminous material and immediately cover the sealed area with a light application of dry sand that is acceptable to the representative .
l surface tolerance .
test the finished surface with a numfoot straightedge at areas the representative determines may be deficient or irregular and at transverse joints and paving notches .
hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and in successive positions parallel to the road centerline to check the entire width of the pavement .
advance along the pavement in stages of not more than onehalf the length of the straightedge until the entire area is tested .
the pavement is defective if irregularities are more than num inch .
m tests for depth binder and wearing courses .
construct the pavement to the depth indicated and within the specified tolerances .
for courses with density acceptance by lots the inspector will measure the depth of each sublot according to ptm no .
num using the density acceptance samples .
for courses with a designed course depth and density acceptance by nonmovement or optimum rolling pattern the inspector will calculate the mass per square meter weight per square yard for verification of yield .
if yield results indicate insufficient course depth drill one num inch diameter core for each num tons of material placed to determine the extent of the deficient depth .
core locations will be determined using ptm no .
num .
for courses with density acceptance by lots the inspector will measure the depth of each sublot according to ptm no .
num using density acceptance samples .
pavement deficient in depth by more than num inch is defective work .
pavement deficient in depth by more than num inch in three or more adjacent core locations is defective work .
the extent of the defective work is the entirety of all sublots represented by the adjacent deficient core samples .
after the inspector completes depth measurements backfill compact and seal core holes with the mixture used to construct the course .
immediately start correcting courses or pavement that are deficient in depth at the core location and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within num inch of the design depth .
n protection of courses .
do not allow vehicular traffic or loads on newly compacted courses for num hours or until the course uniformly cools to a temperature of num f or less .
provide alternate routes as indicated or as directed .
if both lanes that form a longitudinal joint are placed on the same day and public safety is not restricted do not allow vehicular traffic or loads on the lanes until adequate stability and adhesion is obtained and the material has uniformly cooled to num f or less .
maintain the course as specified in sections num num and num. o defective work .
as specified in section num and as follows department acceptance and qa testing shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for material or workmanship that the representative determines is defective before the department issues the acceptance certificate .
remove and replace or repair defective work as directed .
the bopd cmd will review representative determinations of defective material or workmanship .
remove and replace pavement defective for pattern segregation as specified in section numhnum for flushing as specified in section numhnum surface tolerance as specified in section numl or section numl and depth as specified in section numm or section numm .
remove and replace pavement defective for percent within tolerance or payment factor percentages as specified in tables h and i .
num measurement and payment a standard hma construction .
numa numa num num change no .
num num .
hma courses .
num.a superpave asphalt mixture design hma wearing course .
square yard or ton num.b superpave asphalt mixture design hma wearing course scratch .
ton num.c superpave asphalt mixture design hma wearing course leveling .
ton num.d superpave asphalt mixture design hma binder course .
square yard or ton num.e superpave asphalt mixture design hma binder course leveling .
ton num .
bituminous tack coat .
section num .
num .
mixture acceptance by certification and density acceptance by nonmovement optimumrolling pattern or pavement cores .
the representative will pay at the contract unit price adjusted according to table h. the total payment factor percentage is the sum of adjustments for each test criterion subtracted from num .
the adjustment for an individual test criterion is the payment factor percentage subtracted from num .
the pavement will be considered defective if the payment factor for asphalt content percent passing the num m no .
num sieve and percent passing the num mm no .
num sieve no .
num sieve not applicable for num mm asphalt mixtures are all num .
for pavements with density acceptance by cores the pavement will be considered defective if the pavement density cores result in a percent within tolerance less than num .
table h contract unit price adjustments mixture acceptance by certification mixture nmas test criteria test value payment factor percentage asphalt content all sizes printed tickets at least num of daily printed tickets within num of jmf num less than num of daily printed tickets within num of jmf num num mm and smaller qc sample testing single sample nnum multiple samples nnum num num num num to num num num num num num mm and larger qc sample testing num num num num to num num num num num gradation single sample nnum multiple samples nnum all sizes qc sample testing for passing num m no .
num sieve num num num num to num num to num num num num all sizes qc sample testing for passing num mm no .
num sieve num num num num to num num num num num mat density all sizes nonmovement section numjnum .
num optimumrolling pattern section numjnum .
num numa numa num num change no .
num sizes from table i acceptance sample testing of pavement cores table i table i defective pavement .
remove and replace or when permitted by the district executive in writing leave in place and the department will pay num of the contract unit price .
for these test criteria the daily payment factor percentage will be determined by the single sample test result from the daily qc sample .
if more than one qc sample test result is available for a day the payment factor percentage will be determined based on the average of the results using multiple sample tolerances .
if corrective action is taken payment factor percentages will be independently determined for material placed before and after the corrective action .
num .
mixture acceptance by lot and density acceptance by nonmovement optimumrolling pattern or pavement cores .
the department will pay on a lotbylot basis at the contract unit price adjusted for payment factor percentages as specified in table i .
for the payment factor percentages based on percent within tolerance the department will determine the percent within tolerance according to section numanum using the upper and lower specification limits in table j .
table i contract unit price adjustments mixture acceptance by lots mixture nmas test criteria test value payment factor percentage asphalt content all sizes acceptance sample testing all individual sublot acceptance sample test results for the lot are within the nnum tolerances in table a and the lot average is within the nnum tolerances in table a num percent within tolerance if any individual sublot acceptance sample test result for the lot is not within the nnum tolerances in table a or the lot average is not within the nnum tolerances in table a table k gradation all sizes acceptance sample testing for passing num m no .
num sieve all individual sublot acceptance sample test results for the lot are within the nnum tolerances in table a and the lot average is within the nnum tolerances in table a num percent within tolerance if any individual sublot acceptance sample test result for the lot is not within the nnum tolerances in table a or the lot average is not within the nnum tolerances in table a table k mat density all sizes nonmovement section numjnum .
num optimumrolling pattern section numjnum .
num all rps num mm num mm num mm and num mm wearing or binder courses acceptance sample testing of pavement cores all individual sublot test results for the lot are num and num of maximum theoretical density num percent within tolerance if any individual sublot test result for the lot is not num and num of maximum theoretical density table k all standard num mm num mm num mm and acceptance sample testing of pavement cores all individual sublot test results are num and num and the lot average is num and num of the maximum theoretical density num numa numa num num change no .
num num mm wearing or binder courses percent within tolerance if any individual sublot test result is not num and num or if the lot average is not num and num of the maximum theoretical density table k all num mm and num mm base courses acceptance sample testing of pavement cores all individual sublot test results are num and numof the maximum theoretical density num percent within tolerance if any individual sublot test result is not num and num of the maximum theoretical density table k the department may elect to randomly select and test only one sublot mixture acceptance sample from each lot to verify conformance to the specifications .
if only one sublot mixture acceptance sample is tested tighter tolerances than those in table a will be used to verify conformance to the specifications for the entire lot .
if the one sublot is within num of the jmf for asphalt content and within num of the jmf for percent passing the num m no .
num sieve the lot will be considered to conform with the specifications and the lots payment factor percentage will be determined according to this table .
if the one sublot fails to meet the tighter tolerances all mixture acceptance samples from the lot will be tested to determine the payment factor percentage according to this table .
table j upper and lower specification limits for calculating percent within tolerance testing criteria mixture nmas lower specification limit l upper specification limit u asphalt content from jmf value num mm num mm and num mm num num num mm and num mm num num percent passing the num m no .
num sieve from jmf value all sizes num num mat density num mm num mm num mm and num mm wearing and binder courses numt numt num mm and num mm base courses numt numt where t current maximum theoretical density lbs.cu .
ft. table k payment factor based on percent within tolerance percent within tolerance payment factor percentage num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa numa num num change no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num defective lot remove and replace the lot .
if only one lot characteristic has a percent within tolerance less than num the district executive may allow the contractor to leave the defective lot in place .
the department will pay for the defective lot at num of the contract unit price .
num.a payment .
the representative will compute the percent of the contract unit price paid as follows lot payment cpnumpd pb panum cp contract unit price per lot unit price times lot quantity pd payment factor percentage for density pb payment factor percentage for asphalt content .
pa payment factor percentage for percent passing the num m no .
num sieve num.b dispute resolution .
for mixture acceptance testing or density acceptance testing performed by the lts the contractor may request in writing that the department retest a lot if the initial test results indicated a defective lot remove and replace except for density when one or more density acceptance cores in the lot were coated with paraffin wax as a result of ptm no .
num during the original density acceptance testing .
provide written retest requests to the district executive within num weeks of the date the lts test results are released .
retests will not be allowed if a written retest request is not received within num weeks of the date the lts test results are released .
provide quality control test results and control charts companion sample test results if available test data trend evaluation and any other pertinent information to justify the retest request .
the department will evaluate the information and may allow retesting if the information submitted provides a reasonable basis to conclude that the failing test results may not represent the inplace material .
the lts will perform the retest with the contractor present unless otherwise agreed to in writing with the contractor .
for retesting of materials failing for asphalt content or percent passing num m no .
num sieve the inspector will identify the locations where the original box samples were collected .
the inspector will select retest sample locations num inches from the original sample locations longitudinally in the direction of traffic .
if the num inch offset causes the retest sample location to fall outside of the sublot the inspector will select the retest sample location num inches from the original sample locations longitudinally in the opposite direction from traffic .
numa numb num num change no .
num with the inspector present provide appropriate traffic control and drill numinch diameter cores for retesting purposes .
within num hours after coring backfill the hole with mixture of the same jmf or with mixture used for subsequent courses and compact and seal the mixture .
provide traffic control core and backfill the core holes at no cost to the department .
the test method used for asphalt determination during the original acceptance testing ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num will be used for the retest unless the dmedmm grants written approval for a change in test method .
the cores will be rinsed with water before testing .
the results of the retest cores will be used to calculate payment for both asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve for the lot .
for retesting of density acceptance the original density acceptance cores will be utilized .
the lts will not retest a lot for density acceptance when one or more density acceptance cores in the lot were coated with paraffin wax as a result of ptm no .
num during the original density acceptance testing .
upon completing the retesting of the original density acceptance cores the lts will evaluate testing repeatability using both the original density test values and the density retest values according to ptm no .
num .
after evaluating the testing repeatability the density test values used to determine the final payment factor percentage for density will be as follows if repeatable the original test values will be used .
if lack of repeatability i.e .
nonrepeatable the retest values will be used .
the department will deduct from the payment the cost per lot associated with conducting a retest as follows in table l table l dispute resolution retest cost table test method mixture acceptance retest cost if retest results indicate num pay factors mixture acceptance retest cost if retest results indicate num pay factors ptm no .
num num num ptm no .
num num num density acceptance retest cost if retest results indicate a lack of repeatability density acceptance retest cost if retest results are repeatable ptm no .
num num num b hma rps construction .
square yard or ton num .
mixture acceptance by lot and density acceptance by pavement cores .
section numanum except for rps the department will determine mat density by pavement cores only .
num num num initial edition section num superpave mixture design standard and rps construction of plantmixed hma finegraded courses num description this work is the standard and rps construction of a plantmixed hma wearing course on a prepared surface using a volumetric mixture design developed with the superpave gyratory compactor and modified to be a finegraded fg mixture .
num materials section num using the procedure and volumetric tolerances for the num mm nominal maximum aggregate size mixture and modified as follows e mixture composition for standard and rps construction .
num .
virgin material mixtures .
submit a jmf meeting all of bulletin num requirements for a num mm nominal maximum aggregate size mixture except the jmf must have a minimum percent passing the no .
num sieve of num and a maximum percent passing the no .
num sieve of num .
num construction section num using the test procedures limits and tolerances for a num mm nominal maximum aggregate size mixture except where procedures limits and tolerances are specifically indicated for a num mm finegraded nominal maximum aggregate size mixture and as modified as follows revise table g to include num mm fine grade wearing course as follows table g mixture minimum compacted depths mixture minimum depth num mm fine grade wearing course num in .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard or ton paid in accordance with the requirements of section num for a num mm wearing course .
num nume num num change no .
num section numsuperpave mixture design standard and rps construction of plantmixed wma courses num descriptionthis work is the standard and rps construction of a plantmixed densegraded wma pavement course on a prepared surface using a volumetric asphalt mixture design developed with the superpave gyratory compactor sgc using prescribed manufactured additives or modifiers andor plant process modifications .
num materialsection num with additions and modifications as follows a bituminous material .
section numa .
add the following subsections num .
wma technology additives or modifiers blended at the bituminous material suppliers refinery or terminal .
provide refinery or terminal blended bituminous material blended with a wma technology additive or modifier from an approved manufacturer and source listed in bulletin num .
include in the bituminous material producer qc plan the wma technology additive or modifier manufacturer name wma technology name and source dosage rates blending method qc testing corrective action points disposition of failed material storage handling shipping and bill of lading information following the applicable requirements in section num .
include the wma technology additive or modifier and dosage rate on the bill of lading .
provide certification that the refinery or terminally blended bituminous material modified with the wma technology additive or modifier meets the requirements of section numanum or section numanum for the specified grade .
num .
wma technology additives or modifiers blended at the bituminous mixture producers plant .
provide a blended bituminous material consisting of an approved wma technology additive or modifier from an approved manufacturer and source listed in bulletin num that is blended with a base bituminous material of the specified grade conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performancegraded asphalt binder aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num and from an approved source listed in bulletin num section num .
prepare a producer qc plan as specified in section num and conforming to the producer qc plan requirements in section numenum.a and the additional producer qc plan requirements within this specification .
provide certification that the bituminous material blended with the wma technology additive or modifier at the bituminous mixture production plant meets the requirements of section numanum or section numanum for the specified grade .
e mixture composition for standard and rps construction .
num .
virgin material mixtures .
section numenum .
replace the first paragraph with the following size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions bituminous material and either wma technology additives or modifiers in proportions to produce a jmf that conforms to the material gradation and volumetric superpave asphalt mixture design requirements as specified in bulletin num chapter numa for the specified nominal maximum aggregate size and design esals except as procedurally modified by the wma technology manufacturer technical representative technical representative to address laboratory procedures when preparing compacting and testing wma mixtures and to achieve a uniform blend .
special additives or modifiers need not be used if mixture temperature workability and compaction can be achieved solely through plant mechanical modification to produce foamed asphalt .
develop a hot mix asphalt hma jmf and incorporate the wma technology additive modifier or process into that jmf during production .
do not develop a volumetric wma jmf based on incorporating the wma technology additive modifier or process during the volumetric asphalt mixture design process .
for tracking purposes create a separate wma jmf cover sheet trnuma for approval containing the wma technology used additive dosage rate or percent water added for foaming material code and the tsr data from the wma moisture sensitivity testing .
num.a.num .
testing plan with action points .
section numenum.a.num .
add the following additional bullets blended bituminous material lot sizequantity and lot designation method .
list of all tests to be performed on the blended bituminous material .
nume nume num num change no .
num testing and certification of the blended bituminous material and wma technology additive or modifier for conformance to section numanum or section numanum .
frequency of testing of the blended bituminous material .
list action points to initiate corrective procedures for the blended bituminous material .
recording method to document corrective procedures for the blended bituminous material .
handling and disposition of blended bituminous material failing to meet the bituminous material specification requirements .
num.a.num .
materials storage and handling .
section numenum.a.num .
add the following additional bullets wma technology additive or modifier manufacturer name wma technology name and source as listed in bulletin num .
wma technology additive or modifier storage and handling prior to blending .
all measuring conveying and blending devices for the wma technology and antistrip additive if required including calibration procedures .
wma technology additive or modifier and antistrip additive if required method of introduction dosage rates blending with the bituminous material and method of automation recordation and print outs .
storage and handling of the blended bituminous material with the wma technology additive or modifier .
wma production temperature range for normal paving and any specific temperature ranges for special conditions or situations .
wma laboratory compaction temperature for qc volumetric analysis .
determine the sgc compaction temperature for the mix design which yields the same target air voids as the related hma mixture .
num.c .
annual jmf verification .
section numenum.c .
add the following perform annual verification of the wma mixture jmf even if the equivalent hma mixture jmf was previously annually verified .
num.d .
production .
section numenum.d .
add the following prepare and test wma mixtures including sgc specimens for quality control using the same test methods procedures and frequencies as specified for hma except as modified by the producer qc plan .
maintain records of the testing of wma and make available for review by the representative when requested .
num.d.num degree of particle coating .
for all wma mixtures sample the mixture according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
examine the completed wma mixture for particle coating .
produce a wma mixture with fully coated particles .
increase the plant mixing time or make other plant adjustments if particle coating is deficient .
produce a wma mixture capable of being handled placed and compacted without stripping the bituminous material from the aggregate .
table a jobmix formula composition tolerance requirements of the completed mix section nume table a .
revise the temperature of mixture f requirements as follows nume numi num num change no .
num temperature of mixture f class of material type of material chemical organic foaming additives minimum mechanical foaming equipmentprocess minimum maximum pg num asphalt cement num num num pg num asphalt cement num num num pg num asphalt cement num num num all other binders asphalt cement the higher of num or the minimum temp .
specified in bulletin num minus num the higher of num or the minimum temp .
specified in bulletin num minus num as specified in bulletin num outline in the producer qc plan and follow any additional temperature requirements provided by the technical representative for production and placement of the mixture .
determine the sgc compaction temperature for the mix design which yields the same target air voids as the related hma mixture .
include the sgc compaction temperature in the producer qc plan .
compact the completed mixture in the sgc for qc volumetric analysis at the sgc compaction temperature according to the guidelines provided by the technical representative .
g wma technologies additives modifiers or processes and wma manufacturers .
produce the wma mixture using approved or provisionally approved wma technologies including additives modifiers or processes from manufacturers listed in bulletin num .
if blending wma additives or modifiers with bituminous material provide bituminous material blended with the wma additive or modifier according to section numanum or section numanum .
for wma technology additives or modifiers blended with the bituminous mixture at the bituminous mixture production plant prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and also conforming to the additional producer qc plan requirements within this specification .
submit the qc plan to the dmedmm annually and at least num weeks before the planned start of the blending of wma technologies with bituminous material .
do not start blending until the dmedmm reviews the qc plan .
h antistrip additives .
incorporate a liquid antistrip additive at the same dosage rate as the dosage rate for the hma jmf for which the wma jmf is based .
if the wma technology includes an antistrip additive as part of its wma technology additional liquid antistrip additive is not required in mixtures where the moisture sensitivity analysis can not be performed as specified in section numenum .
if the wma technology includes an antistrip additive as part of its wma technology and moisture sensitivity analysis can be performed according to section numenum add additional antistrip additive or make other adjustments to the jmf and meet the specified moisture sensitivity requirements .
use either a compatible heat stable aminebased liquid antistrip or a compatible alternate antistrip additive .
i wma technology manufacturer technical representative technical representative .
identify and provide a technical representative that is knowledgeable in how the wma technology will affect the storage handling blending mixture production mixture qc testing placement and compaction requirements of the mix .
either have the technical representative present during the initial production of the wma and subsequently at the project location during the initial placement operations or if not required to be on site oncall and capable of being in direct verbal contact with the producer contractor andor department representative within num hours after initial contact .
have the technical representative review and sign the producers qc plan and include their current direct contact telephone numbers office and mobile in the producers qc plan .
if unable to sign the qc plan have the technical representative submit documentation that supports all of the data outlined in sections numenum.a.num and numenum.a.num .
if the wma producer is using a fully approved not provisionally or conditionally approved wma technology listed in bulletin num and the wma producer has previously produced wma mixture using the wma technology to the satisfaction of the dmedmm responsible for the production plant a technical representative is not required to be present during the production and placement of the wma material .
during all wma production and placement operations have the technical representative identified in the producers qc plan remain oncall for technical support .
if the wma producer is using a provisionally or conditionally approved wma technology listed in bulletin num or is using a fully approved wma technology for the very first time have a technical representative present at the numi numa num num change no .
num plant during initial production and subsequently at the project location during initial placement of the specified wma pavement course .
have the technical representative present at the project location until at least num lane mile of the specified pavement course has been placed and compacted .
if there are no apparent technical issues request that the department representative agree to release the technical representative from being present onsite .
the department may direct that a technical representative is not required to be present onsite during initial production and placement operations for provisionally or conditionally approved wma technologies .
if the department directs a technical representative is not required to be present onsite have the technical representative identified in the producers qc plan remain oncall for technical support .
j wma mixture production delivery and placing temperatures when placing over membrane systems specified in section num or section num .
if a project includes an item or items of work for membrane systems as specified in section num or section num produce and place wma on top of the membrane at elevated mixture temperatures as per the membrane manufacturers recommendation .
ensure proper adhesion between the asphalt pavement overlay and the underlying membrane .
num constructionsection num with additions and modifications as follows a preplacement requirements .
num .
paving operation qc plan section numanum .
add the following prepare and submit additional information specifically related to all aspects of the field control of wma concrete paving operations to the representative as part of the paving operation qc plan that addresses all recommendations and direction from the technical representative .
do not incorporate any material delivered outside the temperature limits specified in table a .
describe the construction equipment and methods necessary to control the wma paving operations including the testing delivery placement compaction and protection of the wma concrete courses for all placement applications including handwork as specified in section num. c bituminous mixing plant .
section numc .
add the following make any plant modifications needed to introduce the wma technology additives modifiers or processes according to specific recommendations and direction from the technical representative or process manufacturer to achieve a uniform blend of the wma technology additive modifier or foaming process and produce a wma mixture meeting these specifications .
num .
batch plant .
section numcnum .
replace the last sentence with the following dry the aggregate according to the specific recommendations and direction from the technical representative and heat to a suitable temperature so that the resulting completed mixture temperature is within the mixture temperature recommended by the technical representative or manufacturer and table a .
ensure that the aggregate is free of unburned fuel oil and excess moisture as defined in section numenum.d.num when delivered to the pug mill .
num .
drum mixer plant .
section numcnum .
replace the last sentence with the following produce a completed mixture that is within the mixture temperature range recommended by the technical representative or manufacturer and table a .
ensure that the aggregate and completed mixture is free of unburned fuel oil and excess moisture as defined in section numenum.d.num .
num measurement and paymentsection num with modifications as follows a standard wma construction .
num .
wma courses .
section numanum .
replace with the following num.a superpave asphalt mixture design wma wearing course .
square yard or ton numa numb num num change no .
num num.b superpave asphalt mixture design wma wearing course scratch .
ton num.c superpave asphalt mixture design wma wearing course leveling .
ton num.d superpave asphalt mixture design wma binder course .
square yard or ton num.e superpave asphalt mixture design wma binder course leveling .
ton b wma rps construction .
square yard or ton num numb num num change no .
num section numsuperpave mixture design construction of plant mixed hmawma num mm thin asphalt overlay courses num descriptionthis work is the construction of a thin lift wearing course of plantmixed densegraded hmawma asphalt concrete with num mm nominal maximum aggregate size nmas placed on a prepared surface .
num materialssection num with additions and modifications as follows a bituminous material .
num .
virgin mix .
furnish pg num conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performance graded asphalt binder aashto m num or pg numenum conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performancegraded asphalt binder using multiple stress creep recovery mscr test aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num .
obtain material from a source listed in bulletin num for the specified grade .
provide qc testing and certification as specified in sections numb and numbnum .
provide the representative a copy of a signed bill of lading for bituminous material on the first day of paving and when the batch number changes .
when producing a mixture with a wma technology adhere to the following requirements num.a .
wma technology additives or modifiers blended at the bituminous material suppliers refinery or terminal .
provide refinery or terminal blended bituminous material blended with a wma technology additive or modifier from an approved manufacturer and source listed in bulletin num .
include in the bituminous material producer qc plan the wma technology additive or modifier manufacturer name wma technology name and source dosage rates blending method qc testing corrective action points disposition of failed material storage handling shipping and bill of lading information following the applicable requirements in section num .
include the wma technology additive or modifier and dosage rate on the bill of lading .
provide certification that the refinery or terminally blended bituminous material modified with the wma technology additive or modifier meets the requirements for the specified grade .
num.b .
wma technology additives or modifiers blended at the bituminous mixture producers plant .
provide a blended bituminous material consisting of an approved wma technology additive or modifier from an approved manufacturer and source listed in bulletin num that is blended with a base bituminous material of the specified grade conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performancegraded asphalt binder aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num and from an approved source listed in bulletin num section num .
prepare a producer qc plan as specified in section num and conforming to the producer qc plan requirements in section numenum.a and the additional producer qc plan requirements within this specification .
provide certification that the bituminous material blended with the wma technology additive or modifier at the bituminous mixture production plant meets the requirements for the specified grade .
b aggregate num .
general requirements .
provide aggregate from approved producers and sources listed in bulletin num .
furnish aggregate that conforms to the quality requirements for superpave asphalt mixture design as specified in bulletin num with modifications as specified in section num .
provide aggregate with at least the srl designation specified .
to achieve the specified srl the contractor may provide a blend of two aggregates if the blend has an srl designation equal to or better than that specified .
blends are num by mass weight of each aggregate .
blend the aggregates using an approved method .
num .
fine aggregate .
section num except table a gradation does not apply and as follows determine the uncompacted void content according to aashto t num method a or use the value listed in bulletin num and conform to aashto m num table num .
determine the sand equivalent value according to aashto t num and conform to aashto m num table num .
numb nume num num change no .
num all manufactured sand fine aggregates used in nmas num mm mixtures must be from a source that has a coarse aggregate srl rating listed in bulletin num as specified .
manufactured sand fine aggregate must be manufactured from the same parent materials as the bulletin num listed coarse aggregate and will have the same srl rating as the listed coarse aggregate .
all natural sand fine aggregates and manufactured sand fine aggregates without a coarse aggregate from the same source with an srl rating listed in the bulletin num used in nmas num mm mixture must be submitted to the lts for srl determination .
num .
coarse aggregate .
type a section num except table c gradation does not apply and revise the following requirements of table b abrasion maximum percent as specified in bulletin num chapter numa table numa flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate maximum percent as specified in astm dnumusing material retained on the no .
num sieve maximum num percent for num ratio and maximum num percent for num ratio .
crushed fragments minimum percent as specified in aashto m num table num for fractured faces course aggregate using the material retained on the no .
num sieve .
the coarse aggregate must satisfy specified srl requirements .
do not use coarse aggregate or antiskid aggregate in the mixture until the quality type and srl are determined .
c recycled asphalt material .
do not use reclaimed asphalt pavement rap or recycled asphalt shingles ras in the num mm hma wearing course .
d filler .
follow section numcnum .
do not use fly ash if the design traffic is greater than or equal to num million equivalent single axle loads esals .
hydrated lime is allowed as a filler and may constitute up to num percent of the weight of total dry aggregate unless otherwise shown on the plans .
provide hydrated lime that conforms to the requirements of astm cnum .
e mixture composition .
num .
virgin material mixtures .
design num mm nmas mix that meets all department requirements .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions bituminous material and an approved wma technology when wma is indicated in proportions to develop a jmf that conforms to the material gradation and volumetric superpave asphalt mixture design requirements as specified in bulletin num chapter numa except as modified in table a .
for wma mixtures the wma technology manufacturer technical representative technical representative will address laboratory procedure modifications necessary to prepare compact and test wma mixtures and to achieve a uniform blend .
when wma is indicated develop a hma jmf and incorporate the wma technology additive modifier or process into that jmf during production .
do not develop a volumetric wma jmf based on incorporating the wma technology additive modifier or process during the volumetric asphalt mixture design process .
for all wma jmfs perform moisture susceptibility analysis according to bulletin num .
ensure the wma technology additive modifier or process is not detrimental to the moisture resistance of the mixture .
for tracking purposes create a separate wma jmf cover sheet trnuma for approval containing the wma technology used wma technology dosage rate material code and the aashto t num tsr data from the wma moisture susceptibility testing .
submit a complete copy of the jmf including a form trnuma signed by a certified hma level num plant technician to the dmedmm at least num weeks before the planned start of mixture production .
include a list of all material sources and the hma producer on the trnuma .
provide the calibration factors cf for both asphalt content and num m no .
num sieve required by ptm no .
num with the jmf on the trnuma .
do not start mixture production until after the dmedmm reviews the jmf .
submit a completely new jmf including a new form trnuma with a change in material sources or if a new jmf is necessary to produce a mixture conforming to this specification .
table a mix design requirements for thin lift num mm hma wearing course aggregate gradation requirements percent passing sieve size min .
max .
nume nume num num change no .
num num mm num inch num min .
num mm num inch num num mm no .
num num num mm no .
num num num m no .
num num num m no .
num num volumetric design requirements design gyrations ndesign for all specified ranges of design esals num voids in mineral aggregate vma min .
for all specified ranges of design esals num design air voids va for all specified ranges of design esals num binder draindown aashto t num for mixture with greater than num asphalt content num binder grade for all specified ranges of design aashto m num or aashto m num pg num or pg numenum num.a producer qc plan .
section numenum.a num.b plant technicians .
section numenum.b num.c annual jmf verification .
section numenum.c except conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in section numenum.d tables b and c. perform annual verification of the wma mixture jmf even if the equivalent hma mixture jmf was previously annually verified .
num.d production .
section numenum.d except as follows when producing wma produce and test mixtures including superpave gyratory compactor sgc specimens for quality control using the same test methods procedures and frequencies as specified for hma except as modified by the producer qc plan .
maintain records of the testing of wma and make available for review by the representative when requested .
num.d.num apparent moisture content .
section numenum.d.num num.d.num asphalt content .
include in the producer qc plan a frequency of obtaining mixture samples according to ptm no .
num and performing asphalt content tests to verify that the mixture conforms to the tolerances of table b .
test the samples according to either ptm no .
num ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num .
after obtaining a minimum of three test results determine compliance with the multiple sample tolerances in table b .
after obtaining five or more test results determine compliance with the multiple sample tolerances in table b using the running average of the last five consecutive test results .
printed ticket results may be used in place of laboratory test results for qc of asphalt content of the mixture if the producer is currently approved to use printed tickets according to bulletin num .
during mixture production maintain num of printed ticket results for each day of production within num percentage points of the jmf .
num.d.num gradation .
sample the completed mixture or sample the combined aggregate from the hot bins of a batch plant or the combined aggregate belt of a drum plant according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
if mineral filler is used in the mixture determine gradation by testing samples of the completed mixture .
test the completed mixture according to ptm no .
num or according to ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
test combined aggregate samples according to ptm no .
num .
produce a mixture within the tolerances of table b .
determine compliance with the multiplesample tolerance after obtaining a minimum of three test results for the mixture .
after obtaining five or more test results for the mixture determine compliance with the multiplesample tolerances using the running average of the last five consecutive test results .
nume nume num num change no .
num num.d.num theoretical maximum specific gravity .
section numenum.d.num num.d.num volumetric analysis of compacted specimens .
sample the completed mixture according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
prepare a minimum of two specimens from each sample according to aashto t num .
in case wma is used follow section num for specific temperature requirements and the acceptable temperature range .
produce a mixture with volumetric properties conforming to the tolerances of table c. determine the bulk specific gravity of the specimens as specified in aashto t num and calculate air voids va and voids in mineral aggregate vma at ndesign according to aashto rnum and as specified in bulletin num .
table b composition tolerance requirements of the completed plant mix single sample n num multiple samples n num gradation passing num mm num inch to num m no .
num sieves inclusive num num passing num m no .
num sieve num num asphalt content num mm hma num num temperature of mixture f class of material type of material minimum maximum pg num or pg numenum hmawma asphalt cement num num jobmix tolerance requirements for combined hot bin gradations gradation single sample n num passing num mm num inch to num m no .
num sieves inclusive num passing num m no .
num sieve num table c volumetric tolerance requirements of the plant mixed laboratory compacted mixture single specimen n num multiple specimens n num air voids at ndesign va from target num num minimum vma num num.e corrective actions .
immediately take corrective actions if one or more of the following occurs qc test results on a single sample nnum for percent passing the num mm num inch sieve num mm no .
num sieve num m no .
num sieve num m no .
num sieve or asphalt content are not within the tolerances in table b .
the average of multiple samples nnum for percent passing any sieve or asphalt content as determined according to section numenum.d are not within the tolerances in table b. qc test results on a single specimen nnum or on multiple specimens nnum are not within the tolerances in table c. independent assurance ia or qa sample results tested at the producers plant are not within the tolerances of tables b or c. after taking corrective actions sample the completed mixture within num tons of production .
after sampling test the mixture and provide test results to the representative .
if less than three samples are tested for mixture composition determine conformance with table b by comparing each result to the multiple sample tolerances .
if the mixture does not conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in table b and the single and multiple specimen tolerances in table b suspend production and shipping to the project and determine the cause of the problem .
provide a written explanation of the problem and a proposed solution to the department .
after the representative reviews the proposed solution and authorizes production to continue resume production and perform jmf verification according to the qc plan .
during corrective actions and jmf verification mixture acceptance is according to the approved acceptance level of section numf table c. nume numa num num change no .
num num .
draindown sensitivity .
for mixtures with greater than num percent total asphalt content determine the driandown sensitivity of the mixture using aashto t num at the maximum mixture temperature listed in table b minus numf .
use fibers to reduce binder draindown if draindown exceeds the requirements of table a .
use stabilizer types specified in section numd as needed to address draindown .
f mixture acceptance .
section numf except as follows num .
general .
the department will accept the mixture according to the certification acceptance in section numfnum or lot acceptance in section numhnum .
num .
certification acceptance .
acceptance by certification is appropriate for the following applications scratch courses leveling courses and driveway adjustments .
mixtures used by department maintenance forces .
mixtures purchased by local municipal governments .
mixture placed in quantities less than num tons in a continuous placement operation unless otherwise directed by the representative .
other conditions or applications as approved by the representative .
num.b certification of mixture .
certify each mixture daily if qc test results conform to the single sample and multiple sample jmf production tolerances of table a .
the acceptance values will be asphalt content percent passing the num m no .
num sieve if using printed ticket results in place of laboratory test results for asphalt content certify that at least num of each days printed ticket results for asphalt content are within num percentage points of the jmf .
if the mixture does not conform to the above requirements do not certify the mixture .
instead provide all qc test results to the inspectorincharge .
if using printed ticket results for asphalt content provide the percentage of daily printed ticket results within num percentage points of the jmf to the inspectorincharge .
payment will be determined according to table h based on the qc test results .
if a days production is interrupted by corrective action material produced after the corrective action may be certified if qc test results conform to production tolerances .
g wma technologies additives modifiers or processes and wma manufacturers .
for wma mixtures section numg h antistrip additives .
for wma mixtures section numh i wma technology manufacturer technical representative technical representative .
for wma mixtures section numi j num mm mixture use with membrane systems specified in section num or section num .
do not use num mm wearing course paving mixture for material placed on top of membrane systems .
num constructionsection num with additions and modifications as follows a preplacement requirements .
provide hma or wma as indicated for the entire project unless approved by the department in writing to use both .
num .
paving operation qc plan .
prepare a paving operation qc plan as outlined on form csnum for field control and evaluation of bituminous concrete paving operations .
submit the qc plan to the representative before or at the preconstruction conference .
the qc plan shall describe the construction equipment and methods necessary to construct and test the bituminous concrete courses as specified in section num .
for wma mixes additionally have the technical representative provide all recommendations and direction specific to the wma technology in the numa numg num num change no .
num paving operation qc plan .
do not start paving until after the representative reviews the qc plan .
num .
preplacement meeting .
at least num weeks before placing bituminous paving mixtures schedule a bituminous preplacement meeting with the representative to review at a minimum the specification paving operation qc plan sequence of paving operations mixture acceptance density acceptance and the care and custody of bituminous acceptance samples .
b weather limitations .
do not place num mm wearing course paving mixtures from october num to march num in districts num num except juniata and mifflin counties num num num monroe and carbon counties only num cambria and somerset counties only and num and from october num to march num in districts num juniata and mifflin counties only num except monroe and carbon counties num num num except cambria and somerset counties num and num .
no exceptions to paving weather limitations will be allowed unless approved in writing by the district executive .
do not place bituminous paving mixtures when surfaces are wet when the air or surface temperature is numf or lower .
if work is halted because of weather conditions the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of mixture that are en route to the project .
num .
paving season extensions .
section numbnum .
with the following addition if an exception to the weather limitation dates is approved by the district executive for num mm wearing course the minimum surface temperature of numf and an air temperature of numf will be strictly enforced and compaction of the asphalt material completed as quickly as possible .
c bituminous mixing plant .
section numc .
with the following addition for wma mixtures make any plant modifications needed to introduce the wma technology additives modifiers or processes according to specific recommendations and direction from the technical representative or process manufacturer to achieve a uniform blend of the wma technology additive modifier or foaming process and produce a wma mixture meeting these specifications .
for batch plants dry the aggregate according to the specific recommendations and direction from the technical representative .
num .
batch plant .
section numcnum .
with the following addition for wma mixtures dry the aggregate according to the specific recommendations and direction from the technical representative and heat to a suitable temperature so that the resulting completed mixture temperature is within the mixture temperature recommended by the technical representative or manufacturer and section nume table a .
ensure that the aggregate is free of unburned fuel oil and excess moisture as defined in section numenum.d.num when delivered to the pug mill .
num .
drum mixer plant .
section numcnum .
with the following addition for wma mixtures produce a completed mixture that is within the mixture temperature range recommended by the technical representative or manufacturer and section nume table a .
ensure that the aggregate and completed mixture is free of unburned fuel oil and excess moisture as defined in section numenum.d.num .
d hauling equipment .
section numd e paving equipment .
section nume f rollers .
use an adequate number steelwheeled rollers each weighing a minimum of num tons and as specified in section numcnum to keep up with the paving operation .
operate rollers according to manufacturers recommendations .
use rollers equipped with a watering or soapy watering system that prevents material from sticking to the rollers .
do not use pneumatic wheeled rollers .
do not use rollers in vibratory mode unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the representative that no breaking of aggregate or flushing of asphalt binder results from the vibration .
monitor pavement cores for aggregate breakage on every lot .
discontinue vibration if aggregate breakage or flushing of asphalt binder occurs .
g preparation of existing surface .
section numg with the following modification numg numh num num change no .
num num .
conditioning of existing surface .
before delivering bituminous mixtures remove and dispose of loose and foreign material and excess joint sealer and crack filler from the surface of existing pavement or previously placed pavement courses .
if necessary use a power broom .
remove all thermoplastic pavement markings .
if practical do not allow traffic on the existing surface after cleaning to prevent contamination .
before placing a wearing course correct irregularities in the binder course .
repair potholes and gouges greater than num inch in depth .
fill and seal all pavement cracks or joints that exceed num inches in width .
use fillers and sealants conforming to penndot specifications .
paint all existing vertical surfaces of curbs structures gutters and pavements that will be in contact with bituminous mixtures with a uniform coating of bituminous material emulsified asphalt class ssnumh cssnumh or of the class and type designated for the bituminous course .
before overlaying existing surfaces apply a tack coat to the clean surface according to section num .
allow adequate time for tack to break completely prior to placing any material .
h spreading and finishing .
section numh with the following modification num .
general requirements .
num.a placing .
unless otherwise allowed deliver place and compact num mm paving mixtures during daylight hours .
ensure the mixture does not contain lumps of cold material .
deliver and place num mm paving mixtures at the laying temperatures specified in table b .
utilize a material transfer vehicle mtv as specified in section numcnum for nummm paving mixtures unless otherwise approved by the representative .
num.b spreading and finishing .
section numhnum.b with the following addition plan and schedule operations to minimize hand work of num mm paving mixtures .
num.c field technician .
section numhnum.c num .
mixture lot acceptance .
section numhnum with the following modification num.a lots and sublots .
numhnum.a .
num.b mixture acceptance samples .
section numhnum.b and add the following to the end of the first paragraph if a representative mixture acceptance sample can not be obtained directly behind the paver the loose mixture acceptance sample for each sublot may be taken from the paver hopper or from the paver screed representing the sample sublot location .
determine the approved mixture acceptance sample collection method for loose mixture acceptance samples at the preconstruction or prepaving meeting .
num.c mixture acceptance sample testing .
lts testing will be utilized unless otherwise indicated in the proposal .
num.c.num lts testing .
the lts will test the mixture acceptance samples according to ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num modified method d if previously identified problematic aggregates are used in the mixture to determine asphalt content and the percent passing the num m no .
num sieve .
the lts will use the calibration factors cf and num cf provided with the jmf for ptm no .
num .
the minimum sample size for ptm no .
num is num grams when num mm mix is used .
the lts will analyze the test results for extreme values according to ptm no .
num at the num significance level .
if discarding an extreme value reduces a lot to less than three remaining test results the department will accept the lot as specified in section numhnum.a.num .
the department will accept lots with three or more test results as specified in section numanum .
if the asphalt content or the percent passing the num m no .
num sieve is not within the single sample nnum or multiple sample nnum tolerances in table c for two consecutive lots or a total of three lots stop all production of the jmf .
determine the cause of the problem and provide a proposed solution to the department .
do not resume production of the jmf until the representative reviews the proposed solution and authorizes numh numa num num change no .
num production to continue .
num .
pattern segregation .
section numhnum .
num .
flushing .
section numhnum .
i compaction .
begin rolling immediately after placement of mixture .
compact the num mm paving mixture to achieve the optimum rolling pattern requirements and to eliminate all roller marks .
compact the mixture while it is in proper condition and adjust roller speed pattern and roller size andor amplitude and frequency if vibratory rolling is approved by the representative to eliminate displacement shoving cracking and aggregate breakage as specified in section numf .
satisfactorily correct displacement resulting from reversing roller directions and other causes .
do not use pneumatictire rollers .
without using excess water maintain wheels of steel wheel rollers moist and clean to prevent the mixture from adhering to the wheels .
for areas inaccessible to rollers compact with mechanical vibrating hand tampers .
remove areas that are loose broken mixed with dirt or show an excess or deficiency of bituminous material .
replace removed mixture with fresh hot num mm paving mixture and compact the mixture even with the surrounding pavement surface .
j mat density acceptance .
the department will accept the mat density based on nonmovement and optimum rolling pattern .
num .
optimumrolling pattern .
with the representative and the contractors certified hma field technician present determine density with an approved nuclear gauge according to ptm num or determine density with an approved electrical impedance gauge according to ptm no .
num .
nuclear gauges must be operated by a licensed nuclear gauge operator .
in the presence of the representative follow the control strip technique specified in ptm no .
num to construct at least one control strip to establish the optimum rolling pattern for each course .
document readings using the forms provided in ptm no .
num and provide the completed forms to the representative .
compact the course according to the optimum rolling pattern .
during paving the representative may require the contractor to construct a new control strip to verify the optimum rolling pattern .
use one of the following gauges or approved equal troxler electronics model numb or model numb campbell pacific nuclear model mcnum seaman nuclear model mcnum transtech systems inc. pqitm model num or model num troxler electronic laboratories pavetrackertm submit a copy of the certificate of nuclear gauge annual calibration according to astm dnum and documentation of training of the nuclear gauge operator .
recalibrate any nuclear gauge that is damaged or repaired .
k joints .
section numk l surface tolerance .
section numl m tests for depth wearing courses .
section numm n protection of courses .
section numn o defective work .
section numo num measurement and payment a standard nummm hmawma construction .
num .
hmawma courses .
numa numa num num change no .
num num.a thin lift num mm hmawma wearing course .
square yard or ton num.b thin lift num mm hmawma wearing course scratch .
ton num .
bituminous tack coat .
section num num .
mixture acceptance by certification and density acceptance by nonmovement optimumrolling pattern .
the representative will pay at the contract unit price adjusted according to table d. the total payment factor percentage is the sum of adjustments for each test criterion subtracted from num .
the adjustment for an individual test criterion is the payment factor percentage subtracted from num .
the pavement will be considered defective if the payment factor for asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve are both num .
table d contract unit price adjustments mixture acceptance by certification mixture nmas test criteria test value payment factor percentage asphalt content num mm printed tickets at least num of daily printed tickets within num of jmf num less than num of daily printed tickets within num of jmf num num mm qc sample testing single sample nnum multiple samples nnum num num num num to num num num num num gradation single sample nnum multiple samples nnum num mm qc sample testing for passing num m no .
num sieve num num num num to num num to num num num num mat density num mm nonmovement section numjnum .
num optimumrolling pattern section numjnum .
num defective pavement .
remove and replace or when permitted by the district executive in writing leave in place and the department will pay num of the contract unit price .
for these test criteria the daily payment factor percentage will be determined by the single sample test result from the daily qc sample .
if more than one qc sample test result is available for a day the payment factor percentage will be determined based on the average of the results using multiple sample tolerances .
if corrective action is taken payment factor percentages will be separately determined for material placed before and after the corrective action .
num .
mixture acceptance by lot and density acceptance by optimum rolling pattern .
the department will pay on a lotbylot basis at the contract price adjusted for payment factor percentages as specified in table e. for the payment factor percentages based on percent within tolerance the department will determine the percent within tolerance according to section numanum using the upper and lower specification limits in table f. table e contract unit price adjustments mixture acceptance by lots mixture nmas test criteria test value payment factor percentage numa numa num num change no .
num asphalt content num mm acceptance sample testing all individual sublot acceptance sample test results for the lot nnum are within num and the lot average nnum is within num num percent within tolerance if any individual sublot acceptance sample test result for the lot is not within the nnum tolerances or the lot average is not within the nnum tolerances listed above .
section num table k gradation num mm acceptance sample testing for passing numm no .
num sieve all individual sublot acceptance sample test results for the lot nnum are within num and the lot average nnum is within num num percent within tolerance if any individual sublot acceptance sample test result for the lot is not within the nnum tolerances or the lot average is not within the nnum tolerances listed above .
section num table k mat density num mm optimumrolling pattern section numjnum num the department may elect to randomly select and test only one sublot acceptance sample from each lot to determine conformance to the specifications .
if only one sublot acceptance sample is tested tighter tolerances will be used to determine conformance to the specifications for the entire lot .
if the one sublot is within num of the jmf for asphalt content and within num of the jmf for percent passing the num m no .
num sieve the lot will be considered to conform with the specifications and the lots payment factor percentage will be determined according to this table .
if the one sublot fails to meet the tighter tolerances all acceptance samples from the lot will be tested to determine the payment factor percentage according to this table .
table f upper and lower specification limits for calculating percent within tolerance testing criteria mixture nmas lower specification limit l upper specification limit u asphalt content from jmf value num mm num num percent passing the num m no .
num sieve from jmf value num mm num num num.a payment .
section numanum.a .
num.b dispute resolution .
section numanum.b .
except drill two numinch diameter cores at each approved resampling location instead of only one .
num numb num num change no .
num section numstone matrix asphalt mixture design rps construction of plantmixed hmawma wearing courses num descriptionthis work is the rps construction of plantmixed stone matrix asphalt sma on a prepared surface using a volumetric mixture design developed with the superpave gyratory compactor .
the sma is to be produced as either hma or wma as indicated with the wma produced using an approved wma technology .
num materials a bituminous material num .
virgin mix .
furnish material conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performance graded asphalt binder aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num .
obtain material from a source listed in bulletin num for the specified grade .
provide qc testing and certification as specified in sections numb and numb num .
provide the representative a copy of a bill of lading for bituminous material on the first day of paving and when the batch number changes .
when producing a mixture with a wma technology adhere to the following requirements num.a wma technology additives or modifiers blended at the bituminous material suppliers refinery or terminal .
provide refinery or terminal blended bituminous material blended with a wma technology additive or modifier from an approved manufacturer and source listed in bulletin num .
include in the bituminous material producer qc plan the wma technology additive or modifier manufacturer name wma technology name and source dosage rates blending method qc testing corrective action points disposition of failed material storage handling shipping and bill of lading information following the applicable requirements in section num .
include the wma technology additive or modifier and dosage rate on the bill of lading .
provide certification that the refinery or terminally blended bituminous material modified with the wma technology additive or modifier meets the requirements for the specified grade .
num.b wma technology additives or modifiers blended at the bituminous mixture producers plant .
provide a blended bituminous material consisting of an approved wma technology additive or modifier from an approved manufacturer and source listed in bulletin num that is blended with a base bituminous material of the specified grade conforming to the requirements of standard specifications for performancegraded asphalt binder aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num and from an approved source listed in bulletin num section num .
prepare a producer qc plan as specified in section num and conforming to the producer qc plan requirements in section numenum.a and the additional producer qc plan requirements within this specification .
provide certification that the bituminous material blended with the wma technology additive or modifier at the bituminous mixture production plant meets the requirements for the specified grade .
b aggregate .
num .
general requirements .
provide aggregate from sources listed in bulletin num .
provide aggregate with at least the srl designation specified .
to achieve the specified srl the contractor may provide a blend of two aggregates if the blend has an srl designation equal to or better than that specified .
blends are num by weight of each aggregate .
blend the aggregates using an approved method .
num .
fine aggregate .
section num except as follows determine sand equivalent value in accordance with aashto t num and meet requirements of num minimum sand equivalent .
do not exceed num sodium sulfate soundness loss in five cycles .
determine the uncompacted void content in accordance with aashto t num method a or use the value listed in bulletin num .
provide a fine aggregate that meets num minimum uncompacted void content .
num .
coarse aggregate .
type a section num except as follows meet the aggregate quality requirements of table a .
table a coarse aggregate quality requirements numb numd num num change no .
num characteristic required values abrasion max .
num flat and elongated particles max astm dnum measured by mass on material retained on and above the num mm no.num sieve num to num num to num num num absorption max aashto t num num crushed fragments min .
num for one fracture face num for two fracture faces c mineral filler .
furnish mineral filler consisting of finely divided mineral matter such as rock or crushed limestone dust free of organic impurities .
furnish material with a maximum plasticity index of num and conforming to the grading requirements of aashto m num .
submit a hydrometer analysis performed as indicated in aashto t num for mineral filler .
d stabilizer .
provide mineral fiber cellulose fiber or crumb rubber cr stabilizers conforming to the requirements below and added at a rate specified in table b .
use the dosage rate prescribed in the jmf .
num .
requirements for all fiber types .
fibers must prevent draindown in the mixture according to the tolerances in table b .
use a fiber of the type and properties appropriate to the plants metering and delivery system .
num .
cellulose fibers .
fibers must be of sufficient quality to prevent mixture draindown .
num .
cellulose pellets .
use cellulose fiber stabilizing additive in pellet form that disperses sufficiently at mixing temperature to blend uniformly into the asphalt mixture .
use pellets that do not exceed num inch average diameter .
pellets may contain binder ingredients such as asphalt cement wax or polymer .
do not use pellets if the binder ingredient exceeds num of the total weight of the pellets .
use binder that produces no measurable effect on the properties of the asphalt cement .
do not use fiber pellets which soften or clump together when stored at temperatures up to numf .
note if the binder material constitutes more than num of the pellet weight base the dosage rate on the net fiber content .
num .
mineral fibers .
use mineral fibers made from virgin basalt diabase slag or other silicate rock .
use an approved mineral fiber meeting the following requirements for shot content as tested according to astm cnum .
sieve percent passing num m no .
num num num numm no .
num num num num .
crumb rubber cr .
use cr derived from the processing of recycled tires .
rubber tire buffings produced by the retreading process qualify as a source of cr .
furnish processed free flowing cr from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num certified as specified in section numbnum .
num.a gradation .
meet the following gradation as determined according to astm dnum using num mm diameter sized sieves and maintaining a maximum allowable loss after sieve analysis of num .
as an alternative dry sieve analysis test method perform the sieve analysis of the cr according to florida test method fm num .
cr gradation sieve size percent passing num mm no .
num num num mm no .
num num num m no .
num num num.b contaminants .
provide cr relatively free from fabric wire cord and other contaminating materials to numd nume num num change no .
num a maximum total contaminant content of num maximum of num iron num fiber and num other contaminants by weight of total cr sample components .
remove rubber particles from the fiber balls before weighing .
determine the metal content by thoroughly passing a magnet through a num g num num ounces sample .
determine fiber content by weighing fiber balls which are formed during the gradation test procedure .
e mixture composition .
num .
virgin material mixtures .
design and control sma in accordance with the requirements of bulletin num chapter numb .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions bituminous material and an approved wma technology when wma is indicated in such proportions that the total aggregate and bitumen in the jmf conform to the material gradation and volumetric requirements for the sma mixture specified in tables b and c. do not use rap in the mix .
for wma mixtures the wma technology manufacturer technical representative technical representative will address laboratory procedure modifications necessary to prepare compact and test wma mixtures and to achieve a uniform blend .
when wma is indicated develop a hma jmf and incorporate the wma technology additive modifier or process into that jmf during production .
do not develop a volumetric wma jmf based on incorporating the wma technology additive modifier or process during the volumetric asphalt mixture design process .
for all wma jmfs perform moisture susceptibility analysis according to bulletin num .
ensure the wma technology additive modifier or process is not detrimental to the moisture resistance of the mixture .
for tracking purposes create a separate wma jmf cover sheet trnuma for approval containing the wma technology used wma technology dosage rate material code and the aashto t num tsr data from the wma moisture susceptibility testing .
table b mix design requirements for sma mixtures aggregate gradation requirements percent passing sieve size nummm mixture nummm mixture num mm num inch num num mm num inch num num num num mm num inch num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num mm no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num num num num num volumetric design requirements design gyrations ndesign num voids in mineral aggregate num minimum voids in course aggregate vca vcamix vcadry rodded design air voids num num minimum asphalt binder content table c binder grade pg num stabilizer content cellulose num to num by total mix weight mineral num to num by total mix weight cr num to num by total mix weight draindown num maximum table c minimum asphalt binder requirements for sma mixtures combined aggregate minimum asphalt content nume nume num num change no .
num bulk specific gravity by total mix weight num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num perform draindown testing according to aashto t num using a num hour reading .
design a mix meeting the tolerances outlined in table b .
design each sma mix within the jobmix tolerances specified in tables b and c. test the materials proportions and the mixture at the hma plant laboratory .
submit a copy of each completed jmf signed by a certified hma level num plant technician to the dmedmm at least num weeks before the planned start of mixture production .
include a list of all material sources and the hma producer in the jmf .
provide the calibration factors c and num c required by ptm no .
num with the jmf .
do not start mixture production until after the dmedmm reviews the jmf .
submit a new jmf with a change in material sources or if a new jmf is necessary to produce an sma mixture conforming to this specification .
num.a producer qc plan .
section numenum.a for hma and section numenum.a for wma except raprasram is not allowed in the mixture .
num.b plant technicians .
section numenum.b num.c annual jmf verification .
during initial production of each jmf verify according to the qc plan that the mixture conforms to this specification .
if the mixture does not conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in tables d and e within num days of production suspend shipping the mixture to the project .
do not ship the mixture to the project until after the representative reviews and verifies that results conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in tables d and e. perform annual verification of the wma mixture jmf even if the equivalent hma mixture jmf was previously annually verified .
num.d production .
section numenum.d except as follows when producing wma produce and test mixtures including superpave gyratory compactor sgc specimens for quality control using the same test methods procedures and frequencies as specified for hma except as modified by the producer qc plan .
maintain records of the testing of wma and make available for review by the representative when requested .
num.d.num gradation .
section numenum.d.num except rap and ras are not allowed .
produce the mix within the tolerances of table d. num.d.num volumetric analysis of compacted specimens .
sample the completed mixture according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
prepare a minimum of two specimens from each sample according to aashto t num .
produce a mixture with volumetric properties conforming to the tolerances of table e. determine the bulk specific gravity of the specimens as specified in aashto t num and calculate air voids va and voids in mineral aggregate vma at ndesign according to aashto r num and as specified in bulletin num .
determine compliance with the multiple specimen tolerances using the average of the results for all specimens prepared from the sample .
nume nume num num change no .
num num.d.num mixture draindown .
sample the completed mixture according to ptm no .
num a minimum of once daily .
perform draindown testing according to aashto t num along with the first mixture samples for each days production .
produce a mixture that meets the tolerances of table d. num.d.num degree of particle coating .
for all wma mixtures sample the mixture according to ptm no .
num and at the frequency in the producer qc plan .
determine the degree of particle coating of the completed wma mixture according to aashto t num .
produce a wma mixture with percent coated particles num .
increase the plant mixing time or make other plant adjustments if the required percent of coated particles is not met .
produce a wma mixture capable of being handled placed and compacted without stripping the bituminous material from the aggregate .
table d composition tolerance requirements of the completed mix single sample n num multiple samples n num gradation passing num mm num inch and larger sieves num num passing num mm no .
num to num m no .
num sieves inclusive num num passing num m no .
num sieve num num asphalt content asphalt by weight num num draindown by weight num maximum temperature of mixture f class of material type of material minimum maximum pg num asphalt cement hma num num pg num asphalt cement wma num num table e volumetric tolerance requirements of the laboratory compacted mix single specimen n num multiple specimens n num air voids at ndesign va num from jmf num from jmf minimum vma num _ num.e corrective actions .
immediately take corrective actions if one or more of the following occurs qc test results on a single sample nnum for percent passing the num mm no .
num sieve the num mm no .
num sieve the num m no .
num sieve or asphalt content are not within the tolerances in table d. the average of multiple samples n num for percent passing any sieve or asphalt content as determined according to section numenum.d are not within the tolerances in table d. qc test results on a single specimen nnum or on multiple specimens n num are not within the tolerances in table e. draindown test results are not within the tolerances in table d. independent assurance ia or qa sample results from testing at the producers plant are not within the tolerances of tables d or e. nume numb num num change no .
num after taking corrective actions sample the completed mixture within num tons of production .
after sampling test the mixture and provide test results to the representative within num tons of production .
if less than three samples are tested for mixture composition determine conformance with table d by comparing each result to the multiple sample tolerances .
if the mixture does not conform to the single and multiple sample tolerances in table d and the single and multiple specimen tolerances in table e suspend production and shipping to the project and determine the cause of the problem .
provide a written explanation of the problem and a proposed solution to the department .
after the representative reviews the proposed solution and authorizes production to continue resume production and perform jmf verification according to the qc plan .
f mixture acceptance .
num .
general .
the department will accept the mixtures by lot acceptance as specified in section numinum .
num .
certification .
sma material will not be accepted by certification g wma technologies additives modifiers or processes and wma manufacturers .
for wma mixtures section numg h antistrip additives .
for wma mixtures section numh i wma technology manufacturer technical representative technical representative .
for wma mixtures section numi j mixture production delivery and placing temperatures when placing over membrane systems specified in section num or section num .
if a project includes an item or items of work for membrane systems as specified in section num or section num sma that is to be placed on top of the membrane must be produced and placed at mixture temperatures as per the membrane manufacturers recommendations except not to exceed the minimum and maximum limits in table d. ensure proper adhesion between the asphalt pavement overlay and the underlying membrane .
for wma mixtures have the technical representative indicate that producing and placing mixture at the membrane manufacturers recommended temperatures is an acceptable practice for their specific wma technology .
num construction a preplacement requirements .
provide hma or wma as indicated for the entire project unless approved by the department in writing to use both .
num .
paving operation qc plan .
prepare a paving operation qc plan as outlined on form csnum for field control and evaluation of bituminous concrete paving operations .
submit the qc plan to the representative before or at the preconstruction conference .
include in the qc plan a description of the construction equipment and methods necessary to construct and test the bituminous concrete courses as specified in section num .
for wma mixes have the technical representative provide all recommendations and direction specific to the wma technology in the paving operation qc plan .
do not start paving until after the representative reviews the qc plan .
num .
preplacement meeting .
at least num weeks before placing bituminous paving mixtures schedule a bituminous preplacement meeting with the representative to review at a minimum the specification paving operation qc plan sequence of paving operations mixture acceptance density acceptance and the care and custody of bituminous acceptance samples .
b weather limitations .
do not place sma paving mixtures from october num to march num in districts num num except juniata and mifflin counties num num num monroe and carbon counties only num cambria and somerset counties only and num and from october num to march num in districts num juniata and mifflin counties only num except monroe and carbon counties num num num except cambria and somerset counties num and num .
exceptions require the written permission of the district executive .
do not place bituminous paving mixtures when surfaces are wet or when the air or surface temperature is numf or lower .
if work is halted because of weather conditions numb numg num num change no .
num the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of mixture that are en route to the project .
c bituminous mixing plant .
section numc except the following requirements are for sma mixes .
obtain bituminous mixtures from a plant fully automated and recordated and currently listed in bulletin num .
the necessary facilities for inspection include a plant office as specified in section numa except the minimum floor space is num square feet .
ensure that both the aggregates and the completed mixture are free of unburned fuel oil and excess moisture as defined in section numenum.d.num .
for wma mixtures make any plant modifications needed to introduce the wma technology additives modifiers or processes according to specific recommendations and direction from the technical representative or process manufacturer to achieve a uniform blend of the wma technology additive modifier or foaming process and produce a wma mixture meeting these specifications .
for batch plants dry the aggregate according to the specific recommendations and direction from the technical representative .
num .
mineral filler system .
follow the requirements listed in chapter num section num of bulletin num .
num .
stabilizer supply system .
add stabilizer through specialized equipment that can accurately proportion and meter by weight the proper amount per batch for batch plants or continuously and in a steady uniform manner for drum plants .
do not feed fiber pelletized or loose through the cold feed bins or through the rap bins .
provide proportioning devices that are interlocked with the plant system and controlled to num of the weight of the fibers required .
during the trial demonstration specified in section numg perform an equipment calibration to the satisfaction of the representative to show that the fiber is being accurately metered and uniformly distributed into the mix .
include the following on the stabilizer supply system low level indicators noflow indicators a printout of feed rate status in pounds minute a section of transparent pipe in the stabilizer supply line for observing consistency of flow or feed .
have the representative approve all stabilizer addition systems .
when a batch plant is used add the stabilizer to the aggregate in the weigh hopper and increase both dry and wet mixing times .
ensure that the stabilizer is uniformly distributed before the injection of asphalt cement into the mixture .
when a drum plant is used do not allow the fibers to become entangled in the exhaust system .
if there is any evidence of fiber in the baghouse or wet washer fines relocate the liquid asphalt binder line andor the fiber line so that the fiber is captured by liquid asphalt spray and incorporated into the mix .
if there is any evidence of clumps of fibers or pellets at the discharge chute increase the mixing time andor intensity .
store stabilizer in a dry environment .
num .
hotmixture storage .
ship material within num hour of plant mixing .
stored sma material that does not consistently meet the same quality as material discharged directly into hauling vehicles will be rejected .
d hauling equipment .
section numd e bituminous pavers .
section numenum .
f rollers .
use a minimum of three steelwheeled rollers each weighing a minimum of num tons and as specified in section numcnum .
operate rollers according to manufacturers recommendations .
use rollers equipped with a watering or soapy watering system that prevents material from sticking to the rollers .
do not use pneumatic wheeled rollers .
do not use rollers in vibratory mode unless it can be demonstrated during the trial demonstration specified in section numg and to the satisfaction of the representative that no breaking of aggregate or flushing of asphalt binder results from the vibration .
monitor pavement cores for aggregate breakage on every lot .
discontinue vibration if aggregate breakage or flushing of asphalt binder occurs .
g demonstration .
before proceeding with the actual work demonstrate to the representative that the proposed numg numi num num change no .
num sma mix can be produced placed and compacted to meet the requirements of this specification .
place a minimum of num tons outside the project limits for each trial demonstration .
simulate the hauling time for the demonstration .
obtain and test three loose mixture samples at the plant for asphalt content gradation and draindown and three pavement cores from the demonstration pavement for density .
test one set of volumetric specimens for air voids at ndesign va and test for one maximum specific gravity of the mixture value .
if test results do not meet specification limits for both single and multiple sample tolerances for any parameter perform another demonstration .
this work is incidental to the wearing course .
if vibratory rolling is proposed demonstrate to the satisfaction of the inspectorincharge that no breaking of aggregate or flushing of asphalt binder results from the vibration .
h preparation of existing surface .
section numg i spreading and finishing .
num .
general requirements .
num.a placing .
unless otherwise allowed deliver place and compact sma paving mixtures during daylight hours .
ensure the mixture does not contain lumps of cold material .
deliver and place sma mixtures at the temperatures specified in table d. use a material transfer vehicle mtv as specified in section numcnum to apply the final surface course .
have the mtv perform additional mixing of the sma material and then deposit the mixture into the paver at a uniform temperature and consistency .
num.b spreading and finishing .
section numhnum.b and as follows plan and schedule operations to minimize hand work of sma .
do not allow the finished pavement surface to flush .
flushing is continuous or repeated areas of excessive asphalt on the pavement surface .
areas that are determined to be flushed will be considered defective work .
num.c field technician .
section numhnum.c num .
mixture and density lot acceptance rps construction .
lot acceptance is required for rps construction .
num.a lots and sublots .
section numhnum.a except as follows a completed sublot has either three core samples collected according to ptm no .
num or two core samples collected according to ptm no .
num and one loose mixture sample as specified in numinum.b .
num.a.num partially completed lots nnum or less .
when process conditions change to an extent that a partially completed lot can not be combined with the most recently completed lot samples will be independently evaluated on the partially completed lot .
if a lot is terminated before a sample point is reached obtain one sample for mixture acceptance and one sample for mat density acceptance as specified in numinum.a at a location provided by the representative .
for asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve mixture acceptance samples will be evaluated individually using section numa table g nnum criteria .
for density mat density acceptance samples will be evaluated individually using the criteria in table f. if samples tested for asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve meet the nnum criteria of table g and samples tested for density meet the criteria in table f payment will be num percent of the contract unit price .
if samples tested for asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve do not meet the nnum criteria of table g the material will be considered defective work .
if samples tested for density are no more than num percent below the minimum or no more than num percent above the maximum limits of table f payment will be num percent of the contract unit price .
if samples for density are more than num percent below the minimum or more than num percent above the maximum limits of table f the pavement will be considered defective work .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace defective work .
table f density limits for partially completed lots mixture nmas density limits all rps num mm num mm wearing courses num and num numi numi num num change no .
num num.a.num for jmfs placed in quantities less than num tons .
for jmfs placed in quantities of greater than num tons and less than num tons the tonnage will be considered a lot .
the lot will be divided into five equal sublots .
for jmfs placed in quantities of num tons or less the tonnage will be divided into three equal sublots and sampled as specified in numinum.a .
num.b mixture acceptance and theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm verification samples .
the inspector will select different sample locations in each sublot according to ptm no .
num ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
in the presence of the inspector obtain two core samples one for acceptance and one for gmm verification or one core sample for acceptance and one loose mixture sample for gmm verification for each sublot at each sample location and immediately package .
if the contractor elects to obtain a loose mixture sample for the gmm verification sample obtain the sample from uncompacted placed mixture or from the paver screed .
one core sample at each location will be used to determine the mixture acceptance and the second core sample or the loose mixture sample at each location will be used to determine the theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm value .
both sets of mixture samples will be submitted to the testing laboratory on separate trnum sample identification forms .
package individual loose mixture samples in cardboard boxes dimensioned approximately num num inches x num num inches x num num inches .
do not package samples in cardboard boxes with any one dimension greater than num num inches or any one dimension smaller than num num inches .
package individual core samples in plastic num inch diameter concrete cylinder molds .
immediately after packaging and in the presence of the inspector identify the samples by ecms project number lot and sublot number location station and offset date of placement mixture type and as either mixture acceptance samples sample class as or as gmm verification samples sample class fv .
leave at least one side of the cardboard sample box or cylinder mold free of any writing or marking for lts use in testing the samples .
immediately after identifying submit the samples to the inspector .
for quality control purposes a maximum of one loose sample per sublot may be obtained .
no loose mixture or core samples may be taken by the contractor for mixture composition testing after the mixture acceptance samples and gmm verification samples are obtained .
do not obtain any other pavement samples except those which are directed by and surrendered to the department unless allowed in writing from the district executive .
num.c mixture and density acceptance sample testing .
lts testing will be utilized unless otherwise indicated in the contract .
num.c.num lts testing .
the lts will test the density acceptance samples according to ptm no .
num and if necessary ptm no .
num to determine the percent compaction .
the lts will analyze the bulk density test results for extreme values according to ptm no .
num at the num significance level .
if discarding an extreme value reduces a lot to less than three remaining test results the department will accept the lot as specified in section numinum.a.num .
the lts will then randomly select one of the gmm verification cores or loose mixture samples obtained as specified in section numinum.b from the lot according to ptm no .
num .
the lts will test the randomly selected gmm verification core or loose mixture sample to determine the theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm of the compacted mixture according to aashto t num as modified in bulletin num with the following exception the samples will be obtained as specified in section numinum.b .
the lts will compare the randomly selected gmm verification sample test result with the contractors daily gmm value for that same production or placement date .
if the lts and contractor gmm values do not differ by more than num the contractors daily gmm values in the whole lot will be considered verified and the contractors daily gmm values will be used to determine the percent of theoretical maximum density for each density acceptance sample placed on that date .
if the initial randomly selected lts gmm verification sample test result differs from the contractors daily gmm value for that same production or placement date by more than num the lts gmm test result value will be used as the acceptance gmm value to determine the percent of theoretical maximum density for the individual density acceptance cores produced or placed on that same date .
the department reserves the right to select more than one gmm verification sample from the lot representing the same production or placement date and to select other gmm verification samples from the lot representing different production or placement dates to verify the contractors daily gmm values .
when more than one gmm verification sample is selected from the lot representing the same production or placement date the lts gmm test results will be averaged and the averaged used to verify to the contractors daily gmm value for that same production and placement date .
the department will accept density lots with three or more test results as specified in section numanum .
numi numl num num change no .
num the lts will test the mixture acceptance samples according to ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num modified method d if previously identified problematic aggregates are used in the mixture to determine asphalt content and the percent passing the num m no .
num sieve .
for ptm no .
num the lts will use the calibration factors cf and num cf provided with the jmf .
the lts will analyze the test results for extreme values according to ptm no .
num at the num significance level .
if discarding an extreme value reduces a lot to less than three remaining test results the department will accept the lot as specified in section numinum.a.num .
the department will accept lots as specified in section numa .
stop all paving operations if any of the following conditions exist cores are not taken within num day after placing the mixture the density for two consecutive lots or a total of three lots does not meet the density payment factor percentage of num asphalt content is not within the single sample nnum or multiple sample nnum tolerances in table d for two consecutive lots or a total of three lots the percent passing the num m no .
num sieve is not within the single sample nnum or multiple sample nnum tolerances in table f for two consecutive lots or a total of three lots the pavement exhibits flushing as outlined in numinum.b .
determine the cause of the problem and provide a proposed solution to the department .
do not resume paving until the representative reviews the proposed solution and authorizes production to continue .
j compaction .
begin rolling material immediately after placement .
compact the sma mixture to achieve the density acceptance requirements and to eliminate all roller marks while not producing flushing of the asphalt binder .
compact the mixture while it is in proper condition and adjust roller speed pattern and roller size andor amplitude and frequency if vibratory rolling is approved by the representative to eliminate displacement shoving cracking and aggregate breakage as specified in section numf .
satisfactorily correct displacement resulting from reversing roller directions and other causes .
without using excess water maintain wheels of steelwheel rollers moist and clean to prevent the mixture from adhering to the wheels .
for areas inaccessible to rollers compact with mechanical vibrating hand tampers .
k mat density acceptance .
the department will accept the mixtures by lot acceptance as specified in section numinum .
the acceptance criteria will be as shown in table f. the department will determine acceptance with respect to density as specified in section numanum .
the inspector will select different sample locations in each sublot according to ptm no .
num ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
with the inspector present drill numinch diameter cores as soon as possible but no later than the day following placement .
the core at each location will be used to determine the bulk specific gravity gmb and density pounds per cubic foot of the compacted mix .
do not compress bend or distort samples during cutting handling transporting and storing .
if samples are damaged immediately obtain replacement samples as directed by the inspector from within num inches of the original sample location .
within num hours after coring backfill the hole with mixture of the same jmf or with mixture used for subsequent courses and compact and seal the mixture .
in the presence of the inspector identify the samples by ecms project number lot and sublot number location station and offset date of placement mixture type and as acceptance samples sample class as .
provide the daily theoretical maximum specific gravity value from section numenum.d.num for the density calculation of the lot .
if density samples from the lot are taken from more than num days placement the daily theoretical maximum specific gravity values from each production day will be used to calculate the percent of theoretical density for each individual density acceptance core placed on that production day upon gmm verification as described in section numinum.c.num .
immediately deliver the samples to the inspector and provide sample containers of sufficient strength to prevent samples from being damaged during transport and sufficient size to accommodate the density samples from one lot .
the representative will submit samples for one lot in one container .
for quality control purposes a maximum of one pavement core per sublot may be obtained unless the representative allows additional cores .
no cores may be taken by the contractor after the acceptance cores are obtained .
do not obtain any other pavement cores except those which are directed by and surrendered to the department unless allowed in writing by the district executive l joints .
section numk .
numm numa num num change no .
num m surface tolerance .
section numl n tests for depth .
section numm o protection of courses .
section numn p defective work .
as specified in section num and as follows department acceptance and qa testing does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for material or workmanship that the representative determines is defective before the department issues the acceptance certificate .
remove and replace or repair defective work as directed .
the cmd will review representative determinations of defective material or workmanship .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace pavement defective for flushing as specified in section numinum.b surface tolerance as specified in section numl and depth as specified in section numm .
remove and replace pavement defective for percent within tolerance or payment factor percentage as specified in table f. num measurement and payment a sma rps construction .
num .
sma wearing course rps .
square yard or ton num .
bituminous tack coat .
section num .
num .
mixture and density acceptance by lot using pavement cores .
the department will pay on a lotbylot basis at the contract unit price adjusted for payment factor percentages as specified in table g. for the payment factor percentages based on percent within tolerance the department will determine the percent within tolerance according to section numanum using the upper and lower specification limits in table h. num.a payment .
section numanum.a table g contract price adjustments test criteria test value payment factor percentage asphalt content acceptance sample testing of asphalt all acceptance sample test results are within num for nnum and num for n num of the jmf num percent within tolerance if all acceptance sample test results are not within num for nnum and num for n num of the jmf section numa table k gradation acceptance sample testing of passing num m no .
num sieve all acceptance sample test results are within num and num for nnum and num and num for n num of the jmf num percent within tolerance if all acceptance sample test results are not within num and num for nnum and num and num for n num of the jmf section numa table k mat density acceptance sample testing of pavement cores all individual results for the lot are num and num of the maximum theoretical density num numa numa num num change no .
num percent within tolerance if any individual sublot test result for the lot is not num and num of the maximum theoretical density .
section numa table k table h upper and lower specification limits for calculating percent within tolerance testing criteria lower specification limit l upper specification limit u asphalt content from jmf value num num percent passing the num m no .
num sieve from jmf value num num mat density num num the percent of theoretical maximum density num.b dispute resolution .
for mixture acceptance testing or density acceptance testing performed by the lts the contractor may request in writing that the department retest a lot if the initial test results indicated a defective lot remove and replace except for density when one or more density acceptance cores in the lot were coated with paraffin wax as a result of ptm no .
num during the original density acceptance testing .
provide written retest requests to the district executive within num weeks of the date the lts test results are released .
retests will not be allowed if a written retest request is not received within num weeks of the date the lts test results are released .
provide quality control test results and control charts companion sample test results if available test data trend evaluation and any other pertinent information to justify the retest request .
the department will evaluate the information and may allow retesting if the information submitted provides a reasonable basis to conclude that the failing test results may not represent the inplace material .
the lts will perform the retest with the contractor present unless otherwise agreed to in writing with the contractor .
for retesting of materials failing for asphalt content or percent passing num m no .
num sieve the inspector will identify the locations where the original mixture acceptance samples were collected .
the inspector will select retest sample locations num inches from the original sample locations longitudinally in the direction of traffic .
if the num inch offset causes the retest sample location to fall outside of the sublot the inspector will select the retest sample location num inches from the original sample locations longitudinally in the opposite direction from traffic .
with the inspector present provide appropriate traffic control and drill numinch diameter cores for retesting purposes according to the procedure for drilling in ptm no .
num .
ensure drilling procedures include washing off and towel drying the core samples immediately after drilling .
within num hours after coring backfill the hole with sma or superpave mixture of the same nmas and pg asphalt grade as the material sampled or with mixture used for subsequent courses and compact and seal the mixture .
provide traffic control core and backfill the core holes at no cost to the department .
the test method used for asphalt determination during the original acceptance testing ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num will be used for the retest unless the dmedmm grants written approval for a change in test method .
the results of the retest cores will be used to calculate payment for both asphalt content and percent passing the num m no .
num sieve for the lot .
when a request is received for retesting of density acceptance the original density acceptance cores will be utilized .
the lts will not retest a lot for density acceptance when one or more density acceptance cores in the lot were coated with paraffin wax as a result of ptm no .
num during the original density acceptance testing .
the lts will retest each original density acceptance core according to ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num as necessary to determine the gmb and bulk density values .
the lts will not perform gmm testing for lots where the contractors gmm value was previously considered verified according to section numjnum.d.num .
after gmb testing is completed for lots where the contractors gmm value was not verified the lts will select one original density acceptance pavement core from each production or placement date represented by the density acceptance cores in the lot .
each core selected will be the core with the highest bulk density for that production or placement date from the retest results e.g .
if a lot was placed over three production days and the lot density acceptance cores include at least one core from each production or placement day the original density cores selected during a density retest to perform gmm testing numa numa num num change no .
num will be num one from each production or placement date .
the lts will perform gmm testing on the selected cores according to aashto t num as modified in bulletin num with the following exceptions the samples will be obtained as specified in section numjnum.c no conditioning only drying will be performed on the sample the minimum sample size will be waived as necessary to use the numinch diameter pavement core sample and the supplemental procedure for mixtures containing porous aggregate will only be performed when either the coarse aggregate or fine aggregate in the mixture has a water absorption value num as indicated on the jmf and then only when the calculated percent of theoretical maximum density indicates any one individual failing sublot which results in a density pay factor less than num .
the lts gmm values determined will be the gmm values used to determine the percent of theoretical maximum density for the cores represented by the applicable production or placement dates in the lot .
either the previously verified contractors gmm values or the newly tested lts gmm values will be used for acceptance to determine the percent theoretical maximum density for each sublot core in the lot .
upon completing the retesting of the original density acceptance cores the lts will evaluate testing repeatability for the bulk density results of ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num if necessary using both the original bulk density test values and the bulk density retest values according to ptm no .
num .
after evaluating the testing repeatability the density test values used to determine the final payment factor percentage for density will be as follows if repeatable the original test values will be used .
if lack of repeatability i.e .
nonrepeatable the retest values will be used .
the department will deduct from the payment the cost per lot associated with conducting a retest as follows in table i table i dispute resolution retest cost table test method mixture acceptance retest cost if retest results indicate num pay factors mixture acceptance retest cost if retest results indicate num pay factors ptm no .
num num num ptm no .
num num num density acceptance retest cost if retest results indicate a lack of repeatability density acceptance retest cost if retest results are repeatable ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num only num num ptm no .
num or ptm no .
num and aashto t num as specified in section numjnum.d.num num num num numg num num change no .
num section numpervious bituminous pavement system num descriptionthis work is the construction of plantmixed bituminous concrete pervious pavement on a prepared surface designed to allow the infiltration of storm water into the subsoil .
the pervious bituminous surface layer is a horizontal plane that is permeable to water and air .
the second layer of the storm water system is an open graded angular stone layer that is used for temporary storm water detention .
num material a aggregate .
section num num .
coarse aggregate .
num.a for use in bituminous jmf .
course aggregate type a section num except table c gradation does not apply and revise the following quality requirements of table b. abrasion maximum percent as specified in bulletin num chapter numa table numa thin and elongated pieces maximum percent as specified in aashto m num table num for flat and elongated crushed fragments minimum percent as specified in aashto m num table num for fractured faces coarse aggregate num.b for use in detention basin .
either aashto no .
num as the primary detention coarse aggregate topped with aashto no .
num as a choker and leveling coarse or aashto no .
num only as designed and specified .
num .
fine aggregate .
num.a for use in bituminous jmf .
section num except table a gradation does not apply and as follows determine the uncompacted void content according to aashto t num method a or use the value listed in bulletin num and conform to aashto m num table num .
determine the sandequivalent value according to aashto t num and conform to aashto m num table num .
num.b for use in detention basin .
fine aggregate type a or type b. b fibers .
section numg c geotextile class num type a .
section num d edge restraints .
provide asphalt edge restraints as a locally approved material as specified in section numanum.c when specified and of sufficient strength to resist lateral roller forces where the pervious asphalt adjoins landscaped areas to provide a clean durable edge for the pavement .
other edge restraints may be utilized with the approval of the representative .
for manufactured edge restraints install in accordance with the manufacturers guidelines .
provide black edge restraints when permanently incorporated into the project .
e bituminous material .
num .
pervious num mm wearing course .
asphalt cement class pg num or pg num as specified in section num .
approved polymer additives or ground tire rubber may be used to meet the pg grade .
num .
pervious num mm binder course .
asphalt cement class pg num as specified in section num. f recycled asphalt pavement .
limit rap to a maximum of num of the mixture .
g additives .
incorporate an antistrip additive or hydrated lime for pervious mixes utilizing the same aggregates as approved num mm or num mm dense graded mixtures and with the same pg grade binder where an antistrip additive numg numh num num change no .
num was required .
if no history exists for an approved dense graded mixture perform testing in accordance with astm d num on the finished mix with a minimum of num coating to determine moisture susceptibility and an antistrip additive is required .
num .
heatstable antistripping additive .
blend the additive with the asphalt cement before adding the additive and asphalt cement to the mixture .
use the manufacturers recommended dosage of the additive but not less than num by weight of the asphalt .
select an additive that does not harm the completed bituminous concrete mixture and that is compatible with the aggregate and asphalt supplied for the project .
num .
pervious asphalt stabilizer .
perform testing in accordance with aashto t num to determine whether a stabilizer is required .
when required provide cellulose fibers in the mixture according to the tolerances in table b. stabilizer dosage rate must be within num to num by weight of the total mix .
h mixture design and production .
num .
design .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions according to table a .
determine air voids using any method from table b for bulk specific gravity .
determine the maximum theoretical specific gravity in accordance with aashto t num .
gyrate two specimens in accordance with aashto t num and determine bulk specific gravity by averaging them employing one of the methods in table b to calculate air voids .
test materials proportions and the mixture at the bituminous concrete plant laboratory .
verify conformance with the uniformity requirements of this specification .
verification testing may be performed by the lts at the departments discretion .
provide a jmf that conforms to all department requirements .
submit a copy of the jmf to the dmedmm at least num weeks before the scheduled start of producing the mixture for the project .
if the department has not used the jmf on a previous project provide test results from previous mixture production that indicate the mixture conformed to all jmf production tolerances when submitting the design for initial review .
table a composition of mixture total percent by mass weight passing square openings based on laboratory sieve tests pervious num mm wearing pervious num mm binder sieve size percent passing percent passing num mm numinch num num mm numinch num num num num mm numinch num num num num num mm numinch num num num mm no .
num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num bitumen content num num num num table b mixture composition gyrations ninitial na ndesign num nmaximum na air voids astm d num num num aashto t num num num aashto t num num num draindown aashto t num num when using aashto t num the height of the specimen will be determined by the gyratory compactor reading at ndesign .
num .
qc plan .
prepare and submit a qc plan as specified in section num .
provide the qc plan to the representative at the start of the project .
do not begin production until receiving approval of the qc plan from the representative .
numh numg num num change no .
num num .
production .
perform qc tests in accordance with table c. table c production testing property frequency range asphalt content daily num gradation daily table a air voids daily table b draindown daily num at design compaction temperature num .
acceptance of the mixture .
obtain material certifications from the material producer using the results of qc tests for bitumen content gradation and air voids .
provide copies of the certifications to the inspectorincharge within num working day after performing qc tests .
num construction a test sections .
produce two test sections using the approved jmf and placement and finishing operations to be used in production and construct at the project site on a prepared subgrade and base using the material and construction requirements used in production .
each section must have an area of at least num square feet .
perform infiltration on both test sections in accordance with astm c num .
the average of both infiltration values must exceed num inches per hour .
compacted thickness can not be more than numinch less than the design thickness .
b subgrade preparation .
excavate subgrade to undisturbed soil without compaction allowing the subgrade to be left as permeable as possible .
where erosion of subgrade has caused accumulation of fine materials andor surface ponding remove the accumulated material using light equipment and scarify the underlying soil to a minimum depth of num inches using a spring tooth rake or equivalent and a light tractor .
avoid driving haul trucks or other heavy equipment through the installation area .
repair damaged areas to the satisfaction of the representative .
do not compact or otherwise subject the existing subgrade under pavement areas to excessive construction equipment traffic before geotextile and stone bed placement .
satisfactorily correct and repair any damaged or compacted areas to the satisfaction of the representative .
notify the representative upon completion of subgrade work for final inspection and acceptance before proceeding with basin and choker course installation .
c detention basin .
prevent sediment from washing into beds during site development .
cover the bottom of the detention base with a minimum of num inches of fine aggregate to prevent soils from migrating into the storm water storage area .
wrap basin sides with a nonwoven geotextile fabric .
install detention basin coarse aggregate in num inch maximum lifts .
compact the course in as specified in section num .
install aggregates to grades indicated on drawings .
place the specified depths of coarse aggregate on top of the fine aggregate and roll as specified in section numf .
remove temporary sediment control materials when the site is fully stabilized .
d asphalt treated permeable base course .
section num where required for buses or light trucks .
e weather limitations .
do not place pervious pavement mixtures when the air or surface temperature is lower than numf .
f rollers .
use smooth steelwheeled rollers in the static mode and seat with one to four passes .
do not use pneumatic tire rollers .
g conditioning of existing surface .
before placing a wearing course correct irregularities in the binder course .
if practical do not allow traffic on the binder course to prevent contamination .
remove and replace binder course that can not be cleaned to the representatives satisfaction .
coat existing vertical surfaces of curbs structures gutters and pavements that will be in contact with bituminous mixtures with a thin uniform coating of bituminous material aashto ssnum cssnum ssnumh cssnumh or aet applied in two or more applications or of the class and type designated for the bituminous course .
numg numn num num change no .
num do not use a tack coat between lifts of any pervious asphalt .
place the wearing course as soon as practical after the placement of the binder course .
h spreading and finishing .
use a track paver as specified in section nume or a mechanical spreader .
spread or strike off the entire for the entire lane width or as much lane as practical .
place the mixture in maximum num inch compacted lifts .
adjust screed assemblies to provide the cross section and depth indicated .
construct the profile to the design grade line .
use fully automatic sensors to control profile and transverse grade .
allow the mixture to cool to numf before placing subsequent layers or pavement courses .
perform handwork at locations directed by the representative .
for multiple lift construction second lift may be placed and rolled perpendicular to the direction of placement and rolling of the first lift .
do not use pervious pavement beds for storage of equipment materials or soils during construction .
i compaction .
compact the pervious asphalt pavement when the surface is cool enough to resist a numton steel wheeled static roller or vibratory roller operated in the static mode .
limit compaction to not more than four passes to preclude a reduction in the surface porosity .
one roller pass is defined as one trip of the roller in one direction over any one spot .
do not over compact the material to the point that it is not free draining or the aggregate is crushed .
j joints .
num .
longitudinal joints .
spread the pervious paving course to overlap the edge of the lane previously placed by num inch to num inches .
maintain the uniform uncompacted depth adjacent to a compacted lane necessary to provide a smooth joint after compaction .
num .
transverse joints .
at the end of each days work and when more than a num minute interruption occurs in pervious paving operations install a temporary vertical bulkhead to form a straight transverse construction joint .
the joint must be the full depth and width of the pervious paving course .
in lieu of a temporary bulkhead a full depth transverse joint may be sawed before resuming paving .
k surface tolerance .
test the finished surface at locations the representative suspects are irregular and at transverse joints and paving notches .
test the surface in stages using a numfoot straightedge .
at each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface from one side to the other .
advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the pavement centerline by not more than num feet .
immediately correct irregularities of more than numinch by loosening surface mixture and removing or adding pervious paving course .
for irregularities exceeding numinch that develop after compaction is completed correct the irregularity by a method that does not produce contaminating fines or damage the base .
do not grind or mill the pervious paving course .
the area is defective if irregularities or defects remain after final compaction .
remove and replace defective areas .
if allowed submit a corrective action plan to the representative for approval .
l tests for depth binder and wearing courses .
carefully dig or drill one numinch diameter test hole to the full depth of the pervious course for each num square yards or less of completed base course .
the representative may require additional test holes in areas the representative suspects are deficient in depth .
the representative will measure the depth of the pervious course .
using material acceptable to the representative backfill the test holes and compact the material to fill the test hole flush with the completed course .
remove and replace sections deficient in depth by numinch or more .
start correction at the point of determined deficiency and continue correction longitudinally and transversely until the depth is within numinch of the indicated depth .
m infiltration testing .
perform infiltration testing on three areas selected in accordance with ptm no .
num for every num square feet of pervious asphalt pavement placed in accordance with astm c num .
remove and replace pervious asphalt pavement not meeting or exceeding a minimum average infiltration rate of num inches per hour .
document the average infiltration value from testing for use in future maintenance activities .
n defective work .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace pervious asphalt that is deficient in surface tolerance depth asphalt content percent of coated aggregate particles is less than num or when percent passing the num maximum for the no .
num sieve for the composite mixture is exceeded .
pervious courses are also considered defective if the astm c num infiltration rate is less than num inches per hour .
numn numb num num change no .
num with written permission from the district executive low areas may be filled during construction of the next pavement course .
num measurement and payment a pervious bituminous pavement system .
square yard or ton num .
pervious wearing course .
square yard or ton num .
pervious binder course .
square yard or ton b asphalt treated permeable base course .
section num num nume num num initial edition section nummanual bituminous patching num descriptionthis work is preparing and patching of potholes abrupt depressions and deteriorated edges of pavement and repatching temporarily patched potholes using hot bituminous plant mix material placed manually or with mechanical spreading and finishing equipment .
num material a superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma wearing course .
section num wma wearing course .
section num b superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma binder course .
section num wma binder course .
section num c bituminous tack coat .
section num num constructionas specified in sections numa numb and numc or section num and as follows d manual bituminous patching type a .
for potholes and abrupt depressions num inches and less in depth perform the work manually with hma or wma wearing course as indicated .
construct as follows num .
preparation .
cut out and patch the outlined area as marked by the representative .
ensure each patch has a minimum area of num square feet .
excavate outlined area to sound stable material .
the use of a milling or planing machine will be allowed .
cut all edges vertically .
after removal of the debris thoroughly clean the area to be patched and the surrounding pavement of all loose and foreign material .
thoroughly dry all surfaces of the area to be patched .
apply tack coat to the bottom and vertical surfaces of the area to be patched as specified in section numb .
num .
patching .
after the tack coat is cured place hma or wma wearing course .
compact with a steel wheeled roller or other approved compaction equipment .
ensure that after compaction the surface of the patch conforms to the grade of the surrounding pavement .
fill all excavated areas before the close of each work day .
potholes which extend into the shoulder do not require excavation beyond the edge of roadway .
if the existing shoulder has a bituminous base fill the shoulder portion of the pothole with hot bituminous plant mix and compact in the same manner as the roadway .
for other shoulder types fill the pothole with suitable material excavated from the roadway pothole and compact .
seal edges with emulsified asphalt class aet the pgbinder used in the pavement course or pg num. e manual bituminous patching type b .
for potholes and abrupt depressions over num inches in depth perform the work manually with hma or wma wearing course and hma or wma binder course as indicated .
construct as follows num .
preparation .
section numdnum .
num .
patching .
after the tack coat is cured place hma or wma binder course in lifts not to exceed num inches in uncompacted depth .
after leveling each lift compact with an approved mechanical tamper .
place hma or wma wearing course material in the topmost num num inches of the patch .
ensure that after compaction the surface of the patch conforms to the grade of the surrounding pavement .
compact the last lift with steel wheeled roller or other approved compaction equipment .
fill all excavated areas before the close of each work day except that the num num inch wearing course may be placed on the following day .
nume numc num num initial edition potholes which extend into the shoulder do not require excavation beyond the edge of roadway .
if the existing shoulder has a bituminous base fill the shoulder portion of the pothole with hma or wma wearing course and compact in the same manner as the roadway .
for other shoulder types fill the pothole with suitable material excavated from the roadway pothole and compact .
seal the edges with emulsified asphalt class aet the pgbinder used in the pavement course or pg num num .
num measurement and payment a superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma wearing course manual patching .
ton wma wearing course manual patching .
ton b superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma binder course manual patching .
ton wma binder course manual patching .
ton c bituminous tack coat .
section num num numb num num change no .
num section numbituminous tack coat num descriptionthis work is the conditioning and treating of an existing surface with an application of bituminous bonding material .
num material a bituminous material .
one of the following as specified in section num .
submit a certificate of compliance as specified in section numbnum and a bill of lading as specified in section numc to the representative indicating the asphalt residue content arc of the material being used .
if the bituminous material is stored for num days or longer after certification resample and retest the bituminous material at no expense to the department to determine if it meets bulletin num specification requirements .
table a bituminous materials class of material type of material application temperature f minimum maximum tack anionic or cationic emulsified asphalt num num nttcntt anionic or cationic emulsified asphalt num num b fine aggregate for blotting .
section num num construction a conditioning existing surface .
section numg .
b application of bituminous material .
use a distributor designed equipped calibrated maintained and operated to apply material uniformly on surfaces with varying widths and up to num feet wide .
provide a distributor capable of maintaining a uniform distributing pressure and controlling the application rate ar within a tolerance of num gallon per square yard .
provide a distributor equipped with a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volumemeasuring devices or a calibrated tank a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents a poweroperated pump and full circulation spray bars with lateral and vertical adjustments .
provide nozzles sized in accordance with manufacturers recommendations for the material selected for application .
in the field determine the distributors application rate according to ptm no .
num .
the contractor may use handspraying equipment in areas inaccessible to the distributor .
apply tack coat at an application rate approved by the representative to leave a uniform asphalt residual rate within the ranges per surface type according to table b .
identify the application rates and the residual rates on the paving operation qc plan and review the qc plan application rates and residual rates with the representative at the preplacement meeting .
table b uniform asphalt residual rates by surface type surface type uniform asphalt residual rates rr gallons per square yard new bituminous paving num to num existing bituminous paving num to num milled surface bituminous portland cement concrete num to num numb numb num num change no .
num portland cement concrete num to num the application rate to achieve a uniform asphalt residual rate can be determined using the following equation ar rr arc ar application rate gallons per square yard the amount of emulsified asphalt sprayed by the distributor truck .
rr residual rate gallons per square yard the amount of emulsified asphalt remaining on the surface after it has broken and set .
arc asphalt residue content divided by num the percentage amount of asphalt in the emulsified asphalt .
provided on the bill of lading and expressed as a decimal .
when paving operations begin apply tack coat on a numlinear foot minimum test section on the project for each paving course .
apply tack coat at the distributors application rate to achieve the proposed residual rate within the ranges listed in table b .
adjust distributor application rate and spray bar height to obtain a uniform surface coverage .
review adequacy of the tack coat coverage with the representative before to continuing with the tack coat application .
apply the tack coat only when the air temperature is numf and rising and when the existing surface is dry .
prior to each paving course apply the tack coat at an application rate to be within ranges of the uniform asphalt residual rate for the surface type according to table b .
uniformly distribute the tack coat over the surface .
extend the tack coat a minimum of num inches beyond the longitudinal joint of the paving course being placed .
correct all uncoated or lightly coated areas as directed to the representatives satisfaction .
at designated locations correct areas with an excess of bituminous material by covering the area with sufficient dry fine aggregate to blot up or remove excess tack coat .
allow the tack coat to break and set without being disturbed .
do not begin paving until the representative determines the tack coat has cured to the point that tracking is minimized .
c protection of treated surface .
maintain and protect the treated surface against damage .
repair damaged areas to the representatives satisfaction before placing the next pavement course .
num measurement and payment a area basis .
square yard b material used basis .
gallon num numb num num initial edition section numbituminous prime coat num descriptionthis work is the conditioning and treating of an absorbent nonbituminous base course or an absorbent existing surface with an application of bituminous material and if required a blotter material .
num material a bituminous material .
one of the following as specified in section num application temperature f class of material type of material minimum maximum aep emulsified asphalt num num enum prime emulsified asphalt num num b fine aggregate for blotting .
section num num construction a conditioning existing surface .
section numg except delete bituminous painting of existing surfaces and the application of a tack coat .
b application of bituminous material .
use a distributor as specified in section numb .
within the specified temperature range select application rates for aep and enum prime emulsified asphalt from num gallon per square yard to num gallon per square yard .
obtain approval of the application rates .
uniformly distribute the tack coat at the junction of adjacent applications .
following application do not disturb the prime coat .
allow the bituminous material to penetrate the treated surface and the treated surface to absorb the bituminous material until the inspectorinchange determines the bituminous material is completely cured .
apply additional bituminous material to uncoated or lightly coated areas .
twentyfour hours after applying the prime coat cover areas the representative identifies as showing an excess of prime coat material with sufficient dry fine aggregate to blot up or remove excess prime coat material .
c protection of treated surface .
maintain and protect treated surface against damage .
repair damaged areas to the representatives satisfaction before placing succeeding construction .
num measurement and payment a area basis .
square yard b material used basis .
gallon num num num num initial edition section numheavy duty membranes num descriptionthis work is placing heavy duty membranes over transverse and longitudinal joints and random cracks in existing concrete pavements at locations indicated or directed by the representative .
num material a heavy duty membrane .
as listed in bulletin num and include the certification specified in section numbnum with each shipment .
b asphalt cement class pg num or pg num .
section num num construction a general .
provide a copy of the manufacturers written installation instructions .
b surface preparation .
remove dirt and debris from all joints and cracks that will be under the membrane .
fill joints or cracks over num inch wide flush to the surface with pg num or pg num .
before placing the membrane ensure the pavement is sound dry and free of any debris or deteriorated and loose materials and prepare the surface according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not apply heavy duty membranes to milled surfaces .
c primers or binders .
if required apply primer or binder material according to the manufacturers recommendations including temperature requirements .
d membrane placement .
place the membrane according to the manufacturers recommendations including temperature and equipment requirements .
unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer place the membrane approximately centered over the joints and cracks .
slit the membrane and overlap the edges of wrinkles over num inch in width that can not be smoothed out .
securely bond the edges and corners of the strips to the surface .
before placing the overlay rebond or replace strips with loose edges or corners .
e traffic control .
before paving the contractor may only allow traffic on the membrane during the num calendar day period immediately after placing the membrane .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard or linear foot for the width indicated .
num numb num num change no .
num section numasphalt joint and crack sealing num descriptionthis work is cleaning and sealing longitudinal and transverse joints and cleaning and sealing cracks in existing pavement surfaces as part of routine maintenance and before placing an overlay .
num material a asphalt rubber sealing compound .
section numg b rubberized joint sealing material .
section numc c bituminous wearing course num mm .
section num num construction a general .
obtain material from a source listed in bulletin num or bulletin num as applicable .
b heating procedures .
use a premixed prepackaged material .
heat the material within the safe heating temperature range and recommended pouring temperatures found on the label on the manufacturers shipping container .
place the material as close as possible to the manufacturers recommended pouring temperature .
do not maintain batches of material at the pouring temperature for more than num hours .
reheat according to the manufacturers recommendations .
c surface preparation .
clean dry and remove debris and loose material from cracks joints and adjacent pavement surfaces .
if required rout cracks to create a reservoir num inch deep .
clean the pavement for num inches to num inches on either side of the joint or crack .
immediately before sealing use a compressed air stream of at least num pounds per square inch measured at the source or a hot compressed air lance to clean and dry damp cracks in bituminous pavements .
if using the hot compressed air lance do not damage the surrounding pavement area from overheating .
d sealing .
seal joints and cracks from num inch to num inch wide with asphalt sealant and filling joints and cracks over num inch wide with bituminous wearing course num mm .
if using asphalt sealant fill prepared joints and cracks level with the pavement surface .
wipe the sealant flush with the pavement surface leaving a thin film of sealant from num inch to num inch thick and from num inch to num inches wide .
after wiping the joint or crack remove and dispose of excess sealant .
unless allowed do not place sealant when the air temperature is below numf or above numf .
num measurement and payment a asphalt joint and crack sealing .
linear foot for the type specified .
b bituminous wearing course num mm .
section numanum num numb num num change no .
num section numbituminous seal coat num descriptionthis work is application of bituminous material immediately followed by application of coarse aggregate .
num material a bituminous material .
one of the following as specified in section num .
application temperature f class of material type of material minimum maximum rsnum enum emulsified asphalt num num crsnum enum cationic emulsified asphalt num num rsnumpm enumm polymermodified emulsified asphalt num num crsnumpm enumm polymermodified cationic emulsified asphalt num num crsnumpm low temperature polymermodified cationic emulsified asphalt num num pg num asphalt cement num num because of restrictive weather limitations governing the use of crsnumpm emulsified asphalt and the chemistry of the material use crsnumpm emulsions only with the written permission of the district executive .
provide crsnumpm produced by a source listed in bulletin num .
the ambient temperature range for using crsnumpm is numf to numf .
crs numpm is for only low temperature seal coat operations .
do not use crsnumpm for summer sealcoat projects .
do not use crsnumpm low temperature emulsions in rainy weather or on wet or damp surfaces .
use pg num only on shoulders .
b coarse aggregate .
type a no .
numsection num and with the srl designated in the contract item .
supply aggregate from a source listed in bulletin num .
the contractor may use an aggregate or blends of aggregates with an srl equal to or better than that specified .
blends are num by weight of the two aggregates .
mix the aggregates using an approved method .
num constructionat least num weeks before the scheduled start work submit a seal coat design for the representatives review .
design the seal coat according to the method in appendix e of bulletin num .
if the source or gradation of aggregate changes or if type of bitumen changes submit a new seal coat design .
a preparing existing surface .
remove and dispose of all unsuitable material .
where indicated seal cracks as specified in section num. b application of bituminous material .
apply bituminous material when the entire surface is in condition to allow satisfactory material penetration and adhesion and when the air surface and aggregate temperatures are above numf or if using crsnumpm from numf to numf .
do not apply emulsified asphalt if in the representatives opinion rain is imminent or if the representative expects freezing temperatures within num hours after application .
do not apply rsnumenum crsnumenum rsnumpmenumm crsnumpmenumm or pg num from september num to may num in districts num num num num num num num num and num monroe carbon and schuylkill counties only and from october num to may num in districts num num and num berks lehigh and northampton counties only .
use a distributor as specified in section numb .
use a rate of application within num of the design rate .
determine the distributor application rate in the field according to ptm no .
num .
for inaccessible areas uniformly spread the bituminous material over the surface using portable pressure units .
the quantity of material placed at one time shall be consistent with the facilities for handling spreading and rolling coarse aggregate as well as the temperature of the surface and bituminous material .
numb numc num num change no .
num uniformly spread the bituminous material at the junction of separate applications .
c spreading and rolling coarse aggregate .
use dry aggregates except the contractor may use damp aggregates with emulsified asphalt .
before spreading aggregate calibrate the spreader using a method acceptable to the inspectorincharge .
immediately after applying the bituminous material uniformly spread a single layer of coarse aggregate at the design rate using a mechanical spreader capable of spreading num pounds per square yard to num pounds per square yard .
roll the aggregate with pneumatictire rollers as specified in section numcnum.f .
provide a sufficient number of rollers to roll the width of stone spread with one pass .
use a contact pressure from num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch .
d protection of surface .
do not allow vehicular traffic or loads on the newly completed surface until the material obtains adequate stability and adhesion and the material is sufficiently cured to prevent distortion flushing of bituminous material to surface and loss of aggregate .
provide sufficient flaggers and pilot vehicles to move traffic through the work zone or over the completed work at speeds that prevent aggregate distortion or pickup .
if required sweep the surface with a power broom to remove loose aggregate before and after opening the road opened to traffic .
provide a pilot car for sweeping operations after opening the road to traffic .
num measurement and payment a area basis .
square yard b material used basis .
num .
coarse aggregate .
square yard num .
bituminous material .
gallon c crack filling and sealing .
section num num numd num num initial edition section numbituminous seal coat using precoated aggregate num descriptionthis work is application of bituminous material immediately followed by an application of bituminous precoated aggregate .
num material a bituminous precoating material .
one of the following as specified in section num application temperature f class of material type of material minimum maximum mcnum cutback asphalt num num mcnum cutback asphalt num num ssnumh enuma emulsified asphalt num num cssnumh enumc cationic emulsified asphalt num num pg num asphalt cement num num pg num asphalt cement num num b bituminous material .
one of the following as specified in section num application temperature f class of material type of material minimum maximum rsnum enum emulsified asphalt num num crsnum enum cationic emulsified asphalt num num pg num asphalt cement num num only use pg num on shoulders .
c coarse aggregate .
section numb d preparation of precoated aggregate .
use freeflowing precoated aggregate so it can be stocked handled and uniformly spread by a selfpropelled spreader .
prepare precoated aggregate as follows num .
asphalt cement .
use an asphalt cement to precoat the aggregate only if it precoats the aggregate to the representatives satisfaction .
provide a precoating with num to num residual bituminous binder by weight of the mix .
dry the aggregate in a batch or continuous type bituminous plant conforming to the requirements of bulletin num .
precoat the aggregate in the pug mill .
mix the materials at a mixing temperature not exceeding numf .
stock mixed material on a suitable base area and no higher than num feet .
num .
other bituminous materials .
the contractor may use damp aggregate and a stabilization plant .
provide a precoating with num to num residual bituminous binder .
if using damp aggregate with cutback asphalts sufficiently cure the precoated aggregate before use to prevent pickup .
do not exceed an aggregate temperature of numf if using cutback asphalts .
select an application rate sufficient to provide a thin brownish and translucent film on the aggregate .
cover at least num of the total visible surface area of the aggregate .
before producing the pre coated aggregate prepare a sample of the precoated aggregate for the representatives inspection .
the representative will use the sample to establish the visual inspection standard associated with at least num of the visible surface area covered .
during production the representative will determine if less than num of the visible surface area is covered .
if the representative determines less than num of the visible surface area is numd numc num num initial edition covered the contractor may determine the percent of uncoated material passing the num m no .
num sieve after dry sieving for num minutes .
the representative will accept the precoated aggregate if the percent passing does not exceed num .
stock mixed material on a suitable base area and if using heated aggregates no higher than num feet .
num constructionsection num and as follows d protection of surface .
if required sweep the surface with a power broom to remove loose chips before and after opening the road to traffic .
for emulsified asphalt allow sufficient time for the seal coat to completely cure before opening the road to all traffic .
num measurement and payment a area basis .
square yard b material used basis .
num .
coarse aggregate .
square yard the unit price includes the bituminous precoating material .
num .
other bituminous material .
gallon c crack filling and sealing .
section num num numa num num initial edition section numbituminous surface treatment num descriptionthis work is two applications of bituminous material with each application of bituminous material immediately followed by an application of coarse aggregate .
num material a bituminous material .
section numa b coarse aggregate .
type a no .
num and no .
num section num .
provide aggregate to achieve at least the srl designation indicated in the contract item and from sources supplying aggregate for use in wearing courses .
the contractor may provide a blend of two aggregates if the blend has an srl equal to or better than that specified .
blends are num by weight of each aggregate .
mix the aggregates by an approved method .
num constructionat least num weeks before the scheduled start of work submit a surface treatment design for the representatives review .
design the surface treatment according to appendix e of bulletin num. a conditioning existing surface .
section numa b application of bituminous material and coarse aggregate .
section numb and c except apply at the following rates and according to the following sequence first application apply bituminous material at a rate of num gallon per square yard to num gallon per square yard .
use a mechanical spreader to spread num pounds per square yard to num pounds per square yard of no .
num coarse aggregate .
roll the aggregate as specified below and then sweep off the loose material .
allow the first application to cure to the representatives satisfaction before spreading the second application .
second application apply bituminous material at a rate of num gallon per square yard to num gallon per square yard .
use a mechanical spreader to spread num pounds per square yard to num pounds per square yard of no .
num coarse aggregate .
roll the aggregate as specified below .
c rolling .
provide pneumatictire rollers as specified in section numcnum.f and with a contact pressure from of num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch .
use a sufficient number of rollers to cover the width of stone spread during the first pass .
when the bituminous material has a tacky surface backroll the aggregate with a pneumatictire roller or a steelwheel tandem roller until the aggregate adheres to the bituminous material .
if directed eliminate backrolling .
do not roll in the vibratory mode .
d protection of surface .
section numd num measurement and payment a area basis .
square yard numb numc num num initial edition b material used basis .
num .
coarse aggregate .
square yard num .
bituminous material .
gallon c crack filling and sealing .
section num num numb num num initial edition section numbituminous surface treatment using precoated aggregate num descriptionthis work is two applications of bituminous material each immediately followed by an application of precoated aggregate .
num material a bituminous precoated material .
section numa b bituminous material .
section numb c coarse aggregate .
section numb d preparation of precoated aggregate .
section numd num constructionsection num num measurement and payment a area basis .
square yard b material used basis .
num .
coarse aggregate .
square yard the unit price includes the bituminous precoating material .
num .
bituminous material .
gallon num nume num num initial edition section numslurry seal num descriptionthis work is construction of a bituminous slurry seal course of the type designated .
num material a bituminous material .
emulsified asphalt class ssnumhenuma or cssnumhenumc section num. b fine aggregate .
section num provide aggregate with the srl designation in the contract item .
supply the aggregate from an acceptable source for use in wearing courses .
the contractor may supply an aggregate or aggregate blend with an srl equal to or better than in the contract item .
blends are num by weight of each aggregate .
mix aggregates by an approved method .
c filler .
section numcnum d water .
section num and free from harmful soluble salts .
if water exceeds num ppm num grains hardness lower to below num ppm num grains by adding water softener .
e mixture composition .
design and test the slurry seal mixture according to astm d num .
provide fine aggregate asphalt emulsion water and if required filler conforming to the representative directed composition by weight percentages that are within the limits of table a. furnish a mix as specified in section nume .
table a composition by weight percentages combined aggregate gradations percentages by weight passing sieve type i type ii type iii numinch num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num asphalt residue percent by weight of dry aggregate num num num num num num num .
type i .
use to seal cracks fill voids and correct surface erosion .
apply dry aggregate at a rate from num pounds per square yard to num pounds per square yard .
num .
type ii .
use to fill surface voids correct severe surface erosion conditions and provide a minimum wearing surface .
apply dry aggregate at a rate of num pounds per square yard to num pounds per square yard .
num .
type iii .
use to provide a new moderate wearing surface or to build up a crown .
apply dry aggregate at a rate of num pounds per square yard or more .
num numf num num initial edition num construction a weather limitations .
as specified in section numb except do not place mixture if the air temperature is numf or lower or if the pavement temperature is numf or lower .
b equipment requirements .
produce the mixture in a selfpropelled continuousflow mixing apparatus capable of accurately proportioning combining and mixing the materials into a homogeneous mixture with an asphalt film of sufficient thickness to furnish the desired binding properties .
use an apparatus that contains bins tanks and receptacles of sufficient size and volume proportioning feeders liquid measuring meters or devices and a mechanical mixer and distributor for placing the finished mixtures .
materials are to be delivered to the mixer simultaneously and in timeadjusted sequence by integrated mechanized and synchronized components .
c mixer .
a mixer of the spiraled multiblade type or other acceptable type with the following components is required mixing chamber having a stated capacity not to be exceeded mechanical equipment to regulate mixing time up to but not exceeding num minutes equipment to prewet the aggregate before aggregate contact with asphalt emulsion and a gate for controlling discharge of mixture into the distributor spreader .
d spreading equipment .
num .
distributor .
a mechanicallyoperated squeegeetype distributor is required one which is integrally assembled with the slurry mixer and which includes the following a strikeoff lined with flexible material to prevent loss of slurry mixture during spreading a strikeoff with vertical adjustment available for changing grade and cross slope to ensure uniform spreading of mixture and a pressure system and a fogtype spray bar adequate for placing a complete fog coat of water over pavement surface immediately preceding spreading of mixture with a maximum num gallon per square yard application rate of water .
num .
auxiliary equipment .
provide hand squeegees shovels surfacecleaning machines and other hand equipment as necessary .
e conditioning of existing surface .
section numgnum except seal open joint and cracks with an acceptable crack sealer or emulsion .
in addition to the surface cleaning specified also remove heavy paint buildup .
cover and satisfactorily protect existing raised pavement markers .
replace damaged markers .
f placement .
control the temperature of the components of the completed mixture so application temperature of the slurry seal is within the range designated but not less than numf or more than numf .
numg num num num initial edition g joints .
num .
transverse joints .
construct by either overlapping previously cured slurry with num feet to num feet of fresh slurry or by lightly wetting the area the spreader box will touch while the slurry is in a completely uncured semifluid condition .
num .
longitudinal joints .
construct as follows do not wet the slurry if it is completely uncured .
pull a burlap bag or other suitable device along the joint seam to cause fresh slurry from the spreader box to distribute itself evenly over the joint .
wet the slurry with the spring bar if the slurry is completely cured .
h curing .
do not allow traffic on the surface until directed to allow the slurry seal to completely cure to a firm condition that will prevent pickup of the mixture .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numf num num change no .
num section numpolymermodified emulsified asphalt paving system micro surfacing num descriptionthis work is the construction of a polymermodified emulsified asphalt paving system commonly known as microsurfacing to fill ruts andor resurface existing pavements .
microsurfacing material is classified into three mix types as follows a type a .
used to seal cracks fill voids and shallow less than num inch ruts and provide a scratch course or surface seal .
use a double application when specified to meet total design pounds per square yard for surface courses .
b type b .
used to fill moderate num inch to num num inch ruts and provide a scratch course a leveling course a seal coat or a surface treatment .
use a double application when specified to meet total design pounds per square yard for surface courses .
c type rut fill rf .
used to fill deep num inch ruts in a single pass .
num material a bituminous material .
class cssnumhpm enumcpm as specified in bulletin num .
obtain material from an approved producer and source listed in bulletin num and provide quality control testing and certification as specified in sections numb and numbnum .
num .
polymer modifier .
provide a latex based modifier capable of making a microsurfacing mix which cures fast enough to allow traffic to be placed on the pavement within num hour without damaging the surface .
b aggregate .
provide coarse or fine aggregates from sources listed in bulletin num .
provide fine aggregate type b or better meeting the quality requirements of table a section numc and coarse aggregates meeting the quality requirements of table b section numa .
the final gradation must meet the final gradation specified in table a of this specification .
for wearing courses provide aggregate with at least the srl designation specified .
to achieve the specified srl the contractor may provide a blend of two aggregates if the blend has an srl designation equal to or better than that specified .
blends are num by weight of each aggregate .
blend the aggregates using an approved method .
c filler .
supply filler when required to maintain the percent by weight passing the num m no .
num sieve as specified in section numcnum consisting of any approved nonair entrained type num portland cement free of lumps or hydrated lime as specified in section num. d water .
section num and free of harmful soluble salts .
e other additives .
supplied by the manufacturer to control mix set time in the field due to varying ambient environmental conditions .
f mixture composition .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions in such proportions that the total aggregate and filler in the jmf conform to the composition by weight percentages specified in table a .
perform the tests identified in table b for each mix design and provide the test results to document each mix designs characteristics .
submit a certified mix designs using a microsurfacing mix design and materials analysis form trnum to the dmedmm at least num weeks before its use in the work .
clearly show for each mix design the proportions of aggregate filler percent polymermodified emulsified asphalt and asphalt residue based on the dry weight of the aggregate and the design cure time .
ensure that all of the materials used in the mix design represent the materials proposed for use on the project .
if minor adjustments are required during construction based on field conditions provide the changes in writing to the representative .
numf numf num num change no .
num num .
qc plan and jmf .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and submit it for review at the start of the project and at least annually thereafter .
include the number of applications and the mix design used with each application in the qc plan .
do not start work until the qc plan has been reviewed and the jmf has been submitted .
when unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary a new jmf may be required .
if a change in sources of materials is made submit a revised jmf to the dmedmm before using any new material .
num .
uniformity .
produce each mix type within the ranges specified in table c. table a sieve size composition total percent by mass weight passing type a type b type rf num mm num inch num num num num mm num inch num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num note material finer than the num m no .
num sieve will be determined as per ptm no .
num .
table b microsurfacing mix design properties property test method test requirements wet cohesion issa tb num num minutes issa tb num num minutes num kgcm min num kgcm min or near spin wet track abrasion loss issa tb num num hour soak issa tb num num day soak num gftnum max num gftnum max mix time issa tb num num seconds min classification of compatibility issa tb num num grade points min wet stripping issa tb num pass num min loaded wheel test issa tb num vertical num max lateral num max note provide aggregate with a minimum sand equivalency of num as determined by aashto t num .
if the sand equivalency is num the aggregate may be approved as long as the plasticity index pi is zero .
test the pi as per aashto t num and aashto t num and meets the methyl blue test .
table c mix type minimum surfacing application thickness inch asphalt residue by weight of aggregate single application rate pounds per square yard double application rate pounds per square yard a num num num num num b num num num num num num num rf na num num note a provide mix set additive for each mix type as required .
note b filler for each mix type to be from num to num num by weight of dry aggregate depending on weather conditions .
note c it is permissible to increase asphalt content for slag and other absorptive aggregates at the discretion of the dmedmm .
numg nume num num change no .
num g mixture acceptance .
provide a certified calibration sheet for the mixing equipment for each mix design to be used within num days before its use on the project .
record mixing equipment meter readings of material control devices on a run sheet daily for each mix design .
calculate the percent cement or hydrated lime total emulsion asphalt residue based on the dry weight of the aggregate and the yield square yard .
certify the mixture composition and application rate based on quality control tests and run sheet calculations .
send certifications to the inspectorincharge within num working day following any quality control testing .
certify mixtures and each shipment of material delivered to the job site as specified in section numbnum .
h bituminous tack coat .
section num i certification .
section numbnum .
certify each shipment of material delivered to the job site .
num construction a preplacement meeting .
hold a preplacement meeting on site or at a location that is acceptable to the representative with both contractor and penndot personnel present before placing any material on the project .
identify any areas of concern in the pavement that may show any signs of fatigue or excessive rutting at the preplacement meeting .
also review the specification qc plan source of supply list and the aggregate delivery plan .
it may be necessary to hold more than one preplacement meeting on larger projects with multiple state routes .
b weather limitations .
apply when entire surface is in a condition to allow satisfactory penetration and adhesion and the atmospheric temperature is numf minimum during the entire placement .
under no circumstances will the numf minimum temperature requirement to be waived even for night work .
do not apply mixture if rain is imminent or if freezing temperatures are expected within num hours after application .
remove and replace rained on mixture before it sets .
do not apply from september num to april num in districts num num num num num and num monroe carbon and schuylkill counties only and from october num to april num in districts num num num num num and num berks lehigh and northampton counties only .
no exceptions to weather limitations will be allowed unless directed in writing by the district executive .
c aggregate delivery plan .
before the start of work submit an aggregate delivery plan to the dmedmm for approval .
include in the plan the number of trucks that will be used to haul aggregates to the microsurfacing machine in order to keep it moving continuously to limit starting and stopping .
all aggregates being delivered to the microsurfacing machine must be screened directly into the truck .
all screening plants must be equipped with a scalping screen with a num inch maximum square opening for type a and with a num inch maximum square opening for type b and type rf .
d mixing equipment .
produce mixture in a selfpropelled front feed continuousloading mixing machine equipped with a chaindragged conveyor belt aggregate delivery system interconnected with a positive displacement waterjacketed gear pump to accurately proportion ingredients .
truck mounted units may be allowed on projects less than num square yards except for limited access highways and for all municipal projects .
locate filler feed so that the proper amount of cement is coating the aggregate before charging into the mixer .
provide a spray bar to completely wet the aggregate dropping down into the pug mill with additive and water .
provide a continuousflow twin shafted multibladed pug mill at least num inches long .
introduce polymermodified emulsified asphalt beyond the first quarter point of the mixer to ensure thorough mixing of aggregate cement additive and water before polymermodified emulsified asphalt is added .
meet manufacturers recommendations for blade size and side clearance .
provide readily accessible material control devices placed so that the inspector is able to determine the amount of each material being used at any time .
calibrate each material control device before production of each mix type .
equip the machine with a water pressure system and nozzle spray bar to provide a water spray ahead of and outside the spreader box when required .
e spreading equipment .
spread the mixture uniformly by means of a mechanical type squeegee box attached to the mixer and equipped with paddles mounted on adjustable shafts to continually agitate and distribute the material throughout the box .
provide sufficient turbulence to prevent the mix from setting up in the box forming excessive side buildup or forming lumps .
attach flexible front and rear seals in contact with the road to prevent loss of mixture from the box .
furnish rut filling equipment with movable steel strikeoff bar .
operate spreading equipment nume numi num num change no .
num to prevent loss of the mixture on super elevated curves and to leave a uniform skidresistant application of aggregate and asphalt on the surface .
operate spreading equipment to achieve a uniform consistency without skips lumps or tears in the finished surface .
f conditioning of existing surface .
section numgnum and as follows immediately before placing mixture clean the surface of vegetation loose materials dirt mud and other objectionable items .
ensure all pavement markings and legends are completely removed before placing any mixture .
before placing mixture on existing concrete surfaces apply tack coat over the entire area as specified in section num .
do not apply tack coat on existing asphalt surfaces .
apply water to dampen entire surface immediately before placing mixture .
g spreading and finishing .
section numh and as follows spread the mixture to seal cracks fill voids and to leave a uniform surface .
when filling ruts take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement cross section .
avoid excess crowning over filling of rutted areas .
use squeegees and lutes in areas inaccessible to the spreader box .
carry a sufficient amount of material at all times in all parts of the spreader box to obtain complete coverage .
water may be sprayed into the spreader box to facilitate spreading without harming the mix .
lumps balls or unmixed aggregate in the finished surface is not allowed .
adjustments to the additive may be required to slow mixture set time where hand spreading is needed .
when hand spreading pour mixture in a small windrow along one edge of the surface to be covered and spread uniformly by hand squeegee or lute .
make a neat seam where two passes join .
immediately remove excess material from the ends of each run .
num .
general requirements .
ensure mixture properly sets within one hour of placement .
if mixture takes longer than one hour to properly set the representative will give the contractor a warning and an opportunity to immediately correct mixture application and set time .
if the mixture takes longer than one hour and twenty minutes to properly set stop placement operations immediately .
num .
mixture set time .
remove and replace mixture if mixture set time takes longer than one hour and twenty minutes .
h compaction .
before opening to traffic compact using a pneumatictire roller as specified in section numcnum.f except having tire pressures of num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch .
roll the entire surface area of the placed mixture .
on a double application roll the entire surface area of the placed mixture for each application .
i sampling and testing .
at least num weeks before the start of work under the direction and supervision of the representative obtain samples of the aggregates from stockpiles designated and constructed for each mixture type and each project .
obtain a minimum sample size of num pounds using guidelines for stockpile sampling specified in ptm no .
num .
immediately deliver the samples to the representative for testing .
passing aggregate acceptance test results are required before placement of the mixture .
all acceptance samples will be obtained and all acceptance tests will be performed by the representative in accordance with ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num using the following frequency when the projected quantity of aggregate for the specified mixture type is less than num tons .
the entire quantity will be designated as one lot and divided into three equal sublots for sampling .
under the direction and supervision of the representative obtain a sample from each sublot and immediately deliver the samples to the representative for testing .
one of the three sublot samples will be randomly selected and tested in accordance with ptm no .
num by the representative and tested for compliance with table a .
if the sample tested meets the specification the entire lot will be considered acceptable for delivery to the designed project .
if the sample fails the remaining two samples will be tested and the representative will determine the percent within limits pwl according to section numanum .
if results indicate a pwl for the material less than num the representative will reject the stockpile .
after the entire rejected lot has been blended screened or replaced retesting for acceptance of the aggregate will be performed .
when retesting is performed all sublot samples will be tested in accordance to numi numl num num change no .
num section numbnum .
all acceptance testing will be performed by the representative .
all test results will be recorded on a trnuma aggregate report form .
when the projected quantity of aggregate for the specified mixture type is num tons or greater .
the aggregates will be divided into equal lots at the discretion of the aggregate supplier but in no case will the lot exceed num tons .
each lot will be divided into three equal sublots .
under the direction and supervision of the representative obtain a sample for each sublot .
all three samples for each lot will be tested and the representative will determine the percent within limits pwl according to section numanum .
if results indicate a pwl for the material less than num the representative will reject the stockpile .
if the test results for each lot meets the specification and are in compliance with table a the entire lot is acceptable for shipment to the project .
if the test results fail to meet the specifications the lot will be rejected .
retesting for lot acceptance will be performed as described above .
all acceptance testing will be performed by the representative .
all test results will be recorded on a trnuma aggregate report form .
j blending aggregates on the project .
requests to blend aggregates on the project to meet gradation requirements from table a and the method of blending must be approved in writing by the dmedmm before the start of work .
include on the qc plan a detailed description of equipment used to blend aggregates a list of supplier codes for aggregates being blended and the percentages of each aggregate being blended .
set up a portable laboratory at the blending site equipped to perform ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num tests for acceptance of aggregates on the project .
the contractors aggregate technician must be a penndot certified aggregate technician before performing any aggregate testing at the staging area in the presence and direction of the representative .
aggregates will be accepted as specified in section numi .
provide aggregate for use in all mixture types including each application of a double application of a mixture type having the srl designation indicated in the bid proposal .
an aggregate designation or blends equal to or better than that specified may be supplied .
k test strip .
on the first day of work the representative will identify a location to perform the test strip .
the test strip will be prohibited on a limited access highway .
construct a test strip to demonstrate the mixtures ability to be laid in multiple stone thicknesses and to be opened to traffic within one hour after placement .
construct the test strip in the same manner and condition as required on the project .
construct the test strip over onefull lane width and between num feet and num feet long .
apply the mixture at an application rate representative of the application rate for the project .
test the mixture in accordance with issa test method tb num in the presence of the representative .
the representative will evaluate and approve the test strip based on its ability to be opened to traffic within one hour and on its ability to have a set time of num minutes maximum as determined by issa test method tb num .
do not continue with work until the representative has approved the test strip .
the representative does not have the authority to waive or eliminate the test strip requirement .
if this work is to be performed a test strip is mandatory .
the test strip will be payable in accordance with section num. l defective work .
as specified in section num and as follows unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive satisfactorily correct pavement not meeting the following criteria num .
application rate .
calculate yield at the end of each days application .
areas where application rates deviate from the acceptable ranges in table c will be considered defective work .
failure to meet the acceptable ranges in table c will require an additional minimum num pounds per square yard application or the district executive with the concurrence of the director of the bureau of project delivery may allow the contractor to leave the defective lot in place .
the department will pay for the defective lot at num of the contract unit price .
num .
finished surface .
provide a finished uniform surface texture meeting the following requirements no areas of excess asphalt flushing greater than num of the finished surface area .
areas of excess asphalt are characterized by a smooth shiny surface that may be tacky to the touch .
bleeding at joints is not allowed .
no tear andor drag marks greater than num inch wide and num inches long .
numl numb num num change no .
num no more than num tear andor drag marks greater than num inch wide and num inches long per num feet of a lane .
no clumps andor other foreign objects greater than num num inch in diameter .
no completed sections of microsurfacing which exhibit washboard or ripple patterns exceeding num linear feet .
if these areas exist they will be considered defective work as determined by the representative and will require surface correction .
no longitudinal streaks with greater than a num inch ridge bump or depression as measured with a num foot long straightedge .
num .
longitudinal joints .
make a neat seam where two longitudinal passes join with no greater than a num inch bump ridge or depression as measured with a num foot straightedge .
do not overlap longitudinal joints more than num inches except on irregular roadway widths when approved by the representative .
num .
longitudinal edges .
place material to the final widths specified .
make a neat longitudinal edge along the roadway lane shoulder andor curb lines .
place edges flush with curbs .
place edges with no more than num inches horizontal variance in any num feet of roadway .
num .
transverse profile .
fill ruts to have no depressions as measured with a num foot long straightedge .
m opening to traffic .
do not allow traffic on newly completed surface course until mix has set sufficiently to prevent pickup and until directed by the representative .
num measurement and payment a microsurfacing .
num .
area basis .
square yard num .
weight basis .
ton under the direction and supervision of the representative complete measurements based on the combined tonnages of aggregate filler and polymermodified emulsified asphalt actually used computed as follows aggregate .
measure aggregate quantity using the calibrated dry weight from the aggregate control device .
make a deduction for moisture naturally occurring in the aggregate by using ptm no .
num .
filler .
compute filler quantity from the fines feeder control device .
polymermodified emulsified asphalt .
compute polymermodified emulsified asphalt quantity by weight used .
b bituminous tack coat .
section num num numc num num change no .
num section numultrathin bonded wearing course num descriptionthis work is the construction of a polymermodified emulsified asphalt membrane utwcem immediately overlaid with an ultrathin bonded wearing course of hotmix asphalt concrete utwc in one pass of a single paving machine .
num material a bituminous material .
num .
asphalt binder .
provide material as specified meeting the requirements of the standard specification for performancegraded asphalt binder aashto m num except as revised in bulletin num .
obtain material from an approved producer and source listed in bulletin num for the specified grade and provide quality control testing and certification as specified in sections numb and numbnum .
num .
emulsified asphalt .
class utwcem as specified in bulletin num .
obtain material from an approved producer and source listed in bulletin num and provide quality control testing and certification as specified in sections numb and numbnum .
b aggregate .
num .
fine aggregate .
manufactured sand from an approved source listed in bulletin num and meeting the requirements in table a .
table a fine aggregate properties test test method minimum maximum sand equivalent aashto t num num methylene blue aashto t num num uncompacted void content aashto t num num num .
coarse aggregate .
coarse aggregate from an approved source listed in bulletin num and meeting the requirements in table b .
table b coarse aggregate properties test test method average daily traffic adt num num num num abrasion max .
aashto t num num num num microdeval md max .
aashto t num num num num skid resistance level srl min .
bulletin num g or higher h or higher e absorption max .
aashto t num num num num thin and elongated pieces max .
astm d num num num num soundness max .
ptm no .
num num num num crushed num face astm d num num num num crushed num face astm d num num num num md num requires approval of dmedmm .
c filler .
do not use flyash if the design traffic is greater than or equal to num million equivalent single axle loads esals .
numd numd num num change no .
num d mixture composition .
provide a wearing course of plant mixed hot bituminous concrete consisting of fine aggregate coarse aggregate filler and asphalt cement .
size uniformly grade and combine aggregate fractions in such proportions that the total aggregate and the bitumen in the jmf conform to the composition specified in table c and meet the mixture characteristics of table d. table c table d mixture characteristics mixture characteristic test method minimum maximum moisture sensitivity tsr aashto t num num draindown mass aashto t num num apparent asphalt film thickness microns bul .
num sec num num prepare specimens in accordance with the departments modified procedures for superpave mix design detailed in bulletin num chapter numa referencing aashto r num section num with the following exceptions num .
condition the mixture in accordance with bulletin num .
num .
compact to num gyrations .
num .
extrude as soon as possible without damage to the sample .
num .
use aashto t num to determine void content .
num .
record the void content of the specimens .
num .
condition specimens compute the tensile strength ratio and evaluate the specimens in accordance with bulletin num .
num .
visual stripping will require modification andor readjustments as directed by the representative .
num .
producer qc plan and jmf .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and submit it for review at the start of the project and at least annually thereafter .
do not start work until the qc plan has been reviewed and the jmf has been submitted .
when unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary a new jmf may be required .
if a change in sources of materials is made submit a revised jmf to the dmedmm before using any new material .
num .
uniformity .
produce the bituminous mixture to meet the requirements as specified in table c. produce the mixture within the jmf tolerances specified in table e. table e jmf tolerance requirements of completed mix nnum passing num mm num inch and larger sieves num composition total percent by mass weight passing sieve size type a type b type c num mm num inch num num num num mm num inch num num num num num mm num inch num num num num num num mm num inch num num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num asphalt by mass weight num num num num num num note material finer than the num m no .
num sieve will be determined as per ptm no .
num .
numd numg num num change no .
num passing num mm num inch to num no .
num sieves num passing num mm no .
num to num mm no .
num sieves num passing num mm no .
num sieve num passing num no .
num sieve num asphalt by mass num temperature of mixture f class of material type of material minimum maximum pg num asphalt cement num num pg num asphalt cement num num e mixture acceptance .
obtain material certification from the material producer .
send certification to the inspectorincharge within num working day following any qc tests for bitumen determination and sieve analysis of the mixture .
the mixture will be accepted by certification at the plant when quality control tests conform to the jmf within the tolerances specified in table e. acceptance by certification may be suspended if qc tests or qa samples obtained by qa teams from the bopd deviate from the tolerances in table e for acceptance values .
the acceptance values are asphalt percent passing by mass weight percent passing the num no .
num sieve percent passing the num mm no .
num sieve and percent passing the num mm num inch sieve .
if at any time during the course of the work any acceptance values deviate from the tolerances in table e in consecutive tests immediately make necessary changes to comply with the jmf .
if the material can not be brought into compliance within num tons of production suspend operations and notify the inspectorincharge .
do not resume production for the project until the representative has reviewed any corrective action .
if the asphalt content or the percent passing the num no .
num sieve deviates from the tolerances specified in table e the material represented will be considered defective and acceptance will be determined as specified in section numo .
f certification .
section numbnum .
certify each days shipment of material delivered to the job site .
num constructionsection num with additions and modifications as follows b weather limitations .
replace with the following do not place bituminous paving mixtures from november num to march num unless allowed in writing by the district executive .
do not place bituminous paving mixtures when the surfaces are wet or when the air or surface temperature is below numf .
if work is halted because of weather conditions the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of mixture that are en route to the project .
e paving equipment .
num .
bituminous pavers .
add the following use pavers that include a builtin spray bar placed in front of the variablewidth heated screed unit so that the operations of spreading utwcem and the utwc are performed in succession within a period of less than num seconds .
g preparation of existing surface .
num .
conditioning of existing surface .
replace with the following at least num hours before paving operations seal longitudinal and transverse joints and cracks numinch and wider as specified in section num .
use rubberized sealant as specified in section num and minimize the sealant overband numg numb num num change no .
num thickness and width .
do not exceed section num overband tolerances .
remove thermoplastic and tape traffic markings greater than num inches thick .
thoroughly clean pavements impregnated with grease oil or fuel .
immediately prior to applying the utwcem and the utwc clean the surface by sweeping or other means necessary to remove all loose particles and unsuitable material .
h spreading and finishing .
num.b spreading and finishing .
replace with the following apply utwcem with a metered mechanical pressure sprayer at a temperature of numf to numf .
continuously monitor the rate of spray ensuring a uniform application rate over the entire width to be overlaid .
determine the spray rate given the existing pavement porosity and apply between num and num gallons per square yard .
do not allow wheels or other parts of the paving machine to come in contact with the utwcem before the utwc is applied .
within num seconds of applying the utwcem lay the utwc within the temperature range specified in table e for the class and type of material used and at the placement rate specified in table f. continuously adjust operations to obtain a quality surface free from drags marks open areas or suspect quality .
if adjustments do not obtain a quality surface the representative may direct work to stop .
do not begin spreading and finishing until the representative is satisfied with proposed corrective actions to provide a satisfactory surface .
table f gradation type nmas placement rates for utwc a num mm num inch num to num pounds per square yard b num mm num inch num to num pounds per square yard c num mm num inch num to num pounds per square yard note placement rates are intended as a guide and additional material may be required to obtain a quality surface .
in no case should material yield be below the lower limits of the placement rate range .
i compaction .
replace with the following roll the utwc immediately after placement and before the material temperature has fallen below numf .
roll using a minimum of two passes with a steel doubledrum asphalt roller having a mass of not less than num tons .
do not allow rollers to remain stationary on the freshly placed utwc .
maintain rollers in reliable operating condition and equipped with functioning water system and scrapers to prevent adhesion of the fresh mix onto the roller drums .
a release agent added to the water system may be required .
compact in the static mode with the exception of joints where vibration may be necessary .
a pneumatictire roller may be used to prevent the bridging effect of the steel drum roller .
j mat density acceptance .
density testing is not required .
k joints .
replace with the following num .
longitudinal joints .
form butt joints only and compact with rollers .
num .
transverse joints .
minimize the number of transverse joints .
maintain continuous forward paving wherever possible .
construct joints perpendicular to the direction of traffic and compact .
m tests for depth .
loose depth or compacted depth tests are not required .
however control the depth of courses by the weight per square yard .
num measurement and payment a ultrathin bonded wearing course .
square yard .
for the type indicated .
b crack filling and sealing .
section num num num num num initial edition section numremoval of existing surface course num descriptionthis work is removal of an existing surface course .
num constructioncarefully remove the existing bituminous surface course within limits shown on the plans or where the representative directs .
use an acceptable removal method .
neatly trim the edges of remaining bituminous surface to a vertical line .
at locations determined by the representative clean the surface of the existing base course and repair damage to the adjacent surface or underlying base .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numb num num initial edition section nummilling of bituminous pavement surface num descriptionthis work is the milling of an existing bituminous pavement surface .
num construction a equipment .
provide a milling machine designed and built for milling existing bituminous pavements with an automatic grade and slope control system and be capable of milling concrete patches .
b milling operation .
mill to provide a finished surface that is free from gouges grooves and ridges and that conforms to the surface tolerance requirements of section numl .
immediately after milling remove milled material .
carefully remove the existing bituminous material around utility facilities within work areas .
repair or replace utility facilities that are damaged by the milling operation to the satisfaction of the utility owner .
control the rate of milling to avoid tearing of the mat which causes chunky and nonuniformly milled material .
if directed separate oversized and chunky milled material .
maintain the milled pavement surface free of all loose materials and dust .
do not allow traffic to drive on any milled surface for more than num calendar days .
place the first overlaying bituminous course within num calendar days from the start of the milling operation .
failure to overlay a milled section of roadway within num calendar days after it has been milled will constitute a failure to comply with a contract traffic control requirement for which work zone liquidated damages as specified in section numc will be assessed .
work stoppages caused by the department utilities and documented weather delays will not count towards the num working days for calculating work zone liquidated damages .
maintain all milled surfaces and repair or replace any areas damaged due to the bituminous overlay not being placed within num calendar days of the milling operation methods accepted by the representative at no additional cost to the department .
if the first course of the bituminous overlay is not placed on the same day of the milling operation install rough road wnum signs according to publication num publication num and mutcd num mile in advance of the project and at a minimum of num mile intervals throughout the project before the end of the day .
eliminate vertical edges around utilities and inlets within all open travel lanes at the end of each day .
if this is not feasible install a bump wnum sign in advance of the appurtenance and consider a reduced regulatory speed limit sign .
install these signs at no additional cost to department .
c disposition of milled material .
the proposalcontract will indicate which one of the following conditions will apply with regard to the disposition of milled material .
num .
milled material retained by contractor .
when indicated that milled material is to be retained by the contractor satisfactorily dispose of milled material immediately after milling .
num .
milled material retained by department delivered to stockpile .
when indicated that milled material will be retained by the department deliver milled material to the designated stockpiling location immediately after milling .
the proposalcontract will include a special provision that identifies where milled material is to be stockpiled as well as the approximate distance miles from the project site to the designated stockpiling location .
advance notification of a scheduled delivery of milled material to the designated stockpile is to be provided to the individual whose name and telephone number are listed in the special provision .
num measurement and payment a milling of bituminous pavement surface milled material retained by contractor .
square yard b milling of bituminous pavement surface milled material retained by department delivered to stockpile .
square yard the cost of delivering milled material to the designated stockpiling location is incidental to this item of work .
num numd num num initial edition section numprofile milling of bituminous pavement surfaces num description this work is profile milling of existing bituminous pavement surface with parameters to control surface tolerances in both longitudinal and transverse directions .
num construction a equipment .
provide a selfpropelled milling machine capable of milling a fulllane width up to numfeet wide in one pass .
equip the milling machine with a built in automatic grade control system to control the longitudinal profile and the transverse crossslope .
provide longitudinal controls capable of operating from a longitudinal grade reference including string line ski num feet minimum mobile string line num feet minimum or matching shoe .
provide the transverse controls with an automatic system for controlling crossslope at a given rate .
mount profiler cutters to the carrier in order to adjust and control them according to depth of cut and crossslope .
longitudinal milling action may be produced either by a suitable carrier wheelbase or use of an automatic control system having an external reference .
produce either a variable or a constant crossslope with crossslop adjustments or automatic controls .
design maintain and operate milling cutters to produce a surface free from grooves ridges gouges or other irregularities detrimental to the safe operation of vehicles in traffic routed onto the profiled surface .
suitable supplemental equipment or methods approved by the representative may be used in small or confined areas and around utility facilities .
complete adjustment of utility facilities before the milling operation when pavement is not to be resurfaced .
repair or replace utility facilities that are damaged by the profiling operation to the satisfaction of the utility owner at no additional cost to the department .
b profiling operation .
remove irregularities such as bumps corrugations and wheel ruts and establish the specified pavement surface elevation or crossslope with one or more passes over the designated area operating the milling machine in automated mode .
remove milled material from the surface following each pass of the equipment .
before opening the completed area to traffic thoroughly clean the surface of all loose material that would create a hazard a nuisance or would be redeposited into the surface texture .
maintain the milled surface free of all loose material and contaminants during milling and cleaning operations .
repair areas where sound pavement has been damaged by milling operations at no additional cost to the department in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
the repaired area must conform to the adjacent pavement in smoothness and durability .
do not allow traffic to drive on any milled surface for more than num calendar days .
place the first overlaying bituminous course within num calendar days from the start of the milling operation .
failure to overlay a milled section of roadway within num calendar days after it has been milled will constitute a failure to comply with a contract traffic control requirement for which work zone liquidated damages as specified in section numc will be accessed .
work stoppages caused by the department utilities and documented weather delays will not count towards the num working days for calculating work zone liquidated damages .
maintain all milled surfaces and repair or replace any areas damaged due to the bituminous overlay not being placed within num calendar days of the milling operation methods accepted by the representative at no additional cost to the department .
if the first course of the bituminous overlay is not placed on the same day of the milling operation install rough road wnum signs according to publication num publication num and mutcd num mile in advance of the project and at a minimum of num mile intervals throughout the project before the end of the day .
eliminate vertical edges around utilities and inlets within all open travel lanes at the end of each day .
if this is not feasible install a bump wnum sign in advance of the appurtenance and consider a reduced regulatory speed limit sign .
install these signs at no additional cost to department .
c surface patching .
areas of the milled surface to be patched due to spalling or dislodgement of unsound pavement during profile milling operation will be designated by the representative .
excavate to match depth of existing surface .
clean the areas of loose material coat with emulsified asphalt tack coat aet and fill with hma material of the same type .
level and compact the hma material to conform to the adjacent pavement .
d surface tolerances .
profile the surface to a smoothness of num inch in num feet and match the surface at the numd numc num num initial edition edge of adjacent passes within num inches .
conform the crossslope of the profiled surface to the specified crossslope within num inch in num feet .
provide a positive cross slope as shown in the plans such that the pavement drains .
e disposition of milled material .
the proposalcontract will indicate which one of the following conditions will apply with regard to the disposition of milled material .
num .
milled material retained by contractor .
when indicated that milled material is to be retained by the contractor satisfactorily dispose of milled material immediately after milling .
num .
milled material retained by department delivered to stockpile .
when indicated that milled material will be retained by the department deliver milled material to the designated stockpiling location immediately after milling .
the proposalcontract will include a special provision that identifies where milled material is to be stockpiled as well as the approximate distance miles from the project site to the designated stockpiling location .
advance notification of a scheduled delivery of milled material to the designated stockpile is to be provided to the individual whose name and telephone number are listed in the special provision .
f defective work .
profile milling that fails to meet the surface tolerances in section numd will be considered defective .
payment for defective work will be made at num of the contract unit price cup for the fulllane width of the defective area .
num measurement and payment a profile milling milled material retained by contractor .
square yard b profile milling milled material retained by department delivered to stockpile .
square yard the cost of delivering milled material to the designated stockpiling location is incidental to this item of work .
c surface patching .
the department will separately measure and pay for the following items when indicated or required num .
class num excavation .
section num num .
patching .
section num num numa num num change no .
num section numasphalt concrete pavement nummonth warranty num .
descriptionthis work is construction of a plantmixed asphalt concrete pavement on a prepared surface with a num month warranty and includes the furnishing of a warranty bond .
acceptability of this work will be determined by construction endresult and the warranty performance criteria .
num .
materialprovide material which ensures that the asphalt concrete pavement meets the warranty performance criteria .
select the type and class of bituminous material type of aggregate and when necessary type of filler to be used in the constructed pavement .
for wearing courses use aggregate having the specified srl designation from a source listed in bulletin num .
an aggregate designation or blends equal to or better than that specified may be supplied .
blends are num by weight .
a composition of mixtures .
establish the jmfs using a volumetric mix design procedure with the superpave gyratory compactor sgc .
submit mix designs on the most current version of the trnuma form signed by a certified bituminous level num plant technician to the dmedmm at least num calendar days before its use in the work .
the submitted mix designs will be used for information only and will become part of the asbuilt project files .
submission of the mix designs will not relieve the contractor from responsibility for meeting the specified construction endresult or warranty performance criteria .
stone matrix asphalt sma wearing course mixes may be submitted for consideration .
for each mix design provide the following information date of submission project s.r .
section and county project contract no .
bituminous concrete producer name and location bituminous plant type aggregate producer supplier code material codeclass percent in mix bulk specific gravity and percent absorption asphalt cement producer supplier code material codeclass percent in mix and bulk specific gravity volumetric mix design method other jmf materials source material codeclass percent in mix bulk specific gravity and absorption if applicable jmf design and upper and lower tolerances for production control sgc gyrations at nini ndes and nmax combined aggregate bulk specific gravity gsb theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm or density laboratory specific gravity at ndes gmb or density voids in mineral aggregate vma percent by volume voids in total mixture vtm percent by volume voids filled with asphalt vfa percent by volume ignition furnace correction factors for asphalt binder and num m no .
num sieve moisture sensitivity data tensile strengths tensile strength ratio date performed or hamburg wheel tracking results combined aggregate consensus properties sand equivalency fine aggregate angularity coarse aggregate angularity flat elongated pieces gradation chart fhwa num power type with jmf plotted types and results of additional mixture testing if performed designers signature ensure that all component materials shown in the mix design are representative of the materials that will be used on the project .
if for any reason a change in material source or other adjustments are necessary during construction before using any new material notify the dmedmm in writing explaining the need for the change .
submit a copy of the revised jmf with the written notification .
numa numa num num change no .
num num .
qc plan .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and submit it at the start of the project .
do not start work until the qc plan and the jmf have been submitted .
the submitted qc plan will be used for information only and will become part of the asbuilt project files .
provide certified results of qc testing to the representative within num hours of material sampling .
the submitted test results will be used for information only and will become part of the asbuilt project files .
b warranty bond and liability insurance .
when awarded the contract in addition to the required bonds specified in section num furnish a warranty bond with sufficient surety or sureties in an amount equal to num of the total contract amount for all pavements to be constructed under the pavement warranty items .
have the bond specify that remediation work will be completed in a manner satisfactory to the secretary .
have the bond state that the state is to be saved harmless from any expense or damage incurred through the failure of the contractor to complete remediation work as specified or from any damages growing out of the carelessness of the contractor the contractors employees or subcontractors in performing remediation work .
have a corporate surety legally authorized to transact business in the state and satisfactory to the secretary execute the bond .
if the secretary decides the bond surety is unsatisfactory promptly furnish any additional required security to protect the states interests and the interests of all persons firms or corporations whowhich have furnished material provided equipment on rental or suppliedperformed labor services on or in connection with the performance of the remediation work for this contract .
the warranty bond is to be effective beginning on the date of physical work completion established by the representative for the whole project or any substantial project section as specified in section numa .
the warranty bond is to remain in effect for a period of num months from the effective date or until completion of all remediation work identified in the final annual performance surveys whichever is later .
if a substantial section of the project is completed in advance of the whole the contractor may request that a final inspection of that section be conducted .
if the department accepts the work on the section of the project in writing and the section is opened to normal traffic the warranty period for that section will start in advance of the date of physical work completion for the entire project .
the warranty bond however must remain in effect until all criteria established in section numcnum are satisfied and the warranty acceptance notification has been issued .
the amount of the warranty bond will be reduced proportionately if the warranty period for a portion of the work expires in advance of the warranty period for the remainder of the work .
maintain insurance to indemnify and save harmless the commonwealth the department and all of its officers and employees from all suits actions or claims of any character name and description brought for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property related to the performance of any work by the contractor these pavement items or to remedial actions taken throughout the warranty period whether the same is due to the use of defective material defective workmanship neglect in safeguarding the work or public interests or by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct of the contractor .
num .
constructionprovide an asphalt concrete pavement meeting the requirements specified herein and capable of meeting the warranty performance based criteria specified herein .
construct the pavement as a combination of two or more different asphalt concrete pavement courses to achieve the total depth indicated .
a tests for depth of binder and wearing courses .
within num hours after final compaction in the presence of the inspector drill one numinch diameter or larger core through all lifts and courses placed under this item of work to the top of the existing pavement or base for each num linear feet of pavement lane .
the inspector will determine core locations using ptm no .
num excluding any transitional areas indicated .
the inspector will measure the depth of each core according to ptm no .
num .
when any one core depth measurement indicates the pavement is deficient in depth by more than num inch which can not be satisfactorily corrected the affected pavement area will be considered defective work .
when core depth measurements indicate that the pavement is uniformly deficient in depth by more than num inch in any three consecutive core locations and the deficiency can not be satisfactorily corrected the affected pavement area will be considered defective work .
after the inspector completes depth measurements backfill compact and seal core holes with mixture used to construct the wearing course .
after depth measurement the cores may be used for qc testing .
immediately correct pavement that is deficient in depth starting at the point of the determined deficiency and proceed longitudinally and transversely until the depth within the limits of the entire repair area is within num inch of the required depth .
drill additional cores as needed both forward and back of the cores determined to have deficient numa numc num num change no .
num depth to determine the actual starting and ending point of the deficiency .
coring operations will not exclude pavement from the warranty performance criteria .
b information samples for the department .
the department reserves the right to direct the contractor to obtain loose mixture box samples andor pavement core samples at random locations selected by the inspector according to ptm no .
num for testing at the lts for informational purposes only .
if directed and in the presence of the inspector obtain nnum loose mixture box samples from directly behind the paver before the material is compacted .
immediately package loose mixture samples in individual cardboard boxes sized no larger than num cubic inches and identify each sample by number location lane direction and station date of placement mixture type and as information samples sample class if .
immediately deliver the packaged loose mixture box samples to the inspector .
if directed and in the presence of the inspector drill and obtain nnum numinch diameter pavement core samples for each num tons of material placed .
do not bend compress or distort samples during cutting handling transporting and storing .
if core samples are damaged immediately obtain replacement samples as directed by the inspector from within num inches of the original sample location .
obtain samples no later than num hours after placement .
identify the samples by number location lane direction and station date of placement mixture type and as information samples sample class if .
immediately package and deliver the samples to the inspector .
within num hours after coring backfill the hole with mixture of the same jmf or with mixture used for subsequent courses and compact and seal the mixture .
c warranty .
num .
performance criteria .
performance results will be determined by automated surveys .
these distresses will be identified measured and reported using the survey techniques rating procedures and extent estimation procedures in accordance with publication num .
surveys will be performed by the department or a designee .
manual surveys when necessary will be performed according to publication num .
performance results for flushing and potholes will be determined by manual surveys .
for each segment or partial segment performance criteria limits for distresses are indicated in table a .
a segment is defined as a division of the state route approximately onehalf mile in length with termini designated by the department typically beginning and ending at physical features .
the segment beginning points will be designated on the plans .
if the last performance survey year num determines that num of segment area has two or more distresses with low severity then remedial action is required by microsurfacing or other treatment approved by the department .
table a performance criteria distress limits performance criterion threshold level remedial action fatigue cracking all medium or greater severity remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than num feet beyond the distressed area .
cracking all low to medium severity crack seal as specified in section num .
transverse cracking miscellaneous cracking all high severity remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than num feet beyond the distressed area .
raveling weathering all medium or greater severity remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than num feet beyond the distressed area .
rutting num inch remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than num feet beyond the distressed area .
numc numc num num change no .
num flushing all remove and replace distressed layer full depth and full or half lane width longitudinal joint at center of lane for half lane width and a minimum of num inches beyond distressed pavement in all longitudinal directions .
potholes including slippage areas all remove and replace distressed layers full lane width to a depth necessary to correct observed distress but not to exceed warranted pavement and length not less than num feet beyond the distressed area .
longitudinal joint deterioration all medium severity crack seal as specified in section num .
edge deterioration shoulder joint all high severity remove and replace distressed layer one foot either side of the joint transversely and a minimum of num inches beyond distressed pavement in all longitudinal directions .
longitudinal joint deterioration all medium severity crack seal as specified in section num .
left edge joint lane joints all high severity remove and replace distressed layer one foot either side of the joint transversely and a minimum of num inches beyond distressed pavement in all longitudinal directions .
the threshold level as defined in publication num .
note should deviations beyond the threshold levels indicated in table a in combination total a remedial action area greater than num of the surface area of any segment of pavement as defined herein except that for this determination a medium severity crack referenced above will be considered to be a deviation affecting num inches on either side of the crack for the entire length of the crack remove and replace the entire segment .
should the distance between repair areas be less than num feet make one continuous repair .
all repairs must meet the surface tolerance as specified in section num l. num .
remediation work under the pavement warranty .
num.a departments responsibility .
to determine compliance with specified performance criteria the department will be responsible for conducting an annual performance analysis the basis of which will be the distress criteria established in table a .
the department will schedule and perform annual surveys and additional surveys if needed of the warranted pavement for flushing and potholes .
when needed rut depth measurements will be verified using a num foot straight edge across the lane width to determine the severity and extent .
surveys will be conducted annually throughout the warranty period .
the contractor will be notified at least num calendar days in advance of all scheduled manual surveys .
in addition the department will routinely schedule and perform traffic classification counts to confirm that equivalent single axle load esal estimates remain within the projected values included in the contract documents .
the department reserves the right to schedule and perform additional or more frequent performance surveys if at any time during the warranty period evidence exists that performance criteria are not being met .
the department will provide the contractor with access to the results of all performance surveys and traffic counts .
performance survey results will be reported for each individual state route segment as established under the departments location reference system lrs or partial segment within the limits of the warranty project .
within num calendar days after completion the department will notify the contractor in writing of the results of performance surveys identifying the segment location and the performance criterion and indicating whether specified distress limits have been met or exceeded .
after performance surveys are completed if the department determines remedial action is necessary the contractor will be notified within num calendar days from the date of that determination that remediation work is required .
numc numc num num change no .
num during the warranty period the department will not perform routine pavement maintenance such as crack sealing and base repairs on the warranted pavement .
if the department determines emergency repair work is necessary the contractor will be notified immediately of the emergency repair work that is required .
the contractor will be given num hours to review the emergency repair work that is needed and notify the department if they will perform the required repairs .
when the contractor notifies the department agreeing to make the required emergency repairs they must begin repair work within num hours of the departments initial notification .
if the contractor does not notify the department within num hours or begin the repair work within num hours of the departments initial notification the department reserves the right to make emergency repairs to the warranted pavement during the warranty period .
if the pavement condition is determined to be potentially harmful or unsafe the department reserves the right to make immediate emergency repairs to the warranted pavement during the warranty period .
the department will then notify the contractor of the location of all emergency repairs performed .
the costs expended by the department for any emergency repair work needed to correct deficiencies covered under the terms of this warranty specification will be the responsibility of the contractor .
num.b contractors responsibility .
the contractors obligation to perform required remediation work shall survive acceptance of the work and final settlement of the contract .
the contractor may witness all manual performance surveys .
where survey results for a given segment indicate that performance criteria distress limits for one or more distress types have been exceeded perform the remediation work described in table a .
if proposing to utilize a method of testing measurement or remedial action other than that prescribed submit a plan that includes a detailed description of the proposed testing measurement or remedial action to the representative for review and approval .
the department will review and approve or disapprove the submitted testing measurement or remedial action plan within num calendar days of receipt of the submission .
complete remediation work required as part of the pavement warranty at the locations indicated within num calendar days after receipt of the departments written notification that remediation work is required .
perform remediation work to meet the material and performance criteria requirements contained herein .
notify the district executive of the tentative start date for remediation work and submit a schedule for remedial repairs within num calendar days of that notification .
if remediation work does not begin by the start of the numst calendar day after the date of the departments written notification the contractor will be responsible to pay an amount equivalent to the construction engineering liquidated damages as specified in section num .
this cost will accrue until the required remedial work ends .
in addition to the continuing cost equivalent to the construction engineering liquidated damages costs equivalent to road users liquidated damages as specified in section num will be assessed no sooner than the numst calendar day after the date of the departments written notification for each calendar day that the roadway is not open to unrestricted traffic .
if inclement weather prohibits quality repairs the contractor will be responsible for placing and maintaining temporary repairs until permanent remediation work can be properly completed .
charges equivalent to road users liquidated damages will not be assessed following temporary repair work provided the temporary repairs are properly maintained .
permanent repairs are to be constructed as soon as weather permits .
the department will notify the contractor in writing when weather conditions permit permanent repairs .
charges equivalent to construction engineering liquidated damages and road users liquidated damages will resume beginning num calendar days beyond this notification until permanent repairs are completed .
in the final year of the warranty period segments with distresses that can not be repaired due to inclement weather will have the warranty period extended for these segments only until permanent repairs are satisfactorily completed .
the warranty bond can be reduced proportionately to cover only the distressed segments .
all charges equivalent to liquidated damages as referenced herein will be determined from original contract documents .
furnish all materials equipment and labor needed to perform remediation work required as part of the pavement warranty including traffic control at no cost to the department .
when the remedial action specified in table a calls for removal and replacement use only plantmixed asphalt concrete unless other materials are accepted in writing by the district executive .
under adverse weather conditions temporary repair methods and materials may be used in remediation work provided traffic safety and normal traffic patterns are maintained .
remove temporary repairs and perform permanent remediation work as soon as weather conditions permit .
the departments notice to perform required remediation work or the departments approval of the contractors written proposal to perform elective or preventative maintenance work shall serve as a rightofentry that authorizes the work to be done subject to time and location limitations contained in that notification or those agreed to by the contractor and the department .
perform remediation work including replacements to meet the specified performance criteria indicated in table a .
restore according to department specifications all features removed andor damaged during remediation work .
numc numc num num change no .
num except for allowable crack sealing as indicated in table a repair distress areas to the limits specified with square or rectangular patches using materials meeting the requirements of this specification and constructed to meet the construction endresult and performance criteria of this specification .
provide and maintain traffic control for operations involved in remediation work performed as part of the pavement warranty .
use the traffic control plan tcp provided in the original contract for remediation work or submit an alternate tcp to the district executive for approval .
submit alternate tcps at least num calendar days before the start of remediation work .
alternate tcps are to comply with the provisions of publications num and num the mutcd and the contract special provisions .
if the departments written notification indicates that remedial action is required as part of the pavement warranty and the departments performance survey results are disputed notify the department in writing within num calendar days from the date of the departments written notification .
base disputes on appraisals of the performance survey results supplied by the department .
the contractor may base a dispute on a third party appraisal of the performance results .
if the department and contractor can not resolve a dispute over remediation work within num calendar days from the date of the contractors written notification the dispute will be submitted to the conflict resolution team identified in section numcnum .
remove material placed by the department during emergency repair work within warranted pavement areas and perform required remediation work if it is determined that the emergency repair was required due to faulty workmanship or construction .
the contractor may monitor or test warranted pavement courses using nondestructive methods at any time during the warranty period .
notify the district executive at least num calendar days in advance of any nondestructive testing .
provide all nondestructive test results to the department for information .
obtain written authorization from the department before conducting nondestructive testing .
do not perform any remediation work without prior written notification from the department .
submit a written proposal to the district executive setting forth the reasons for performing elective or preventative remediation work not directed by the department .
the department will review and approve or disapprove elective or preventative remediation work initiated by the contractor within num calendar days from receipt of the written proposal .
num .
conflict resolution team .
the conflict resolution team team will consist of two representatives selected by the contractor two representatives selected by the department district and bureau of project delivery and a fifth person mutually agreed upon by both the department and the contractor .
any costs incurred for the fifth team member will be shared equally by the department and the contractor .
the team members who will be identified at the preconstruction meeting must be knowledgeable in the terms and conditions of the warranty specification and the methods used in the measurement and calculation of pavement distress .
each team member will have an equal vote and the decision of the majority will be final .
if a change in the team is required the same selection procedure will be used as stated above .
the team will resolve disputes concerning defective work warranted pavement performance survey results required remediation work proposed alternate repair methods and material selection and disputes over probable causes .
the team will meet and resolve disputes within num calendar days from the date of submission .
num .
probable cause .
the department will furnish the contractor with the results of performance surveys and traffic counts noting those distresses considered to be caused by factors beyond the control of the contractor .
the contractor will not be held responsible for meeting specified performance criteria or performing remediation work within these distress areas which will be calculated by multiplying the maximum transverse width of the distress by the maximum longitudinal length .
the area of nonresponsibility will be defined as a square or rectangular area centered over and equal to num of the distress area but extending no more than num feet on either side of the distress area .
the department may repair distresses determined to be caused by factors beyond the control of the contractor using routine repair techniques .
factors beyond the control of the contractor include the following num.a base condition .
if performance surveys detect fatigue cracking or other distresses which might indicate an unacceptable base condition a series of numinch diameter cores will be drilled within the distress area as necessary at locations directed by the department .
the inspector will measure the depth of each core .
the cores will be tested according to ptm no .
num and aashto tnum to determine the percent of unfilled voids ptm no .
num or other approved test methods to determine the percent bitumen and ptm no .
num to determine gradation .
have a representative witness the testing .
test results will be provided to the dmedmm .
if the warranted pavement meets numc numc num num change no .
num the specified minimum thickness the density is num of theoretical maximum density and test results for percent bitumen and gradation are within the tolerances indicated in the contractors mix designs or if field evaluation clearly indicates base failure beyond the contractors control the contractor will not be held responsible for repair of the distress and will be reimbursed by the department the total cost of the testing .
should these criteria not be achieved further investigation may be necessary to determine the cause of the distress .
num.b traffic loadings .
if during the warranty period the departments traffic counts indicate that estimated cumulative esals have exceeded num of the estimated numyear design life esals or if the esals increase enough to warrant a change in the mix design in the number of gyrations the contractor will not be held responsible for repair of rutting or base condition distresses for the remainder of the warranty period .
num.c routine maintenance by the department .
during the warranty period the department will perform routine maintenance such as snow removal application of antiskid material andor deicing chemicals repairs to safety appurtenances application and maintenance of pavement markings mowing and sign maintenance .
routine pavement maintenance activities such as crack sealing pothole patching or milling will not be performed by the department during the warranty period .
num.d destructive procedures by the department .
the contractor will not be held responsible for repair of distresses caused by coring milling or other destructive procedures performed by the department .
num.e uncontrolled forces of nature .
the contractor will not be held responsible for repair of distresses caused by floods earthquakes tornadoes brush or forest fires landslides sinkholes or other natural disasters .
num.f traffic accidents .
the contractor will not be held responsible for repair of distresses caused by traffic accidentrelated fuel or chemical spills vehicle fires andor gouging or goring of the pavement surface unless the contractor or its representative is the cause of the distress .
num .
final warranty inspection .
at the end of the warranty period and when any remediation work if required is substantially complete at least num make arrangements for a mutual final warranty inspection .
at the time of final warranty inspection the representative along with the contractor will establish the following the list of all physical work items requiring completion andor correction and a list of all documents requiring submission completion andor correction .
as established during the final warranty inspection perform work as necessary for required correction or completion of all physical work items and complete correct and submit all outstanding documents .
num .
release from warranty .
to be released from warranty responsibility satisfy all of the following meet minimum requirements for each of the specified performance criteria through the end of the warranty period complete all required remediation work identified during the warranty period at no additional cost to and to the satisfaction of the department and submit all required warranty documents .
when the warranty period has expired all physical remediation work has been satisfactorily completed and all required warranty release criteria have been met the representative will establish the date of physical warranty work completion the date on which the contractor will be relieved of responsibility for further physical remediation work and maintenance on the project or any substantial project section .
upon receipt and verification the representative will establish the date that all required warranty documents are satisfactorily furnished .
when all physical remediation work has been satisfactorily completed and all contractually required warranty documents have been properly furnished the date of warranty project acceptance will be established .
if the warranty period for a substantial project section expires in advance of the whole a final warranty inspection will be made of that section as specified for the entire project and the contractor notified in writing that the warranty terms for the specific section of the project have been satisfied .
no further remediation work will be required on the numc numb num num change no .
num section as specified in section numb .
the contractor will then be allowed to reduce their warranty bond proportionately .
num .
warranty acceptance notification .
upon completion of the requirements of section numcnum a warranty acceptance notification will be issued indicating that the project warranty has been satisfactorily completed and certifying that the project is accepted as of that date .
num .
warranty default and termination of contract .
as specified in section num and as follows failure of the contractor to perform remediation work within the time specified .
num .
measurement and payment a asphalt concrete pavement nummonth warranty .
square yard payment will be made as specified in section num as work progresses based on the quantity of each separate pavement course placed meeting specified construction criteria .
the inspector will measure the quantity of each pavement course placed on a daily basis and compute the payable quantity by multiplying the measured area by a factor equal to the depth of the pavement course being placed divided by the total indicated pavement depth .
the placement depth will be determined as indicated in section numa .
no additional payment will be made for pavement depths in excess of the total indicated depth .
b asphalt concrete pavement nummonth warranty warranty bond and liability insurance .
lump sum num numa num num change no .
num section numrigid pavements section numreinforced or plain cement concrete pavements num descriptionthis work is construction of normal strength or high earlystrength hes cement concrete pavement plain or reinforced on a prepared surface as indicated .
num material class aa cement concretesection num hes cement concretesection num reinforcementsections num and num expansion joint fillersection num longitudinal joint materialsection num load transfer unitssections numa and b joint sealing materialsection numa b or d graphite lubricantsection num concrete curing materialsections num numa type num and numb concrete admixturessection num mortarsection numb tape bond breakeran acceptable selfadhesive tape the width of the sealant reservoir .
epoxy bonding compound section num joint backing materialsection num fiberglass dowel sleevean approved type as listed in bulletin num .
premixed nonshrink grout an approved type as listed in bulletin num .
num construction a general .
construct pavements in one or two traffic lane widths as shown on standard drawings rc numm numm numm numm numm numm and numm unless otherwise directed .
use onelane construction if twolane construction interferes with traffic .
num .
field operation qc plan .
prepare a paving operation qc plan as specified in section numdnum.a for field control and evaluation of concrete paving operations for the representatives review .
do not start paving until after the representative reviews the qc plan .
numb numf num num change no .
num b weather restrictions .
num .
cold weather .
unless otherwise permitted in writing discontinue concreting operations when the descending air temperature away from artificial heat falls to numf .
do not resume operations until the air temperature away from artificial heat rises above numf .
do not let water with a temperature above numf to come in direct contact with the cement until the cement has been mixed with the aggregates .
place concrete when the concrete temperature is between numf and numf .
do not use materials containing frost lumps or crusts of hardened materials .
do not place concrete on frozen base subbase or subgrade .
num .
hot weather .
when the air temperature in the immediate vicinity of concrete operations rises to numf take thermometer readings of the plastic concrete at numhour intervals and at the conclusion of the mixing cycles .
discontinue concrete operations if the plastic concrete temperature exceeds numf after mixing .
when the plastic concrete temperature rises to numf cool the mixing water or aggregates to maintain a plastic concrete temperature within numf to numf at the time of placing .
c concrete mixture .
do not use mixtures from volumetric mixing plants or mobile mixers unless approved by the district executive in writing .
for slipform paving the contractor may use plant mixed cement concrete volumetric mixing plants or mobile mixers as specified in section numa .
d forms .
use steel forms for concrete pavement except as specified herein .
use forms not less than num feet in length with form depth and base width equal to pavement depth .
do not exceed num inch in num feet from the true plane of the face or top .
the contractor may use forms with a base of not less than num inches in width and meeting all other requirements for narrow strips of widening if approved by the district executive in writing .
use forms of an approved section without horizontal joints and with flange bracing extending outward on the base not less than twothirds of the form height .
use forms that do not deflect or deform more than num inch when a center load of num pounds is applied within a numfoot span .
use form sections equipped with three stake pockets each of which have positive nondetachable wedges and positive interlocking devices which form a neat tight joint .
use a sufficient quantity of steel pins to securely hold the forms in place and provide the necessary rigidity .
for curves with a radius of less than num feet the contractor may use wood forms .
use two numinch nominal seasoned surfaced planks properly joined together .
brace all wood forms with steel pins .
do not exceed num inch spacing between pins .
clean and oil forms before each concrete placement .
cut and firm the subbase under the forms true to grade and set forms accurately to line and grade for their entire length and width .
forms may be shimmed provided that the material used to shim the forms creates continuous contact between the form and the base course surface .
the forms and shimming material must result in a full vertical face of concrete when removed .
if concrete extrudes outside the shims or forms remove this extruded concrete as directed before placing the adjacent concrete .
e preparation and protection of base course .
when placing concrete on the completed base course do not disturb the form line after final testing .
remove accumulation of material adjacent to forms to full depth of forms in conjunction with final testing .
if the prepared area is disturbed by any operations or by traffic check and correct before placing concrete .
thoroughly sprinkle water on the base course before paving if necessary to ensure a moist base course and to cool the surface temperature of treated permeable base courses below numf .
discontinue paving operations if the surface temperature of treated permeable base courses can not be maintained below numf .
do not create water puddles or mud .
sprinkle the base course with as much water as it readily absorbs well in advance of paving .
if nondestructive depth testing is being utilized as specified in section numsnum place targets at locations determined by the inspector as specified in section numsnum and in accordance with ptm no .
num .
the measuring device and targets must be verified daily in accordance with ptm no .
num in the presence of the inspector before the installation of the targets .
the inspector will verify the targets have been placed at the proper locations before paving operations .
remove and replace improperly located targets and repair any damage to the base course before paving operations at no expense to the department .
f placement and initial strikeoff of concrete .
for pavement construction around manholes inlets valve boxes and similar appurtenances place premolded expansion joint filler not less than num inch in total thickness for the full depth of the pavement around the outer sides of structures within the paved areas .
where pavements adjoin other rigid structures bridges or culverts place premolded expansionjoint filler not less than numinch thick adjacent to the structures .
before placing pavement adjacent to railway tracks fill the spaces along the web and below the head numf numg num num change no .
num and top flange of the rail with mortar .
if construction crosses railway tracks place a minimum numinch thick expansion joint filler against the mortarfilled rails .
if constructing along tracks place a minimum numinch thick expansion joint filler along each mortarfilled rail .
do not use concrete that has developed an initial set .
if implanting dowel bars by mechanical means the contractor may deposit the concrete directly on the subgrade or prepared surface in front of the paver .
spread concrete as close as possible to joint assemblies to ensure proper concrete consolidation without disturbing the joint .
do not damage the prepared surface while transporting or depositing concrete ahead of the paver .
if the prepared surface is an asphaltic leveling course on rubblized concrete treated base course of cement or asphalt or an aggregate subbase travel on the prepared surface only in the immediate area of the paving operation for the purpose of depositing concrete ahead of the paver .
do not use the prepared surface for hauling .
satisfactorily repair or replace any damaged areas at no additional cost to the department .
use vibrators capable of transmitting vibration to concrete with a frequency of not less than num impulses per second .
operate the vibrator around but not in contact with transverse or longitudinal joint assemblies .
do not cause segregation when vibrating .
do not operate manual vibrators in one place more than num seconds .
use vibrators only to consolidate concrete after it has been properly placed .
do not use vibrators to move or spread concrete .
remove and discard segregated concrete as directed .
maintain sufficient reserve vibratory equipment to prevent shutdown due to failure of equipment .
g slipform paving method .
num .
equipment .
use a fully energized selfpropelled slipform paving machine equipped with side forms to support concrete laterally to prevent edge slumping .
use a paver that vibrates or tamps concrete for the full width and depth of the layer being placed .
num .
line and grade .
unless otherwise specifically shown on the construction drawings construct pavement so the longitudinal joints do not traverse a driving lane or conflict with the final pavement markings .
construct longitudinal joints parallel to and within num inches of final pavement markings unless otherwise detailed on the construction drawings .
num .
placing concrete .
place the concrete and spread in one or more layers provided the concrete is fully consolidated the reinforcement is satisfactorily embedded and a satisfactory finished surface is obtained .
operate the slipform paver in a continuous forward movement .
coordinate operations of mixing delivering placing and spreading concrete to provide uniform progress with stopping and starting of the paver held to a minimum .
if the pavers forward movement is stopped immediately disengage vibrating and tamping elements .
num .
joints .
when load transfer units are used stake in place in advance of paving operations at the designated locations .
implanting of dowel bars by mechanical means is permitted .
accurately mark the dowelbar locations to ensure sawing the transverse joints over the center of dowels .
saw cure and protect transverse and longitudinal contraction joints as specified in sections numi and j .
num .
edge slumping .
num.a during paving operations .
test the pavement surface for edge slumping with a numfoot straightedge before the concrete becomes nonplastic .
strive to avoid edge slump .
edge slump not exceeding the following will be acceptable num inch between adjacent lanes and lanes and ramps .
num inch between lanes and shoulders and ramps and shoulders .
measure edge slump for the numinch width contiguous to the pavement edge .
suspend paving operations after num feet if edge slumping can not be prevented or controlled within the above stated acceptable limits .
the pavement within this numfoot section will be evaluated as specified in section numgnum.b .
num.b after the concrete hardens .
test the pavement surface with a numfoot straightedge to ensure the requirements of section numgnum.a have been met .
numg numi num num change no .
num if testing confirms edge slumping exists in the hardened concrete submit methods for correction to the district executive for review .
make corrections according to the reviewed methods to eliminate the edge slumping .
remove and replace pavement determined defective as specified in section numu at no additional cost to the department .
h handling and placing reinforcement .
use reinforcement free of rust dirt oil grease or other foreign substances which impair bond of steel with concrete .
a light powdery coating of rust formed during project storage does not require cleaning .
remove loose scaly or thick rust by suitable methods .
the representative will reject reinforcement with rust that has caused detectable reduction in crosssectional area .
if placing reinforced concrete pavement in two layers within fixed forms strike off the entire bottom layer and lay the reinforcement full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
place reinforcement directly upon the concrete and place strikeoff and screed the top layer of concrete .
remove and replace bottom layer portions of concrete placed more than num hour without being covered with the top layer of freshly mixed concrete .
if placing reinforced concrete pavement in one layer position mesh reinforcement on acceptable supports as specified in section numdnum in advance of concrete placement .
if a mechanical installer is used avoid segregation of concrete or displacement of reinforcement .
i transverse joints .
in new multilane pavements place transverse joints perpendicular to centerline to form a continuous joint across the entire pavement width and locate dowels as shown on standard drawing rc numm except where paving operations must cease temporarily due to unavoidable conditions .
before paving apply graphite bondbreaker lubricant to onehalf of the length of type b coated dowel bars unless a bondbreaker lubricant has been applied in the shop .
stir the lubricant well and apply to the free end of dowels by daubing mopping or with a gloved hand to produce a thorough coating approximately num inch thick .
do not use brushes for lubricant application .
apply the lubricant as specified at least num hour before placing the concrete around the dowel assembly .
type a coated dowel bars do not need lubricant .
where existing concrete pavements are widened align transverse construction or contraction joints if possible with existing construction or contraction joints or cracks otherwise do not place within num feet of a joint .
when constructing pavement one lane at a time or placing concrete shoulders after pavement construction fill the ends of transverse joints with joint backing material or cover with duct tape to prevent intrusion of cement mortar into the joint .
in these cases when saw cutting transverse joints in the newly constructed lane or shoulders saw cut the existing transverse joint in the previously placed lane to ensure the removal of any mortar that might have intruded into the joint .
num .
construction joints .
if more than a numminute interruption occurs in concreting operations construct a transverse joint using a bulkhead .
place dowels in bulkheads by drilling or inserting into fiberglass dowel sleeves .
do not construct a transverse joint within num feet of another transverse joint .
if not enough concrete has been placed or mixed at the time of interruption to form a slab at least num feet long remove concrete to the preceding joint and dispose of excess mix .
num .
contraction joints .
accurately mark using tacks or other approved methods the location for the center of the sawed transverse contraction joints .
the sawed transverse joint must be located directly num inch over the centerline of the dowel basket assemblies or the centerline of the mechanically implanted dowels .
saw joints with equipment having guides a blade guard watercooling system and cutdepth control .
provide adequate and extra equipment and parts at the site before placing concrete and during sawing operations .
other than white membrane curing compound remove curing materials from pavement at the location where a joint is to be cut .
only remove sufficient covering to provide space necessary for sawing joints .
immediately after sawing the initial saw cut thoroughly flush the joint as necessary to remove slurry .
place oversized width plus num backer rod in the top of the sawed joint to maintain cure .
monitor the movement of the joint throughout the cure period and up to placement of permanent seal .
if at any time the joint opens remove and replace backer rod with appropriate oversized backer rod .
the maximum time period permitted for curing covers to be removed for sawing is num hour .
if white membrane curing compound is used reapply curing compound as specified in section numlnum.c .
the representative will not allow displacing coarse aggregate from the joint location by use of a vibrating tbar or by use of a filler strip at the joint .
in singlelane construction mark the joints that have cracked and opened on the first lane placed .
align the location of the first joints sawed in the second lane with the marked joints on the first lane .
in lanes adjacent to previously constructed lanes saw joints before uncontrolled cracking occurs .
make the full required depth cut from numi numi num num change no .
num edge to edge of the pavement .
in formed paving do this by loosening or removing the side forms or by other acceptable methods .
saw all initial saw cuts to prevent random cracking without damaging the pavement surface .
if damage to the pavement surface occurs repair in an approved method at no additional cost to the department .
slight raveling along the joint edge is permissible .
if necessary conduct sawing operations continuously both day and night regardless of weather conditions .
if a crack or spall occurs at any location and any time before final inspection and resolution of all issues regarding the condition of the pavement repair the pavement in accordance with table a at no additional cost to the department .
field coat the dowels with the graphite lubricant as specified in section numi where necessary as determined by the representative .
join original pavement to replacement pavement and test as specified in section num if ride quality and incentive are not applicable test as specified in section numo .
for joints requiring a second stage of sawing saw the sealant reservoir num hours or more after placing the concrete .
clean joints with pressurized water or water and air pressure immediately after sawing .
patch voids or spalls in excess of the specified width as specified in section num .
continue curing and protect joint until sealed .
num .
expansion joints .
place transverse expansion joints where indicated .
if existing concrete pavements are widened align transverse expansion joints if possible with existing expansion joints .
place transverse expansion joints without load transfer units in the plain cement concrete pavement in paved divisor areas .
conform to the dimensions and locations in adjacent concrete curb .
place expansion joint filler as indicated or as directed .
table a repair procedures for deficiency in new concrete pavement item deficiency location description contractor repair options num partial depth crack anywhere num inches wide do nothing num inches wide and dnum deep epoxy inject crack as specified in section num num inches wide and dnum deep repair as specified in section num partial panel full depth patcha b c num spall mainline or shoulder panel minimal spalling d num inches wide and dnum deep do nothing significant spallinge num inches wide measured perpendicular to joint and dnum deep or num inches wide not at a joint and dnum deep spall repair as specified in section num repair must perform satisfactorily for num year or replace with partial panel full depth patch as specified in section numa b c significant spallinge num inches wide measured perpendicular to joint and dnum deep or num inches wide not at a joint and dnum deep repair as specified in section num partial panel full depth patcha b c num single full depth crack any orientation shoulder nonworking crack with minimal spallingd epoxy inject crack as specified in section num working crack with minimal spallingd seal crack as specified in section num crack with significant spallinge repair as specified in section num partial panel full depth patcha b c numi numj num num change no .
num or full panel replacementc mainline or shoulder panel is affected by irregular geometry construction joints do not line up crack with minimal spallingd seal crack as specified in section num mainline entire length of crack num inches from longitudinal joint and crack is parallel to longitudinal joint num inch seal crack as specified in section num mainline crack is in center one third of dowelled panel .
crack num inch wide and spalling num inch from edge of crack .
dowel retrofit as specified in section num three dowels per wheel path panels num inches thick four dowels per wheel path panels num inches thick or partial panel full depth patcha b c repaired as specified in section num or full panel replacementc mainline all other conditions partial panel full depth patcha b c or full panel replacementc num multiple cracks dnum deep any orientation mainline or shoulder panel has more than num crack dnum deep partial panel full depth patcha b c or full panel replacementc notes a b c d e d minimum patch length is num foot for plain cement concrete pcc or num foot for reinforced concrete pavement rcp .
minimum amount of panel left in place is num foot .
all patches partial panel and full panel replacements must be full width and depth .
minimal spalling is defined as num inches total width and num inches combined length along crack .
significant spalling is defined as num inches total width or num inches combined length along crack .
design pavement depth .
payment for new pavement where the crack has been removed is at the contract unit price cup with no additional compensation for the repair .
payment for new pavement where the crack has not been removed but sealed as specified in section num is at five percent cup for the slab with no additional compensation for the repair .
payment for slabs with partial depth crack or spall is at the cup with no additional compensation for the repair crack depth is to be determined by coring at no cost to the department j longitudinal joints .
place tie bars as indicated or directed .
the representative will select num tie bars from the first days concrete placement according to ptm no .
num .
test each selected tie bar for pullout resistance after the numj numk num num change no .
num concrete has attained a compressive strength of num pounds per square inch or epoxy anchoring material has met manufacturers requirements .
use a centerpull hydraulic jack with a load measuring gage and bearing ring capable of testing each tie bar to num pounds or to a numinch slippage .
do not use jack and gage having a calibration date older than num months .
record the gage reading at point of slippage or num pounds whichever occurs first .
determine the average of pullout test results .
divide pullout test average by the tie bar spacing to determine pullout resistance of tie bars in pounds per cubic foot for compliance with table b .
if the pounds per cubic foot is not in compliance with table b replace failed tie bars or install additional tie bars until compliance with table b is attained at no additional cost to the department .
install additional tie bars from the center of slab out in an approved pattern .
do not install additional tie bars within num inches of a transverse joint .
do not construct adjacent lanes until the tie bars comply with table b .
perform additional testing as directed .
saw tied longitudinal contraction joints to prevent random cracking as specified in section numinum .
clean joints with pressurized water or water and air pressure immediately after sawing .
continue curing and protect the joint until it is sealed as specified in section numn .
table b pullout resistance of tie bars tied width of pavement distance from joint being constructed to nearest free edge minimum average pullout resistance of tie bars lbft of joint num feet or less num over num feet to num feet num over num feet num if a longitudinal crack occurs within a lane remove and replace slabs containing the crack at no additional cost to the department .
if damage to the pavement surface occurs repair in an approved method at no additional cost to the department .
join original and replacement pavements .
field coat dowels with graphite lubricant as specified in section numi where necessary .
k final strikeoff consolidation and finishing .
complete these operations during hours of natural light unless using an acceptable lighting system .
num .
strikeoff and consolidation .
num.a machine method .
immediately after placing strike off and screed the concrete with a finishing machine as necessary to properly consolidate the concrete and to leave a uniform textured surface .
keep the top of forms free from accumulation of concrete or of foreign material .
maintain true machine travel on the forms without lift wobble or other variations that affect accurate finishing .
use equipment that does not groove the concrete pavement edges for a width greater than can be eliminated by edging tools .
use a rubbertired wheel to support the spreader and a transverse finishing machine on the adjoining concrete pavement surface keeping the wheel approximately num inches from the pavement edge .
maintain a uniform roll of concrete ahead of the finishing machine front screed for its entire length .
overlap the previously screeded concrete on the last pass .
place and vibrate concrete adjacent to joints and other areas as specified in section numf then bring the finishing machine forward .
operate the machine carefully to avoid damage misalignment of joints or concrete segregation .
do not add water to the concrete surface to assist in finishing .
num.b manual method .
unless otherwise directed do not use manual strikeoff methods except to strike off concrete already deposited on the subbase if a breakdown of mechanical equipment occurs or on small turnout areas and patches up to num feet in length .
if finishing manually use screeds contoured to the pavement cross section .
provide screeds sufficiently rigid to retain their shape and at least num feet longer than the maximum slab width to be struck off .
operate the equipment in a manner to obtain consolidation and a uniform textured surface free of porous areas .
consolidate as specified in section numf .
numk numk num num change no .
num num .
floating .
after the concrete has been struck off and consolidated smooth and fill in opentextured pavement areas with a float as necessary .
do not add water to the surface .
mechanical floats or long handled floats may be used .
num .
straightedge testing and surface correction .
while concrete is still plastic test the surface using a num foot straightedge swung from handles num feet longer than onehalf the slab width as required .
hold the straightedge in contact with the surface in successive positions .
advance in successive stages of not more than num feet a stage .
immediately correct low areas then strike off consolidate and refinish .
cut down high areas and refinish .
make sure the surface across joints meets requirements for smoothness as specified in section numo .
continue straightedge testing and surface corrections until the entire surface is free from observable departures from the straightedge and until the slab conforms to the required grade and crosssection .
num .
final finish .
after straightedge testing and surface corrections have been completed and before concrete becomes nonplastic texture the surface transversely for the full pavement width .
produce a textured finish with grooves that have the following characteristics rectangular in shape from num inch to num inch in width and from num inch to num inch in depth .
for a numfoot rake use centertocenter tine spacing as follows table c centertocenter tine spacing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in when using this chart begin in the upper left corner and read across the entire row then start again on the left side in the next row .
produce the texture in one pass without overlapping the previous pass to provide a uniform finish .
keep the texturing device free of hardened concrete particles .
num.a longitudinal texture .
when indicated or when requested in writing and approved by the district executive construct the final finish in lieu of the random transverse texture specified above as follows after straightedge testing and surface corrections have been completed and before concrete becomes non plastic provide initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device to produce striations parallel with centerline .
perform final texturing with a spring steel tine device to produce grooves parallel with centerline .
operate the spring steel tine device within num inches but not closer than num inches of pavement edges .
produce a textured finish with grooves that have the following characteristics parallel with centerline rectangular in shape num inch num inch in width num inch to num inch in depth and num inch nominal centertocenter tine spacing .
install burlap drags brooms and tine devices on selfpropelled equipment having external alignment control .
maintain the area of burlap in contact with the pavement surface constant at all times during texturing .
provide positive elevation control for broom and tine devices .
maintain down pressure on pavement surface at all times during texturing to achieve uniform texturing without measurable variations in pavement profile .
operate selfpropelled texturing machines to maintain constant travel speed when texturing .
for small or irregular areas or during equipment breakdown hand methods may be approved by the representative .
if unsatisfactory results are obtained stop the placement of concrete until the equipment deficiency or malfunction is corrected .
when diamond grinding surface corrections are made in the hardened concrete for pavement smoothness no additional texturing is required .
numl numl num num change no .
num l curing concrete .
cure the entire surface immediately after finishing operations have been completed .
do not mar the concrete surface .
after removing forms and correcting honeycombed areas cure the sides with the same method as the surface .
when using covers secure over the entire surface and sides .
the representative will suspend concrete operations immediately if sufficient curing is not provided .
cure by the same method throughout the work unless directed to change by the inspector .
have material available for emergency curing .
if normal curing is delayed apply an intermediate monomolecular film curing agent to all cement concrete patches before normal curing .
apply the monomolecular film in a lightfog application using a pressure spray tank with an adjustable nozzle .
use a watertocuringagent ratio and rate of application both according to the manufacturers recommendations .
agitate the solution before each application .
apply the curing agent in a continuous film immediately after finishing and texturing operations are completed on any area .
do not provide any additional finishing after application of the monomolecular film .
apply additional applications as required if surface drying is taking place and curing covers have not been placed .
after application of the monomolecular film provide normal curing as specified .
num .
normal curing .
apply curing materials and maintain them as specified below for a period of num hours for normal strength concrete or num hours for hes concrete .
the contractor may use methods other than those described below to protect and cure joints if the procedure and materials are acceptable .
the representative may require a change in method if unsatisfactory results are obtained .
num.a white polyethylene curing .
use sheeting wide enough to cover the pavement surface and sides .
provide lengths consistent with pavement joint spacing .
overlap sheets a minimum of num inches and secure sides and seams to form a tight seal .
after form removal fold sheeting down over the sides for the full pavement depth then secure with suitable material .
num.b white polyethylene burlapbacked curing .
use sheeting wide enough to cover the pavement surface and sides .
provide lengths consistent with pavement joint spacing .
overlap sheets a minimum of num inches then secure sides and seams to form a tight seal .
saturate the burlap side with water then place and secure with the burlap side down .
after form removal fold sheeting down over the sides for the full pavement depth then secure with suitable material .
num.c white membrane forming curing compound .
the representative will allow this method of curing if the air temperature is above numf at the time of application and the air temperature is forecasted to remain above numf a period of num hours after application .
following the final finishing immediately after free water has left the pavement surface and while the surface is still damp seal exposed concrete areas with an application of curing compound .
apply at a rate of num gallon per num square feet num of surface area or as directed .
using a selfpropelled mechanical spreader apply in a fine mist without marring the concrete surface .
use atomizing type spraying equipment equipped with a tank agitator providing continual compound agitation during application .
provide proper calibration to allow accurate control of the amount of material being placed .
use a hood to protect the spray device against the wind and control so the spray overlaps transversely num to produce two coverages of a continuous uniform membrane .
do not drip curing compound on the pavement .
if rain falls on newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if film is damaged in any way before the pavement is cured apply a new coat immediately in an amount equal to the original specified application .
after form removal apply a uniform coat to the sides at the rate specified for the surface .
manual spraying equipment may be used for spraying the sides and for any small or irregular areas not reached by surface spraying equipment .
the contractor may cure joints and protect them by use of tape a strip of white polyethylene or white polyethylene backed with burlap .
during the curing period to prevent moisture loss from concrete in and adjacent to joints use strips num inches to num inches wide securely held in place on the pavement surface by an acceptable method or place saturated rope strands in the joints .
just before the curing compound application or reapplication carefully place rope without damaging or distorting the joints .
keep workmen materials and equipment off the membrane film during curing unless adequate precautions are taken to protect the film .
numl numn num num change no .
num num.d burlap curing .
place burlap in doublethickness by overlapping each strip onehalf its width on the pavement surface .
keep this covering saturated with water for the full curing period .
after sides are exposed fold burlap down over the sides and secure with suitable material .
num.e white polypropylene fiberbacked curing .
use sheeting wide enough to cover the pavement surface and sides .
provide lengths consistent with pavement joint spacing .
overlap sheets a minimum of num inches then secure sides and seams to form a tight seal .
saturate the burlap side with water then place and secure with the burlap side down .
after form removal fold sheeting down over the sides for the full pavement depth then secure with suitable material .
num.f black membraneforming curing compound .
liquid membraneforming curing compound black may be used provided the cement concrete pavement will be overlaid and is not accessible to traffic before the surface course is placed .
apply at a rate not to exceed num gallon per square yard to produce a uniform continuous film .
discontinue use of the compound if it becomes unsatisfactory as a curing agent and resume curing by other methods as specified .
num .
cold weather curing .
if the forecasted air temperature during concrete curing is expected to fall below numf place highlow thermometers on the concrete surface and monitor concrete curing temperatures .
protect the pavement surface and sides to effectively maintain a temperature of not less than numf for at least num days and until the concrete achieves a strength of num pounds per square inch .
if at any time during this period the highlow thermometer falls between numf and numf extend the cure period by and additional day .
if at any time during the curing period the highlow thermometer temperature falls below numf the concrete will be considered defective .
remove and replace defective pavement as specified in section numt at no cost to the department .
m removal of forms .
do not remove forms from freshly placed concrete until it has set .
remove the forms carefully to avoid pavement damage .
n sealing joints and cracks .
seal joints before opening any pavement section to traffic including construction equipment and before discontinuing work for the winter season .
when permitted the contractor may open pavement to construction equipment provided an approved temporary sealing material is in place and initial concrete strength and curing requirements are met .
provide construction equipment within vehicle code limits .
seal cracks as indicated or directed .
do not place joint sealing material on the same day as the sawing or if joint is wet or damp due to weather conditions .
clean joints of all scale dirt curing compound temporary joint sealing material and other foreign material with a wire brush .
upon completion of the cleaning thoroughly sandblast or waterblast the joint sidewalls with sufficient pressure to clean but not damage joint .
immediately before placing bond breaker or joint sealing material blow the joint clean with a compressed air stream of at least num pounds per square inch measured at the source .
use compressed air free of oil moisture and other contaminants .
num .
poured in place seal .
do not place poured jointsealing material if the air temperature is less than numf unless permitted .
for hotpoured seals use heating equipment of an indirect heating type constructed as a double boiler .
provide positive temperature control and mechanical agitation .
determine the safe heating temperature range and recommended pouring temperature from the manufacturers shipping container .
heat and maintain the material temperature within these recommended safe temperatures .
place the material as close as possible to the recommended pouring temperature .
do not maintain any single batch of material at the pouring temperature for more than num hours .
reheat according to the manufacturers recommendations .
fill the joint reservoir with sealing material to the level shown on the standard drawings .
do not allow sealing material to spread over the pavement surface .
when required place the tape bond breaker andor backer rods on the bottom surface of the joint reservoir before sealing .
do not extend tape up the reservoir face more than num inch .
if necessary for support install an acceptable joint backing material below the tape .
num .
neoprene seals .
install preformed neoprene seals as specified using installation equipment capable of placement without cutting nicking twisting or damaging the seal .
install seals with lubricant adhesive applied according to manufacturers recommendations to the contact surfaces of the joint faces or sides of the seal .
install seal numn nums num num change no .
num in one piece to the depth indicated unless approved .
do not elongate the seal more than num or compress longitudinally more than num .
prepare and submit a qc plan to the representative at the start of the project as specified in section numanum .
as a minimum include the following in the qc plan contractors and manufacturers representatives list of equipment and construction sequence list of material along with sampling and testing procedures test section schedule and procedure to replace unacceptable seals .
before sealing joints seal a minimum of three fullwidth pavement joints according to the test section schedule specified in the qc plan .
have the manufacturers representative witness the test sections unless otherwise permitted in writing .
the representative will inspect the test sections .
do not seal the remaining pavement joints until the representative accepts an installation procedure .
conduct tests according to qc plan when material is changed or seal installations are unacceptable .
replace seals exceeding num elongation or num compression or otherwise not conforming to the specifications at no expense to the department .
patch pavement damaged by removing unacceptable seals and adhesive as specified in section num .
num .
silicone seals .
prepare the joint and place silicone sealant material according to the manufacturers recommendations .
o surface tolerance .
after the concrete has hardened test the surface of pavement again using straightedges as specified in section numknum .
remove high points in excess of num inch by means of grinding or cutting tools as directed .
the representative will consider pavement containing depressions of more than num inch to be defective .
num .
longitudinal joints .
test the surface of pavement at all longitudinal joints including the joint between the pavement and shoulder again for the following tolerance requirements where there is no change in the design cross slope across a joint the tolerance will not be greater than num inch as measured by holding a numfoot straightedge centered across and perpendicular to the joint .
where there is a change in the design cross slope across a joint the tolerance will not be greater than num inch as measured by holding a numfoot straightedge perpendicular to and on each side of the joint .
remove high points in excess of num inch by means of grinding or with cutting tools as directed .
pavement containing depressions of more than num inch between adjacent lanes will be considered defective .
p protection of pavement .
protect pavement as specified in section num and exclude traffic including construction equipment .
when required to complete adjacent pavement the spreading finishing and subgrade machines may operate on the pavement surface after num hours if num pounds per square inch is achieved .
num .
late season pavements .
apply boiled linseed oil mixture as specified in section num on all concrete pavements and shoulders constructed after september num. q opening to traffic .
the representative will determine when pavement may be opened to traffic .
however do not open to traffic in less than num hours for normal strength concrete or num hours for hes concrete and until pavement develops the required num pounds per square inch minimum compressive strength determined by compressive tests made on cylinder specimens according to ptm no .
num or determined by maturity method according to ptm no .
num. r protection against rain .
provide sufficient materials on site at all times to properly protect the pavement edges and surface against rain before initial set of concrete .
if rain appears imminent stop paving operations immediately protect the pavement sides and cover the concrete surface with protective material .
s tests for depth .
before final acceptance of each phase of the project the concrete pavement thickness will be determined in the presence of the inspector by drilling cores according to ptm no .
num or by nondestructive thickness measurements according to ptm no .
num .
other methods of nondestructive thickness testing may be requested in writing and approved by the district executive .
nums nums num num change no .
num the department will divide the mainline pavement into lots representing not more than num square yards of pavement in each traffic lane .
a traffic lane is defined as the pavement surface between longitudinal joints or between a longitudinal joint and the pavement edge .
include ramps in a separate lots select one of the following options for thickness determination num .
measurement of drilled cores .
the inspector will select one coring location at random within each lot according to ptm no .
num .
provide a measuring apparatus conforming to ptm no .
num .
the inspector will determine the core depth according to ptm no .
num .
if any core measurement is deficient by more than num inch in required depth drill additional cores in the presence of and for measurement by the inspector .
drill the additional cores at numfoot intervals in both directions longitudinally from each deficient core in the same traffic lane until the depth is no more than num inch deficient .
each core will represent the condition in the same traffic lane for a distance of num feet in both directions longitudinally .
if any core measurement is deficient by more than num inch in required depth the inspector will consider the pavement to be defective .
submit every fifth core as an information sample to the lts where an evaluation will be made of the entrained air content according to ptm no .
num and for numday compressive strength testing according to ptm no .
num .
for a partial lot the inspector will randomly select one core according to ptm no .
num for testing .
if the core strength is less than num pounds per square inch immediately perform an investigation of the concrete operations to determine the cause of the low strength .
provide a written evaluation of the problem and the proposed solution to the department .
num .
measurement by nondestructive testing .
the inspector will select pavement thickness measurement locations within each lot in accordance with ptm no .
num .
determine the pavement thickness in accordance with ptm no .
num in the presence of the inspector .
one retest will be permitted if any average sublot thickness measurement is determined to be deficient by more than num inch in required depth .
if any average sublot thickness measurement is deficient by more than num inch in required depth drill measure and backfill a core over the target as specified in section nums in the presence of the inspector for confirmation of the deficient depth at no additional cost to the department .
if the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is deficient more than num inch in required depth drill additional cores to determine the extent of pavement deficient in depth as specified in section numsnum .
if the core measurement does not confirm the pavement thickness is deficient more than num inch in required depth stop paving operations to investigate the equipment and targets used in the nondestructive testing to determine if reverification is needed .
if the inspector suspects a location is deficient in required depth drill measure and backfill a core as specified in section nums in the presence of and as directed by the inspector .
if the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is deficient more than num inch in required depth drill additional cores to determine the extent of pavement deficient in depth as specified in section numsnum .
if the core measurement does not confirm the pavement thickness is deficient more than num inch in required depth the drilling of the core will be paid as specified in section numc .
for independent assurance of nondestructive thickness measurements the inspector will select one location within the initial lot and one location within the subsequent ten lots thereafter .
drill measure and backfill one core over the selected target locations as specified in section nums in the presence nums numc num num change no .
num of the inspector .
cores drilled based on deficient nondestructive thickness measurements or based on suspect deficiencies may be used for independent assurance purposes .
if the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is deficient more than num inch in required depth drill additional cores to determine the extent of pavement deficient in depth as specified in section numsnum .
if the core measurement confirms the pavement thickness is not deficient by more than num inch in required depth the drilling of the core will be paid as specified in section numc .
thoroughly clean the vertical surface of any core hole of laitance and loose and foreign material .
fill the holes with the mixture used to construct the course and consolidate .
as an alternative use a premixed nonshrink grout .
t defective work .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace pavement that is defective in construction or sawing of transverse joints as specified in section numi defective in curing requirements as specified in section numlnum defective in surface tolerance as specified in section numo defective in depth as specified in section nums defective in air content as specified in section numcnum defective in compressive strength as specified in section numd or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of freezing and thawing rain improper final finish or honeycombing which in the representatives opinion can not be repaired .
repair pavement that is cracked or spalled in accordance with table a .
the minimum pavement removal and replacement length between transverse joints is num feet if constructing reinforced cement concrete pavements or num feet if constructing plain cement concrete pavements .
after removal of defective pavement construct required transverse joints according to the methods for joining pavements as shown on the standard drawings .
where replacement extends to an existing transverse joint satisfactorily salvage the joint or replace in kind as directed .
if removing and replacing pavement defective in depth start at the determined point of deficiency as determined by the representative .
remove and replace defective work transversely for the fulllane width and longitudinally until the pavement is not more than num inch deficient in depth as specified in section nums .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard a adjustment for deficient pavement .
where a deficiency exists as determined by cores the department will pay as follows deficiency in depth determined by cores inches proportional part of contract price allowed num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num defective work b defective pavement left in place .
the department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive .
when the district executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at num of the contract price .
c tests for depth .
each the price includes the measuring apparatus which remains the contractors property upon completion of the project and targets provided for nondestructive testing .
the department will not pay for additional cores drilled if the depth is deficient by more than num inch .
num numg num num change no .
num section numroller compacted concrete pavements num descriptionthis work is the construction of roller compacted concrete rcc pavement as indicated on a prepared subgrade and subbase using a stiffer low slump concrete mix conventional or highdensity asphalt paving equipment and various size rollers to obtain the required thickness density and surface texture .
num material a cement .
section num b pozzolans .
section num c aggregate .
section num except use wellgraded aggregate that conform to the following table a table a aggregate gradation requirements for rcc material percent passing by weight based on maximum nominal aggregate size wearing surface base course sieve size gradation a gradation b gradation c num num mm num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num nummm num num num num num num d water .
section num e admixtures .
section num f concrete curing material .
section num and section num g rcc mixture .
num .
mix design .
according to section numc except numcnum .
and add the following use the same mix design and materials for the entire project .
optimize moisture content of mix according to aashto t num method d. any material change requires submission of a new mix design .
num .
mix duration .
assure complete and uniform mixing .
do not exceed the manufacturers rated volume capacity for dry concrete in the mixing chamber .
keep the sides of the mixer and mixer blade surfaces free of hardened concrete and other materials .
check mixer blades frequently for wear and replace if wear is sufficient to cause inadequate mixing .
num .
mix ingredient tolerances .
produce rcc according to tolerances set in section nume .
supply daily plant records of production and quantities of materials used that day to the representative .
these records will be used as a check on plant calibration .
num numd num num change no .
num num construction a general requirements .
num .
field operation qc plan .
prepare a paving operation qc plan as specified in section numdnum.a for field control and evaluation of concrete paving operations for the representatives review .
do not start paving until after the representative reviews the qc plan .
num .
concrete technician .
provide a concrete technician as specified in section numdnum and a concrete field testing technician as specified in section numdnum.a .
b test section .
construct a minimum numfoot long test section of the rcc material .
size the test section using the plan thickness by plan width .
use the proposed equipment for the project .
use placement to verify the plant can produce a consistent mix and resolve any mix design issues determine if the equipment will achieve the proper placement establish the best combination of rollers to achieve thickness and best surface conditions review testing procedure of field density acceptance testing establish curing procedures and determine compressive strength .
place the test section within the rcc plan location as a portion of the pay item .
c weather restrictions .
if work is halted because of weather conditions the representative may allow the contractor to place limited quantities of rcc mixture that are enroute to the project .
do not place rcc pavement during a hard rain that may damage the pavement surface .
placement may continue during a light rain or mist as determined by the representative as long as the rcc pavement surface is not damaged .
num .
cold weather .
unless otherwise approved in writing discontinue rcc placement when the descending air temperature away from artificial heat falls to numf .
do not resume paving until the air temperature away from artificial heat rises above numf .
num .
hot weather .
when the air temperature in the immediate vicinity of rcc placement rises to numf take temperature readings of the plastic rcc mixture at numhour intervals and at the conclusion of the mixing cycles .
discontinue rcc placement if the rcc mixture temperature exceeds numf after mixing .
when the rcc mixture temperature has risen to numf cool the mixing water or aggregates to maintain a plastic rcc mixture temperature within numf to numf during placement .
num .
environmental conditions .
precautions to reduce surface moisture loss are needed when the evaporation rate exceeds num pounds per square foot per hour .
determine rate of evaporation using a weather station or the individual measurements of air temperature relative humidity concrete temperature wind speed and the nrmca chart in aci numrnum .
minimize moisture loss by one or more of the following methods adding retarding admixtures to the mix reducing time between mixing and final compaction using covers on the haul trucks using temporary windbreaks or fogging and misting the rcc pavement surface .
d equipment .
have all equipment on hand and approved by the representative before work can proceed .
comply with but is not limited to the following num .
mixing plant .
produce an rcc pavement mixture in the proportions defined by the approved mix design and within the specified tolerances .
the plant must be able to produce a uniform mixture at a rate compatible with the placement equipment .
num.a batch type plant .
meet the requirements as specified in section num and num .
num.a continuous mix plant .
meet the requirements of aashto m num .
num .
haul trucks .
provide a sufficient number of trucks to ensure a continuous supply of rcc mixture to the paver .
equip haul trucks with covers to protect the rcc mixture during transit from inclement weather and to reduce surface moisture loss .
use clean trucks with no buildup of hardened or foreign material .
numd numg num num change no .
num num .
paver .
use a paver of suitable weight and stability to spread and finish the rcc mixture without segregation to the required thickness smoothness surface texture crosssection and grade .
do not use pavers that tear shove or gouge the mixture or that cause tracks indented areas segregation or other permanent surface blemishes .
for single lift placement less than num inches use either a conventional paver or a highdensity paver equipped with compaction devices capable of producing rcc pavement with a minimum compaction of num of the maximum wet density prior to using rollers .
for single lift placement greater than or equal to num inches but less than num inches use a highdensity paver equipped with compaction devices capable of producing a minimum compaction of num of the maximum wet density prior to using rollers .
for multiplelift placement use either a conventional paver or a highdensity paver equipped with compaction devices capable of producing rcc pavement with a minimum compaction of num of the maximum wet density in each lift prior to using rollers .
for areas inaccessible to pavers submit alternate paving equipment for approval by the representative .
num .
compactors .
use rollers conforming to section numcnum .
if a minimum num field density is not achieved with the paver use a selfpropelled smooth dual steel drum roller operating in static or vibratory mode having a minimum weight of num tons to achieve primary compaction before final compaction .
increased weight may be needed for thicker lifts .
use either a steel drum roller operating in static mode or a rubbertired roller or a combination of rollers for final compaction surface finishing and removal of equipment marks .
if a minimum num field density is achieved with the paver use either a steel drum roller operating in static mode or a rubbertired roller or a combination of rollers for final compaction surface finishing and removal of equipment marks .
use walkbehind vibratory rollers or vibratory plate tampers for compacting areas inaccessible to large rollers .
num .
water trucks .
have at least one water truck on site and available throughout the paving and curing process .
equip the water truck with a water distribution system containing fog nozzles capable of evenly applying a fine mist of water to the rcc pavement surface without damaging the final surface .
e preparation of base course .
before placing the rcc prepare the subgradesubbase as required by the plans and specifications .
f transporting rcc mixture .
use haul trucks to transport the rcc mixture from the plant to paver .
deposit the rcc mixture directly into the hopper of the paver or into a secondary distribution system which deposits the material into the paver hopper .
discharge the trucks clean with no buildup or hanging of rcc mixture in the corners .
g placing rcc material .
use an rcc mixture that is within the temperature range of numf to numf .
do not use rcc material containing frost lumps or crusts of hardened materials .
if needed adjust moisture content of mix for paving equipment selected for placement .
place rcc pavement in a pattern so that the curing water from the previous placements do not pose a potential surface erosion or runoff problem on the fresh rcc surface or on the subbase layer .
num .
subgradesubbase condition .
provide a subgradesubbase surface that is clean and free of foreign material ponded water and frost or frozen material prior to rcc placement .
do not place rcc pavement on frozen base subbase or subgrade .
at the time of rcc placement uniformly moisten the subgradesubbase .
if the subbase becomes dry uniformly water without forming mud or pools of freestanding water .
num .
rcc placement .
adjust the paver and regulate the speed to prevent segregation and provide a surface course that is smooth continuous without tears and pulling .
limit the spread of the rcc material to a length that can be compacted and finished within the available period under the prevailing air temperature wind and climatic conditions .
proceed in a steady continuous operation with minimal starts and stops .
regulate speed to assure a constant supply of rcc material in the hopper .
maintain rcc material above the auger shaft at all times during paving .
num .
lift thickness .
minimum lift thickness is num inches .
construct pavements between num inches and less than or equal to num inches in single lifts .
construct pavements greater than num inches in multiple lifts of equal thickness to achieve density requirements .
num .
multiplelift placement .
place the second lift within num minutes of the completion of the first lift .
if more than num minutes has elapsed the interface between the first and second lift shall be considered a cold joint .
prepare numg numi num num change no .
num the cold joint according to section numinum .
at the discretion of the representative this time limit may be increased or decreased depending on the use of retarding admixtures or the ambient weather conditions of temperature wind and humidity .
multiple pavers in tandem formation may be used to reduce the opportunity for cold joints to develop .
num .
adjacent lane placement .
place adjacent paving lanes within num minutes .
if more than num minutes has elapsed between placements of adjacent lanes the vertical joint is considered a cold joint .
prepare the cold joint according to section numinum .
at the discretion of the representative this time may be increased or decreased depending on the use of retarding admixtures or the ambient weather conditions of temperature wind and humidity .
h compaction .
allow for infield density readings and then begin compaction of the rcc material behind the paver .
perform field density readings with the representative present .
plan operations and supply sufficient rollers to minimize cold joints .
determine the sequence and number of passes by vibratory and nonvibratory rolling to achieve the density acceptance requirements and to achieve a surface finish without uneven roller marks .
operation of rollers in the vibratory mode while stopped or reversingdirection is not allowed .
use a steel drum roller operating in static mode a rubbertired roller or a combination of rollers for final compaction surface finishing and removal of equipment marks .
num .
rolling rcc material at longitudinal and transverse joints .
do not operate rollers within num to num inches of the freshly placed lane edge until the adjacent lane is placed .
within the allowable time roll together both edges of the two adjacent lanes .
if the lane edge will not have an adjacent lane or if the lane edge is the outside pavement edge the lane may be placed wider to achieve compaction for the required width with the additional rcc pavement material cutoff after density acceptance .
as an alternative to saw cutting use an edge shoe on the paver .
the shoe should have an angle of num to num degrees and should compact the edge as required .
when a cold joint is planned roll the complete lane and follow cold joint procedures as specified in section numinum .
provide additional rolling for longitudinal joints with a vibratory roller as necessary to produce the specified density for the full depth of the lift and provide a tight smooth transition across the joint .
remove any uneven marks left during the vibratory rolling utilizing a static or rubbertired roller .
roll until a smooth flat surface free of tearing and cracking is obtained .
avoid deformation of the rcc pavement by operating the rollers at slow enough speeds at all times .
correct any deformations of the rcc pavement resulting from reverse direction of the roller or from any other causes .
num .
density requirements .
perform inplace field density tests according to astm c num test method a direct transmission as soon as possible and no later than num minutes after completion of rolling .
use only the wet density reading for this test requirement .
if the testing equipment does not calculate the compaction percentage calculate the compaction percentage using the following equation .
   num x compaction percentage w recorded density in pounds per cubic foot t computed rcc unit weight in pounds per cubic foot as provided on the project csnum batcher mixer slip determine field density test locations using ptm no .
num .
perform at least five tests directly behind the paver and at least five tests after final compaction for each num cubic yards of rcc material placed .
determine the compaction percentage with the testing equipment or by calculation .
directly behind the paver achieve a minimum compaction of num of the maximum wet density for thicknesses less than num inches and num of the maximum wet density for thicknesses greater than or equal to num inches .
after final rolling achieve a minimum compaction greater than num of the maximum wet density for all thicknesses .
record compaction percentages after final rolling for determining density acceptance in section nummnum .
i joints .
numi numk num num change no .
num num .
fresh joints .
a fresh joint is a vertical joint between lanes or a horizontal joint between multiplelifts where the adjacent rcc material is placed within num minutes of placing the previous lane or lift .
the time limit may be adjusted by the representative depending on the use of retarders in the rcc mixture or ambient weather conditions .
construct fresh vertical joints to assure a continuous bond between new and previously placed lanes of rcc pavement .
for fresh horizontal joints maintain a moist surface to prevent excess moisture loss .
prior to placement of the second lift clean all loose material from the surface .
num .
cold joints .
a cold joint is any planned or unplanned longitudinal or transverse construction vertical joint or any horizontal joint between multiple lifts in the rcc pavement that does not qualify as a fresh joint .
before placement of an adjacent rcc lane prepare the cold vertical joint as follows cut the pavement vertically for the full depth in sound compacted material at least num inches from the exposed edge .
use an approved saw wheel cutter or other method that does not tear or ravel the vertical edge .
remove the excess rcc material .
clean the joint of any loose or foreign material .
moisten the vertical face of the cold joint immediately prior to placement of the fresh adjacent lane to prevent excess loss of moisture .
cold vertical joints that are constructed utilizing a drop extension or edging shoe are exempt from the above cutting requirement when placed up to num degrees from vertical .
for cold horizontal joints maintain a moist surface to prevent excess moisture loss .
prior to placement of the second lift clean all loose material from surface and if required by the plans place cement slurry or mortar grout made with the same materials as in the rcc mixture on the cold horizontal joint .
num .
control joints .
saw cut control joints as indicated on the plans to num depth of the compacted rcc pavement .
saw cut pavement behind the rolling operation as soon as possible to prevent random cracking using early entry saws set to the manufacturers recommendations .
saw cut without causing raveling or other damage to the pavement begin sawing no later than num hours after placement .
if random cracking occurs in the pavement before the saw cutting operation repair cracks as directed by the representative at no expense to the department .
num .
sealing joints .
if indicated seal joints as specified in section numn .
j curing .
immediately after final rolling and infield density testing keep the rcc pavement surface moist until one or more of the following curing methods are used .
maintain the selected curing methods for a minimum of num hours and the rcc pavement has developed a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch determine compressive strength as specified in section nummnum .
num .
water cure .
apply water cure using a water truck equipped with misting spray nozzles soaking hoses sprinkler system or other means to maintain a uniform moist condition on the rcc pavement surface .
apply moisture in a manner that does not wash out or damage the surface of the finished rcc pavement .
num .
white polyethylene sheeting .
apply sheet material as specified in section num .
num .
curing compound .
apply curing compound as specified in section num according to the manufacturers application rate in two uniform coats .
apply the two coats either by overlapping transversely num or by spraying perpendicular to each other .
provide a uniform voidfree application across the entire rcc pavement surface .
reapply curing compound to saw cuts and disturbed areas .
num .
cold weather curing .
if the forecasted air temperature during concrete curing is expected to fall below numf place thermometers or other temperature measuring devices on the concrete surface and monitor concrete curing temperatures .
protect the rcc pavement surface and sides to maintain a temperature of not less than numf during the cure period .
if at any time during the cure period the temperature readings fall between numf and numf extend the cure period by an additional day .
if at any time during the curing period the temperature readings fall below numf the rcc pavement will be considered defective .
k surface tolerance .
num .
testing .
test the finished rcc pavement surface with a numfoot straight edge or crown surface template at areas the representative determines may be deficient or irregular .
hold the straightedge in contact with the surface numk numn num num change no .
num and in successive positions parallel to the road centerline to check the entire width of the pavement .
advance along the pavement in stages of not more than num feet a stage until the entire area is tested .
num .
correction .
when the pavement surface varies by more than num inch remove high points by grinding the surface to within the tolerance use a selfpropelled diamond grinder or cutting tools at no expense to the department .
the representative will consider depressions in the pavement surface of more than num inch to be defective .
continue straightedge testing and surface corrections until the entire surface is free from observable departures from the straightedge and until the slab conforms to the required grade and crosssection .
num .
finishing .
for rcc pavement with an exposed pavement surface and a speed limit of num miles per hour or greater texture the pavement surface by diamond grinding as specified in section numc .
l open to traffic .
protect the rcc pavement from vehicular traffic for the duration of the curing period .
open to traffic when the cure period is complete as specified in section numj .
m acceptance .
num .
lots and sublots .
material will be accepted on a lot by lot basis .
lots will be established cumulatively and will be specific for each mix design .
each lot consists of five equal sublots nnum .
test completed lots and sublots for density compressive strength and pavement thickness .
a normal lot size is num cubic yards .
if breakdowns or stoppages of short periods due to such causes as weather or equipment failure occur the lots size is the quantity placed for that day .
num .
density .
determine density acceptance using the recorded compaction percentages after rolling in section numhnum .
the final average for each lot can not be less than num of the maximum wet density and no test less than num of the maximum wet density .
properly placed and compacted rcc material not meeting these requirements should be cored and tested for compressive strength at num days according to aashto t num at no expense to the department .
fill core holes with rcc material .
if the tested area has achieved the minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch the rcc material will be paid for at full price and left in place .
if the lot does not meet the maximum wet density and the compressive strength requirements the pavement is considered defective .
num .
compressive strength .
mold and test cylinders according to astm c num and aashto t num to determine the numday numday and numday compressive strengths for each lot of rcc material .
test the numday test cylinders to determine the compressive strength for the lot .
if the numday compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to num pounds per square inch the field cure on the lot of rcc pavement represented by the test cylinders may be discontinued unless otherwise directed .
if the numday test cylinders do not meet the minimum value continue curing the lot until the numday test cylinders are tested for verification .
test the numday test cylinders for compressive strength .
if the numday compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to num pounds per square inch the field cure on the lot of rcc pavement represented by the test cylinders may be discontinued unless otherwise directed .
if the numday test cylinders do not meet the minimum value continue curing the lot until the numday test cylinders are tested for verification .
test the numday test cylinders to verify the rcc pavement has achieved a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
rcc pavement that fails to meet the numday compressive strength requirement is considered defective .
any cores taken for pavement depth measurements may be used for compressive strength testing if needed .
num .
pavement depth .
using ptm no .
num the representative will designate one location within a lot to be tested for depth .
for each lot drill one core according to aashto t num in the presence of the representative .
provide a measuring apparatus conforming to ptm no .
num for the representative to measure the core depth according to ptm no .
num .
if the measured depth is within num inch of plan depth the rcc pavement is acceptable .
if the depth is deficient by more than num inch core two additional cores in the presence of the representative for measurement .
if the average depth of the three cores is less than a num inch deficient the pavement depth is acceptable .
if the average depth is greater than num inch the pavement depth is defective .
fill core holes with rcc material .
n defective work .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace pavement lots that are defective during curing as specified in section numjnum defective in surface tolerance as specified in numn numb num num change no .
num section numknum defective in density as specified in section nummnum defective in compressive strength as specified in section nummnum or defective in depth as specified in section nummnum .
num measurement and payment a roller compacted concrete pavement .
square yard b defective pavement left in place .
when the district executive directs in writing to leave defective pavement in place the payment will be at num of the contract price .
num num num num initial edition section numprotective coating for cement concrete pavement num descriptionthis work is the application of protective coating to concrete pavements and shoulders .
num material boiled linseed oil aashto m num from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num construction a general .
thoroughly dry and clean concrete surfaces of all foreign matter which would prevent protective coating penetration adhesion or drying .
allow a minimum of num days to elapse before applying protective coating on surfaces cured with white membrane curing compound .
allow num days to elapse after removing curing covers and before applying protective coating on all other types of curing methods .
apply the protective coating before subjecting the concrete surface to deicing chemicals .
b application .
apply protective coating according to manufacturer recommendations .
at a minimum apply in two coats at a rate of num gallon per square yard for each coat .
apply as directed by pressurespray equipment by portable hand spray equipment by brushing or by a combination of methods to ensure complete coverage of treated concrete surfaces .
apply in weather suitable for drying when the air temperature and concrete surface temperature are between numf and numf .
unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer allow the first application to dry for a period of at least num hours before the second application .
if the initial application is made on concrete surfaces carrying traffic close these surfaces for a period of at least num hours until penetration is complete and tackiness has disappeared .
after the second application close surface to traffic for a period of at least num hours or until tackiness has disappeared and no pickup results from use .
c safety precautions .
protect traffic workers and concrete surface against the occurrence of fire if in the presence of flammable and volatile mineral spirits blended into the protective coating .
before using the treated pavement surface satisfactorily correct slippery pavement conditions other hazards or inconvenience to traffic resulting from the protective coating application as directed .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num num num num initial edition section numpavement relief joint num descriptionthis work is construction of a pavement relief joint including subbase material and necessary excavation .
num material class aa cement concretesection num high early strength cement concretesection num reinforcement bars section num asphalt cement pg numsection num subbasesection num superpave asphalt mixture design hma base coursesection num and as follows pg num num to num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design wma base coursesection num and as follows pg num num to num million esals or as indicated or directed .
polyethylene sheeting section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawing rcnumm as specified in section num and as follows a excavation .
excavate for the sleeper slab after constructing the subbase .
b sleeper slab .
construct the sleeper slab as specified in the applicable requirements of section num. c polyethylene sheeting .
construct in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num. d base course .
construct the superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma base course as specified in section num section num .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured transversely .
num numa num num initial edition section numbridge approach slabs num descriptionthis work is construction of reinforced cement concrete approach slabs and associated sleeper slabs including the subbase material and necessary excavation .
num material a subbase section num b reinforced cement concrete pavement section num c bituminous paper section num d polyethylene sheeting section numa e concrete curing materials section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings approved contract drawings as specified in section num except section numl and as follows a excavation .
excavate for the sleeper slab after constructing the subbase .
b polyethylene sheeting .
two layers of num mil minimum polyethylene sheeting to be used as a bond breaker under bridge approach slabs .
provide surface that is smooth without excessive depth of sheeting .
install any seams in the longitudinal direction of the bridge and overlap seams a minimum of num inches ..
provide certification from the manufacturer concerning the above material requirements .
c concrete curing .
cure the approach slab in accordance with section nump except section numpnum.a and as follows water cure bridge approach slabs for a minimum of num days .
use covers of a double thickness of burlap .
num measurement and payment a bridge approach slab .
square yard the price includes excavation subbase material polyethylene sheeting bituminous paper cement concrete and reinforcement bars .
num numt num num change no .
num section numreinforced or plain cement concrete pavements rps num descriptionthis work is construction of normal strength or high earlystrength hes cement concrete pavement plain or reinforced on a prepared surface under restricted performance specifications rps .
num materialsection num with the following modification once material control is established as specified in section numdnum.a the frequency of testing may be reduced to a minimum of one test every num minutes .
num constructionsection num with the following modifications o surface tolerance .
test the surface of pavement as follows num .
mainline paving .
test as specified in section num and section numonum .
these pavements include but are not limited to any full width lane used for travel passing climbing center turn acceleration deceleration and ramps .
num .
other than mainline pavement .
test as specified in section numo .
these pavements include but are not limited to approach slabs bridge decks tapers shoulders medians or other pavement surfaces as directed .
s tests for depth .
replace with the following the inspector will determine lots and sublots as specified in section numu .
complete any surface corrective work before testing for pavement depth .
test pavement depth by obtaining one core from each sublot .
the inspector will determine the location of each core using ptm no .
num .
drill cores at each sublot location as specified in ptm no .
num in presence of the inspector .
thoroughly clean the vertical surface of the core hole of laitance and loose and foreign material .
fill the holes with the mixture used to construct the course and consolidate .
as an alternative use a premixed nonshrink grout .
provide a measuring apparatus conforming to the requirements of ptm no .
num .
the inspector will determine the core length as specified in ptm no .
num determine the average lot pavement thickness by averaging the individual sublot core thicknesses accept concrete as specified in section numunum and determine price adjustments as specified in section numa .
submit every tenth core as an information sample to the lts where an evaluation will be made of the entrained air content according to ptm no .
num and for numday compressive strength testing according to ptm no .
num .
for a partial lot the inspector will randomly select one core according to ptm no .
num for testing .
if the core strength is less than num pounds per square inch immediately perform an investigation of the concrete operations to determine the cause of the low strength .
provide a written evaluation of the problem and the proposed solution to the department .
t defective work .
replace with the following unless otherwise directed in writing as specified in section numdnum .
by the district executive remove and replace pavement determined defective as follows num .
depth .
the lot will be defective if the average core depth of the lot is less than the design thickness d minus num inch or more than one individual sublot core depth is less than the design thickness minus num inch .
num .
compressive strength or air content .
the lot is defective if pwl for compressive strength or the plastic air content is less than num as specified in section numunum .
numt numu num num change no .
num num .
other conditions .
the lot is defective if the pavement contains surface defects from rain improper final finish or honeycombing that can not be satisfactorily repaired as determined by the representative .
num .
other than mainline pavement surface tolerance .
the lot is defective if the pavement contains depressions or high points as specified in section numo that can not be satisfactorily corrected as determined by the representative .
num .
edge slumping .
the pavement is defective if the requirements specified in section numgnum are not met .
remove and replace a minimum of num feet of pavement between transverse joints of reinforced cement concrete pavements or an entire panel of plain cement concrete pavement .
longitudinal edge spall repairs are not considered satisfactory repairs for edge slumping or spalling between adjacent lanes or outside pavement edges .
where replacement extends to an existing transverse joint replace the joint in kind .
construct transverse joints at other locations resulting from removal of defective pavement using the methods for joining pavements shown on the standard drawings .
u acceptance .
add this section as follows lots and sublots for the combined pavement characteristics of depth strength and air content will be determined based on the full width of pavement placement .
lots and sublots will begin at the starting point of paving and continue until num square yards are placed .
lots and sublots will be calculated as the work progresses and will include any pavement designated as rps pavement .
do not combine various depth pavement into any lot or sublot .
a full lot is defined as num square yards of pavement of the same constant depth and consists of four equal sublots of num square yards each .
combine partial lots with the last full lot or make a separate lot according to the following procedure if less than num square yards remain combine the remaining pavement with the last full lot .
if the remaining pavement is equal to or greater than num square yards consider the remaining pavement as a separate lot .
determine sublots for the last pavement lot by establishing a number of equal size sublots .
determine the number of sublots by dividing the area of the combined lot or partial lot by num square yards and then rounding to the nearest whole number .
determine the equal size of each sublot by dividing the combined lot or partial lot quantity by the number of whole sublots calculated .
determine lots and sublots based on the full width of pavement placement .
num .
depth .
the representative will accept each lot for compliance with the specifications for depth if the average core depth of the lot is more than the design thickness d minus num inch and not more than one individual sublot core depth is less than the design thickness minus num inch .
num .
compressive strength and air content .
the representative will accept concrete for compliance with the specification requirements for compressive strength and air content on a lotbylot basis as specified in section num and section num .
the representative will determine locations where samples of plastic concrete will be lifted using ptm no .
num .
make one compressive strength test and one test for percentage of plastic air content on samples from each sublot .
sublot plastic air content acceptance test results that are outside specification limits will be included in the determination of the pwl .
mold acceptance cylinders at the determined sublot location .
the average of the test results from two cylinders made from the same sample tested as specified in ptm no .
num will constitute the numday compressive strength .
cure test specimens according to subsection num of ptm no .
num .
the result of one sample of concrete obtained and tested according to aashto t num for stone and gravel or aashto t num for slag coarse aggregate will constitute the percentage of air content .
the representative will accept concrete based on the adequacy and uniformity of compressive strength at the age of num days and with respect to the air content when the pwl is num or greater .
numu numa num num change no .
num calculate the value of q by one of the following equations where x num is the average of the sublot test results .
ql is the lower quality index and qu is the upper quality index .
s is the standard deviation as specified in section numanum.a.num .
num.a for class aa numday concrete compressive strength s psi x ql num num num num.b for percentage of air content of class aa concrete s x q and s x q u l num num num num determine the percentage of material within specification limits as specified in section numanum .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard the department will pay on a lotbylot basis at the contract price adjusted for pavement characteristics relative to depth compressive strength and air content .
the lot payment will be determined according to the multiple characteristic formula specified in section numanum .
a adjustment for pavement characteristics .
num .
depth .
the lot average core depth will be determined as specified in section nums .
the characteristic percentage for depth will be determined using table a .
the characteristic percentage for depth will be placed in the multiple characteristic formula as pd specified in section numanum to determine the lot payment .
num .
compressive strength and air content .
the percent within limits will be determined for the lot as specified in section numunum .
the characteristic percentages for compressive strength and air content will be determined by using table b .
the characteristic percentage for compressive strength and the characteristic percentage for air content will be used as ps and pa respectively in the multiple characteristic formula specified in section numanum to determine the lot payment .
num .
multiple characteristic formula .
the lot payment will be determined according to the following formula num pa numpd numps c l p p where lp lot payment cp contract price per lot contract price times lot size ps characteristic percentage of compressive strengthtable b pd characteristic percentage for depthtable a pa characteristic percentage for air contenttable b table a characteristic percentages for concrete pavement cores pd relative to specification limits numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num numa numa num num change no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic numa numa num num change no .
num average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average core percentage average core percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness characteristic average core percentage thickness inches pd num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa numd num num change no .
num less than num defective work as specified in section numt .
table b characteristic percentages for concrete pavement compressive strength ps or air content pa relative to specification limits percent within specification limits characteristic percentage num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num below num defective work as specified in section numt .
b defective pavement left in place .
the department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive .
c concrete pavement cores .
each the price includes measuring apparatus which remains the contractors property upon completion of the project .
d evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive .
as specified in section num .
num numc num num initial edition section numevaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive num descriptionthis work is evaluating a concrete pavement surface profile and determining the ride quality incentive associated with the pavement surface profile .
a general requirements .
determine the ride quality of finished pavement surfaces including approach slabs and pavement relief joints .
in the presence of the inspector measure the pavement surface profile according to ptm no .
num .
provide the resultant international roughness index iri data to the representative .
the representative will determine payment for each ridequality lot based on the iri .
measure the pavement surface of the following excluded areas separate from the pavement surface profile of ridequality lots .
the representative will not include measurements from excluded areas to determine lot incentive payment .
bridge decks .
ramps less than num feet in length .
tapered pavements less than num feet wide .
shoulders medians and other pavement surfaces indicated .
partial lots less than num feet .
b lot size .
a full lot is num feet of a single pavement lane with the same lot type .
the lot types are type num posted speed limit greater than num miles per hour and type num posted speed limit less than or equal to num miles per hour .
the representative will designate lots starting at the beginning limit of paving and continuing to the ending limit of paving for each pavement lane and ramp that is num feet or wider .
do not include the length of excluded areas in the num feet .
if the lot type changes end the lot and begin a new lot .
the representative will designate a partial lot at the ending limit of paving at a change in the lot type and at an excluded area when the lot length is less than num feet .
the representative will evaluate a partial lot as a percentage of a full lot .
num construction a equipment and operator .
provide pavement surface profile measuring equipment that has been verified by the department according to ptm no .
num .
in the presence of the inspector calibrate the distance sensor and check the profile system calibration before each days testing .
provide an operator that is department certified according to ptm no .
num. b testing .
num .
lots .
provide the traffic control and station marking necessary to accommodate testing .
remove objects and equipment from the surface and sweep the surface as necessary to remove debris .
in the presence of the inspector determine the pavement surface profile for each lot according to ptm no .
num .
at the completion of testing immediately submit the lot iri data as defined in ptm no .
num to the representative .
num .
excluded areas .
provide traffic control necessary to accommodate testing .
test the entire surface of each excluded area in stages using a numfoot straightedge .
at each stage hold the straightedge in contact with the surface and parallel to the road centerline and in successive positions test the pavement surface profile from one side of the excluded area to the other .
advance the test location to the next stage by moving the straightedge along the roadway centerline not more than num feet .
c acceptance .
numc nume num num initial edition num .
lots .
the representative will compare the lot iri to table a in section num to determine if the lot requires corrective action .
additionally perform corrective action on any individual bump must grind where the irregularity is more than num inch when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
num .
excluded areas .
perform corrective action where irregularities are more than num inch when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
correct longitudinal joints not conforming to the requirements specified in section numonum .
to improve the ride quality and at the departments expense the representative may require grinding of excluded areas that conform to the acceptable straightedge surface tolerances specified in section numc .
d corrective action .
num .
do not produce a deviation such as a ridge or valley with the adjacent pavement of more than num inch when measured on the transverse profile .
correct a sufficient length of pavement to correct the pavement surface profile without producing additional high or low points .
retest the lots and excluded areas after completing corrective action .
perform additional measurements of the pavement surface profile as necessary for the representative to determine which lots do not require additional corrective action .
correct surfaces to a uniform texture and cross section .
num .
perform all corrective action before testing for pavement depth .
if protective coating was applied before grinding reapply to ground area .
use one or more of the following methods num.a .
carbide grinding .
use carbide grinding for correcting areas num feet in length or less .
use grinders of the walkbehind type that have cutting heads of carbide tipped shackles stars or blades and have a locking depth control to produce a uniform pavement surface texture .
provide a pavement surface texture consisting of parallel grooves between num inch and num inch wide width a land area between grooves num inch and num inch .
operate the grinder by making multiple passes if necessary with a maximum depth of any single pass of num inch .
grind longitudinally or transversely across the pavement surface .
num.b .
diamond grinding .
as specified in section num and modified as follows d tolerance .
delete this section .
unless otherwise approved grind the entire lane width .
num.c .
removal and replacement .
remove and replace a minimum of num feet of pavement between transverse joints of reinforced cement concrete pavements or an entire panel of plain cement concrete pavement .
where replacement extends to an existing transverse joint replace the joint in kind as directed .
construct transverse joints at other locations resulting from removal of defective pavement using the methods for joining pavements shown on the standard drawings .
e defective work .
a ridequality pavement lot is defective if the iri of the lot exceeds the maximum acceptable iri specified in table a of section num .
any individual bump must grind exists in the lot where the irregularity is more than num inch when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
the surface adjacent to another ridequality lot contains a ridge or valley of more than num inch .
the specifications for pavement construction require removal and replacement of pavement within the ridequality lot .
unless the department and contractor agree to leave a defective lot in place as specified in section num remove and replace defective areas and retest the ridequality lot .
num num num num initial edition num measurement and paymentdollar the proposal will include an item and a predetermined amount of money for evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive .
the contract item will have a unit of measure of dollar a unit price of num and a quantity equal to the predetermined amount .
due to the incentive or bonus status of the payment being made the provisions of section numd are not applicable to this item .
measured and paid for under the evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive item as follows if the lot is not defective table a and the iri for each lot will be used to determine the incentive payment for ride quality .
the incentive payment for a lot subjected to corrective action will be determined using table a and the iri for the lot after the contractor completes corrective action .
the incentive payment for a partial lot will be determined as a percentage of a full lot .
after corrective action the contractor may leave a defective lot in place if the district executive provides written approval and the contractor accepts a num downward adjustment rebate of the amount paid for the lot .
costs associated with evaluating pavement ride quality will not be paid for separately .
table a payment schedule for ride quality incentive type num lots iri inchesmilelot amount num num num num num num num num num corrective action required maximum acceptable iri type num lots iri inchesmilelot amount num num num num num num num num num corrective action required maximum acceptable iri num num num num initial edition section numlongitudinal grooving of existing concrete pavement num descriptionthis work is the cutting of longitudinal grooves in existing cement concrete pavement .
num constructionsatisfactorily groove the existing pavement surface longitudinally between the limiting stations indicated .
do not use flailing type equipment .
do not cut grooves on bridge decks .
cut numinch wide grooves with a tolerance of plus num inch a num inch centertocenter spacing and a minimum depth of num inch .
do not cut grooves within num inches of the outside edge and centerline pavement joint .
do not allow the cutting slurry to accumulate on adjacent lanes .
remove the slurry and satisfactorily clean the grooves as the work progresses .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard measured on the finished grooved area .
num num num num initial edition section numpressure relief joint num descriptionthis work is construction of a pavement pressure relief joint .
num material a pressure relief material .
section nume or f b approved sealant or lubricant .
as recommended by the manufacturer of the pressure relief material .
num constructionsaw the joint opening num inches wide full depth and full width of the pavement .
remove the existing concrete material .
immediately before placing the sealing material sandblast all vertical faces of the joint clean with a compressed air stream measuring num pounds per square inch at the source and ensure the joint is free of oil moisture and other contaminants .
coat joint sides with either the sealant or lubricant adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num num num num initial edition section numlongitudinal joint cleaning and sealing num descriptionthis work is cleaning and sealing longitudinal joints in existing cement concrete pavements .
num materialsection numb or c num constructionthoroughly clean the longitudinal joints of all existing sealing material bituminous material and other foreign material by sawing sandblasting or water blasting .
clean original sawcut joints to a minimum depth of num num inches .
clean original formed construction joints to a minimum depth of num inch .
if sawing is used immediately flush the joint with water .
if water blasting use a waterblaster with a minimum operating capacity of num gallons per minute at num pounds per square inch .
seal the joint as specified in the applicable parts of section numn to a level num inch to num inch below the pavement surface .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num num num num initial edition section numjoint rehabilitation num descriptionthis work is construction of a sealant reservoir and sealing transverse contraction construction or expansion joints in existing portland cement concrete pavements of the type indicated .
joint rehabilitation is classified into two types as follows a type num .
joint rehabilitation of existing sawcut joints .
b type num .
joint rehabilitation of existing metal plate joints .
num material a joint sealing material .
section numb or c b joint backing material .
section num c tape bond breaker .
duct tape the width of the sealant reservoir .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a type num .
num .
general .
perform this work after spall repairs at the joint are completed .
clean and seal any unrepaired spalls num inches or less in dimension .
construct the joint sealant reservoir by sawing to the width and depth indicated for the appropriate existing joint spacing .
in general center the sealant reservoir around the existing joint opening .
immediately after sawing flush the joint with water .
place tape bondbreaker on bottom of joint reservoir immediately before sealing .
do not allow tape to extend up reservoir face more than num inch .
num .
existing wide joint .
if the existing joint is as wide as or wider than the required width of sealant reservoir thoroughly clean the joint to the depth required for the sealant reservoir .
instead of sawing the vertical faces of the joint may be thoroughly cleaned by sandblasting or water blasting .
if water blasting use a waterblaster with a minimum operating capacity of num gallons per minute at num pounds per square inch .
place joint backing material to the depth required for the sealant reservoir if necessary .
num .
sealing .
immediately before placing the sealing material sandblast all vertical faces of the joint and clean with a compressed air stream measuring num pounds per square inch at the source free of oil moisture and other contaminants .
seal as specified in the applicable parts of section numn .
b type num .
construct as specified for joint rehabilitation type num except remove the portion of the existing steel plate that lies within the new sealant reservoir before sealing the joint .
a maximum of num inch of the plate may protrude into the reservoir .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot the unit price includes cleaning and sealing of small unrepaired spalls .
repair any damage to the existing shoulders because of this work at no additional expense to the department .
num nume num num initial edition section numdiamond grinding of concrete pavement num descriptionthis work is the diamond grinding of existing cement concrete surfaces as indicated or directed .
num construction a equipment .
use a power driven selfpropelled machine having diamond blades and capable of grinding the surface of the pavement to the specified smoothness tolerances and texture .
do not use equipment that causes spalls at joints or cracks or fractures the aggregate at the surface .
b grinding .
grind the entire pavement surface in the longitudinal direction beginning and ending at lines normal to the pavement centerline unless otherwise specified .
grind in either direction unless it is otherwise determined by the representative that traffic safety considerations mandate grinding with traffic flow .
provide a uniform finished surface and eliminate joint or crack faults .
operate the grinding machine parallel to centerline .
texture the entire pavement surface however do not perform extra depth grinding to eliminate minor depressions .
do not exceed num inches of overlap .
do not grind within num feet of existing curb bridge barrier and roadway barrier .
newly sealed longitudinal or transverse joints that are damaged due to the diamond grinding operation will be resealed as specified in section num and section num at no additional cost to the department .
a newly sealed joint will be defined as a joint sealed under the current contract .
remove slurry or residue resulting from the diamond grinding in a continuous operation .
do not allow grinding slurry to flow across lanes occupied by traffic or to flow into gutters or other drainage facilities .
satisfactorily clean the pavement surface after diamond grinding and prior to opening to traffic .
do not waste slurry within the departments rightofway .
dispose of all slurry as specified in section num. c texture .
provide a surface texture consisting of parallel grooves between num inch and num inch wide with a land area between grooves of num inch to num inch and a difference between the peaks of the ridges and the bottom of the grooves of approximately num inch .
d tolerance .
num .
transverse tolerance .
restore original pavement cross slope .
maintain a uniform cross slope .
check the uniformity of cross slope at numfoot intervals longitudinally .
correct any areas with deviations greater than num inch in num feet .
provide a positive cross slope such that the pavement drains .
provide the representative with documentation recording each cross slope test location and the maximum depth of depression or slope misalignment at that location .
num .
longitudinal tolerance .
supply and operate equipment as specified in section numa for all longitudinal roughness tests .
test the pavement surface roughness in the longitudinal direction and submit the record of the information to the inspectorincharge before beginning any diamond grinding work .
following grinding of the pavement surface test the longitudinal roughness as specified in section numcnum .
regrind pavement segments as specified in section numd .
e concrete pavement rehabilitation .
concrete pavement repairs including concrete pavement patching concrete spall repair dowel retrofit slab stabilization and slab jacking must be completed before the start of any diamond grinding operations .
after completing the concrete rehabilitation operation determine the ride quality of the existing pavement in accordance with section numa and section numb before performing any diamond grinding .
after completing the diamond grinding operations reevaluate the ride quality of the pavement surface according to section numa and section numb .
use the same pavement surface profile measuring equipment to perform all ride quality evaluations on the project .
after diamond grinding the pavement surface provide a maximum iri of num inmile for facilities where posted speed limits are greater than num miles per hour and a maximum iri of num inmile for facilities where posted speed nume num num num initial edition limits are less than or equal to num miles per hour .
meet these requirements in all iri lots where diamond grinding of the pavement was performed to receive payment .
num .
lots .
a full lot is num feet of a single lane .
the representative will designate lots starting at the beginning ride quality limit and continuing to the ending ride quality limit for each pavement lane and ramp that is num feet or wider .
do not include the length of excluded areas in the num feet .
excluded areas will consist of bridge decks ramps less than num feetin length tapered pavements less than num feet wide partial lots less than num feet in length shoulders medians and other pavement surfaces as indicated .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard price includes the removal and disposal of all slurry .
no ride quality incentive will be paid for diamond grinding on concrete pavement rehabilitation projects .
num numc num initial edition section numsawing and sealing of bituminous overlays num descriptionthis work is the saw cutting of new bituminous concrete courses directly above existing or constructed transverse joints in the underlying concrete pavement as directed and sealing the reservoir .
num material a sealing material .
section numb c or g b tape bond breaker .
section numc num construction a general .
locate and reference the location of each end of each existing transverse joint before placing any bituminous courses .
for transverse joints across multiple lanes where traffic is diverted to an adjacent lane locate and reference an additional point along the transverse joint to facilitate marking the location of the joint in one lane while traffic is traveling in the adjacent lane .
prepare a qc plan outlining the control of locating and referencing transverse joints .
have the qc plan describe the personnel equipment and methods necessary to accurately locate reference and later mark for sawing all joint locations .
submit the qc plan to the representative at least num days before the start of referencing operations .
do not begin joint referencing until the representative reviews the qc plan .
before or on the first day of joint referencing and before the placement of any bituminous courses demonstrate the ability to accurately relocate the existing transverse joints using the reference data to the satisfaction of the representative at no additional cost to the department .
if the joint referencing and relocating process does not yield consistent results within a num inch tolerance stop all related operations and amend the qc plan to ensure accurate referencing .
b sawing .
make all sawcuts directly above the existing transverse joints within num inch .
sawcuts which do not meet this tolerance will be declared defective as outlined in section num .
do not saw cut until the bituminous course has cooled below numf .
perform saw cutting within num days after placing the wearing course .
perform this work on all finished overlay areas before discontinuing work due to seasonal paving limitations .
make sawcuts only in the lane in which the existing joint is located .
extend the sawcuts through any existing widening .
provide separate sawcuts in each lane if existing transverse joints are offset more than num inch .
use the following table to determine sawcut reservoir size overlay thickness inches reservoir inches num num num deep by num wide num num num deep by num wide additionally if the total depth of overlay is num num inches or greater make an initial sawcut num inch wide to a depth of num num inches or onethird of the total overlay thickness whichever is greater .
indicated overlay depths do not include scratch or leveling courses less than num inch .
if wet sawing immediately flush the reservoir with water .
if not placing the wearing course within the same construction season provide a numinch wide sawcut in the last placed bituminous course to a minimum depth of num inch or onethird the thickness of the bituminous material placed whichever is greater .
c sealing .
do not place sealing material unless the reservoir faces are thoroughly clean and dry .
do not place on the same day as wet sawing .
clean the reservoir by using compressed air immediately before placing sealing material .
use compressed air free of oil moisture or any other substance that would prevent bonding of sealing material to the reservoir faces .
numc num num initial edition do not place sealing material if the air temperature is less than numf or above numf unless otherwise allowed by the representative .
determine the safe heating temperature and recommended pouring temperature from the manufacturers shipping container .
heat and maintain the material temperature within these recommended safe temperatures .
place the material as close as possible to the recommended pouring temperature .
do not maintain any single batch of material at the pouring temperature for more than num hours .
reheat according to the manufacturers recommendations .
place tape bondbreaker on bottom of joint reservoir immediately before sealing .
do not allow tape to extend up the reservoir face more than num inch .
fill the reservoir with sealing material to a level num inch to num inch below the pavement surface .
do not allow sealing material to spread over the pavement surface .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num numn num num initial edition section numconcrete pavement patching num descriptionthis work is the construction of single course full depth normal strength or accelerated strength cement concrete pavement patches .
do not patch less than one lane width .
if diamond grinding is to be performed test the pavement surface in the longitudinal direction as specified in section numdnum .
a patching joint .
provide full depth sawcuts at the existing pavementpatch interface install load transfer dowels in the transverse faces of the existing pavement construct a sealant reservoir and seal the joint .
b new pavement joint .
provide load transfer unit construct sealant reservoir and seal the joint .
c normal and accelerated concrete pavement patching type a. construct patches between num feet and num feet long .
d normal and accelerated concrete pavement patching type b. construct patches between num feet and num feet long .
e normal and accelerated concrete pavement patching type c. construct patches between num feet and num feet long .
num material a cement concreteclass aa .
section num. b reinforcement .
sections num num and num c expansion joint filler .
section num.l d dowels and load transfer units .
section num e joint sealing material .
section numb or c f graphite lubricant .
section num g concrete curing materials .
for normal strength concrete use section numa b c d and e or section numa type num .
for accelerated strength concrete use section numb and section numa type num or numb .
h concrete admixtures .
section num if accelerating admixtures are used provide only accelerating admixtures that contain no chlorides .
i subbase .
section num j tape bond breaker .
an approved selfadhesive tape .
k anchor material .
an approved adhesive anchoring material listed in bulletin num. m preformed cellular polystyrene .
astm c num n intermediate curing compound .
section numc num numc num num initial edition num constructionas shown on standard drawing rc numm and as follows a general .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section numanum.a and submit it for review .
the qc plan must describe appropriate action points for all phases of construction including concrete mixing and curing joint sawing and sealing and sampling and testing for opening to traffic .
if patching adjacent lanes construct concrete pavement patches onelane at a time where twolane width construction would interfere with traffic .
the representative will surface mark patch areas in advance of the sawing operations .
protect traffic from drop off conditions as specified in section numj .
do not allow excavated patch areas to remain unpatched for more than num calendar days or over weekends or holidays .
if it rains while the patch area is open excavate an outlet through the shoulder at the lowest point of the patch as directed .
repair any damage to the existing shoulders as a result of this work at no expense to the department .
after saw cutting the existing pavement allow traffic on patch areas of existing pavement for a maximum of num hours .
do not allow saw cuts in excess of num inch in width to be opened to traffic .
for normal strength patches do not place concrete if the air temperature falls below numf .
for accelerated strength patches do not place concrete if the air temperature falls below numf .
before placing concrete ensure adequate equipment and trained personnel are available and sufficient hauling units scheduled to maintain continuity in placement .
b saw cutting .
use a saw equipped with a diamondtipped blade a blade guard alignment guides water cooling system and cutdepth controls for saw cutting the perimeter of the patch .
do not allow cooling water slurry and dust from the sawing operation to enter any lane opened to traffic .
make all required full depth longitudinal saw cuts along the perimeter of the patch prior to making any full depth transverse saw cuts .
where only one lane is being patched make a full depth sawcut in the existing longitudinal joint for the full length of the patch .
where multiple lanes are being patched one lane at a time perform one of the following make a full depth sawcut within the adjacent lane to be patched .
make the sawcut parallel and not more than num foot from the existing longitudinal joint .
form the patch joint in the same location as the existing longitudinal joint and backfill behind the forms with aggregate at no additional cost to the department .
make a full depth sawcut in the existing longitudinal joint for the length of the patch and insert a temporary rigid separator between the adjacent lane and the patch area .
do not use a temporary rigid separator greater than num inch thick .
make full depth transverse sawcuts at the locations marked on the pavement surface .
do not break back the underside of the existing pavement .
if break back or spalling occurs make a new full depth transverse sawcut beyond the area of break back or spalling .
place the additional length of patch at no expense to the department .
if break back or spalling occurs in the adjacent lane repair the damaged area at a minimum with a full depth type a concrete patch at no additional expense to the department .
full depth saw cuts at the patch limits will be allowed to extend transversely into the adjacent pavement up to full depth num inches provided dowel bars in the adjacent lane are not damaged .
additional full depth transverse saw cuts will be allowed to facilitate slab removal but may not extend transversely into the adjacent pavement to remain in place .
c removal of existing pavement .
remove concrete between narrowly spaced sawcuts at the end of a proposed patch area in a manner that does not damage any adjacent pavement that is to remain in place .
as an alternate a wheel saw having carbide steel tips may be used before making the full depth transverse saw cuts necessary for the patching joint .
limit penetration of the wheel to minimize disturbance to the subbase .
do not allow wheel saws with carbide steel tips to cut into pavement that is to remain in place .
discontinue using a wheel saw if unsatisfactory results are obtained as determined by the representative .
remove the concrete in the patch area in one or more pieces minimizing disturbance to the subbase subgrade and the adjacent pavement to remain in place .
do not use drop hammers or hydrohammers .
if damage occurs to pavement to remain in place repair as specified in section numb at no additional cost to the department .
if the surface of the subbase is disturbed by the removal technique recompact the surface using small vibratory compactors .
if the disturbed material is deeper than num inch remove the disturbed material with hand tools and replace with concrete during paving at no expense to the department .
numc numj num num initial edition correct all subbase surface irregularities exceeding num inch in depth by loosening the surface and removing or adding material as required .
compact the corrected area and surrounding surface by rolling to proper grade and slope .
d removal of existing subbase .
remove unsuitable subbase material as directed .
replace as specified in section num. e transverse joints .
num .
general .
if any patch is replacing an existing expansion joint and the existing expansion joint in the adjacent lane is remaining in place install numinch expansion joint material in the joint nearest to the remaining expansion joint .
provide a tube with a minimum numinch clearance packet over the lubricated end of all coated dowel bars .
num .
patching joint .
drill holes into the face of the existing pavement that has been saw cut full depth .
provide holes a maximum of num inch larger in diameter than the coated dowel bars .
mount drilling machines in a frame that maintains the proper horizontal and vertical alignment during drilling .
do not use hand held drills or drills that rest upon the subbase or subgrade .
drill holes to the alignment tolerances shown on the standard drawings .
change location of drill holes num inch to avoid existing reinforcing steel .
securely embed the coated dowel bars into place with an approved anchoring material .
inject all the mixed anchoring material into the rear of the hole before inserting the dowel bar .
rotate the dowel three to five complete rotations while inserting the dowel to purge air voids as completely as possible .
immediately trowel all excess anchoring material flush with the vertical face of the patch until the anchoring material reaches its initial set .
do not leave voids in the anchoring material .
use a plastic retainer washer to hold anchoring material in place if directed and remove before placement of concrete in the patch .
provide anchoring material formulated to reach an initial set within num minutes of application .
provide a material specification data sheet for the anchoring material used .
render exposed portion of each coated dowel bar bondless as specified in section numi .
num .
new pavement joint .
as indicated and when directed provide load transfer units adjacent to existing joints and at the same joint spacing as the existing pavement .
when patching all adjacent lanes make the joint spacing correspond to standard drawing rcnumm or rcnumm as applicable .
make all joints normal to the centerline of the roadway .
place coated dowel bars parallel to the centerline and surface of the pavement .
install load transfer units as specified in section numi .
f forms .
form all patch sides not in contact with pavement remaining in place .
use steel or wood forms with adequate bracing to maintain proper position .
extend all forms to the full depth of the existing pavement .
furnish forms plumb clean and free of any warping or surface defects .
make all formed joints vertical .
g concrete .
design mix and place as specified in section numa through h. concrete will be accepted by lot as specified in section numdnum .
h final strikeoff and consolidation .
as specified in section numk .
i final finish for pavements not being overlaid .
for type a and b patches finish the surface of the patch to match the existing pavement cross section .
include any existing wheel ruts .
for type c patches taper the wheel ruts at both ends of the patch to a straight pavement cross slope within the patch with a minimum transition length of num feet .
texture type a and b patches to correspond with the texture of the surrounding pavement .
texture type c patches as specified in section numknum .
following the final finishing and before application of curing materials scribe the date of the patch placement in the surface of the fresh concrete along the shoulder edge of the patch .
if the contract includes grinding of the pavement surface then the matching of wheel ruts and the texturing of the patch surface is not necessary .
make the scribing of the patch dates deep enough that the grinding will not eliminate them .
j curing of concrete .
for normal strength patches immediately after finishing operations have been completed cover and cure the patch surface as specified in section numl .
numj numc num num initial edition for accelerated patches cure concrete as specified in section numlnum.b or using approved curing insulation materials .
apply white membraneforming curing compound as specified in section numlnum.c .
the contractor may use black membraneforming curing compound provided the patch area will not be accessible to traffic before placement of a surface course .
discontinue use of black membraneforming curing compound if it performs unsatisfactorily as a curing agent and resume curing by other methods as specified .
cure test cylinders under the same conditions as the concrete pavement patch .
provide insulation or heating of patches if the ambient temperature drops below numf during the curing operation .
control the curing temperature and monitor at least hourly to ensure that the concrete pavement patch does not experience a curing temperature change in excess of numf within any numhour period during the curing operation .
if a change in curing temperature in excess of numf occurs in the concrete pavement patch within any numhour period the work will be considered defective .
k stabilizing around patches .
after curing and before opening to traffic grout around the patches .
use the hole pattern shown on the standard drawings .
if directed stabilize as specified in section num. m longitudinal joints .
in twolane width patching being performed at the same time construct a type l joint as shown on the standard drawings .
in twolane patching being performed one lane atatime or onelane patching provide a numinch full depth polystyrene board bond breaker in the longitudinal joint of type a and b patches .
do not provide a bond breaker in the longitudinal joint of type c patches .
provide tiebars in all type c patches .
for all patch types saw cut the longitudinal joint num inch wide and num inch deep .
center the sawcut over the joint .
n sealing .
seal all longitudinal and transverse joints constructed as part of this work as specified in section numn .
seal all sawcuts extending beyond the patch limits .
p ride acceptance .
test the surface of the patch area in the longitudinal direction and across patch joints using a numfoot straightedge .
correct by grinding any high points or depressions in excess of num inch at no expense to the department .
after grinding retest the area with the numfoot straightedge .
if the surface still exceeds the above limits then the area is defective .
remove and replace the defective area at no expense to the department .
q opening to traffic .
for normal strength patches do not open the repaired area to traffic until the concrete has obtained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to ptm no .
num .
for accelerated strength patches obtain samples of plastic concrete for compressive strength testing for opening to traffic from each num cubic yards or fraction thereof of the days placement and unless otherwise required from the last mixer load of the day according to the approved qc plan .
sample locations will be selected according to ptm no .
num .
test concrete for compressive strength according to ptm no .
num at the time of opening to traffic but no later than num hours after the test specimens were molded .
concrete lots that have not attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at the time of opening to traffic will be considered defective work .
r defective work .
remove and replace concrete pavement patches that are considered defective at no cost to the department .
the numday minimum compressive strength testing for acceptance will not be conducted for any work that is considered defective .
num measurement and payment a patching joint .
linear foot b new pavement joint .
linear foot c concrete pavement patching .
square yard numc nume num num initial edition for the type indicated .
when longitudinal joint cleaning and sealing is part of the contract the sealing of longitudinal joints is incidental to that item not to concrete pavement patching .
the unit price includes removal of the existing pavement and all repairs or corrections specified in section num that are needed as a result of patching operations .
d subbase material .
cubic yard the unit price includes excavation .
e slab stabilization .
section numb and c num num num num initial edition section numtransverse grooving of concrete pavement for retexturing num descriptionthis work is the cutting of transverse grooves in existing cement concrete pavement after the original texture has been lost .
num constructionsatisfactorily groove the existing pavement surface transversely between the limiting stations indicated .
do not use flailing type equipment .
cut grooves num inch in width with a tolerance of plus num inch a numinch centertocenter spacing and a minimum depth of num inch .
do not cut grooves within num inches of the outside edge or centerline pavement joint .
do not allow cutting slurry to accumulate on adjacent lanes .
remove the slurry and satisfactorily clean the lanes as work progresses .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard measured on the finished grooved area .
num numb num num initial edition section numcontinuously reinforced concrete pavement patching num descriptionthis work is the construction of one course fulldepth continuously reinforced cement concrete pavement patches .
do not patch less than one lane width .
a patching joint .
provide partial depth sawcuts at the existing pavementpatch interface construct a sealant reservoir and seal the joint .
b continuously reinforced concrete pavement patching type a. construct patches between num feet and num feet long if using tied splices and between num feet and num feet long if using welded splices .
c continuously reinforced concrete pavement patching type b. construct patches between num feet and num feet long .
d continuously reinforced concrete pavement patching type c. construct patches between num feet and num feet long .
num material a cement concrete .
class aa or class hes section num. b reinforcement bars .
section num c concrete curing materials .
section numa b c d and e. . d concrete admixtures .
section num e bondbreaker .
use polyethylene sheeting clear or opaque minimum nummil thickness or a double application of type num white pigmented waxbased curing compound as specified in section numa and section numa respectively .
f subbase .
section num g joint sealing material .
section numb or c h tape bond breaker .
an acceptable selfadhesive tape the width of the sealant reservoir .
i preformed cellular polystyrene .
section numm j welding material .
section numt k anchoring material .
section numk num constructionas specified in section num modified as follows b saw cutting .
replace the second paragraph of section numb with the following make initial fulldepth transverse sawcuts from the outside edge of the pavement toward the longitudinal saw cut .
make a second numinch minimum depth transverse sawcut at each end of the patch area parallel to and outside the initial sawcut the distance shown on the standard drawings for the type of rebar splices to be used .
do not saw cut across an existing crack .
do not locate sawcuts within num inches of an existing crack .
do not cut reinforcement bars when making the partial depth sawcuts .
if any of the reinforcement bars are cut take corrective action by making numb numc num num initial edition the partial depth sawcut a fulldepth cut and making another partial depth numinch minimum sawcut located as specified above .
place the additional length of patch at no expense to the department .
c removal of existing pavement .
replace section numc with the following c removal of existing pavement .
remove concrete between the two fulldepth transverse sawcuts before making the numinch minimum depth sawcuts .
a wheel saw having carbide steel tips may be used while making the fulldepth transverse sawcuts to provide a trench across the slab to relieve compression in pavement before lifting out failed area .
limit penetration of wheel into the subbase to a maximum of num inch .
do not allow the wheel to cut into pavement that is remaining in place .
discontinue use of the wheel saw if unsatisfactory results are obtained as determined by the representative .
install lifting devices and lift out the concrete in the area enclosed by the fulldepth sawcuts in one or more pieces without disturbing existing subbase .
remove the concrete strips at each end of the patch area with jackhammers and hand tools .
limit jackhammer size to num pounds maximum .
do not damage existing reinforcement bars within the concrete strips .
do not break back the underside of the existing pavement .
if break back greater than num inches occurs make a new fulldepth transverse sawcut beyond the area of break back .
saw cut a new outside edge maintaining the appropriate bar length at the edge of patch .
place the additional length of patch at no cost to the department .
if the existing pavement was constructed on top of a bond breaker remove the bond breaker from the top of pavement base .
place new bond breaker of the existing type and thickness before placing concrete .
if polyethylene sheeting is used cut to the surface dimensions of the patch .
if the surface of the subbase is disturbed by the removal procedure recompact the surface using small vibratory compactors .
if subbase material is disturbed to a depth greater than num inch remove the disturbed material with hand tools and replace with concrete during paving at no cost to the department .
e transverse joints .
replace section nume with the following e reinforcement .
place reinforcement in the patch area as specified in section num and as shown on the standard drawings .
firmly support and tie bars at every intersection to reestablish the continuous reinforcing .
use tied or welded splices .
lap the new reinforcement bars with the existing bars as shown on the standard drawings for the type of rebar splices to be used .
weld splice as specified in section numm and as shown on the standard drawings .
when weld splicing lap tie bars at the center of the patch as shown on the standard drawings to allow for expansion .
num measurement and payment a patching joint .
linear foot b continuously reinforced concrete pavement patching .
square yard for type indicated .
the unit price includes removal of the existing pavement and repairs or corrections specified in section num that are needed as a result of patching operations .
c subbase material .
cubic yard the unit price includes excavation .
num numi num num change no .
num section numpervious concrete pavement system num descriptionthis work is the construction of plantmixed pervious concrete pavement on a prepared surface designed to allow the infiltration of storm water into the subsoil .
the pervious concrete surface layer is a horizontal plane that is permeable to water and air .
the second layer of the storm water system is an open graded angular stone layer that is used for temporary storm water detention .
num material a cement .
section num b pozzolans .
section num c aggregate .
section num num .
coarse aggregate .
num.a for use in concrete .
aashto no .
num type a .
num.b for use in detention basin .
either aashto no .
num as the primary detention coarse aggregate topped with aashto no .
num as a choker and leveling coarse or aashto no .
num only as designed and specified .
num .
fine aggregate .
num.a for use in concrete .
fine aggregate type a .
num.b for use in detention basin .
fine aggregate type a or type b. d water .
section num e concrete admixtures .
section num with the following addition i hydration stabilizing admixture .
a bulletin num approved admixture that is both a water reducing and retarding admixture .
f geotextile class num type a .
section num g concrete mix design .
design the pervious concrete mixture proportions in accordance with astm c num .
design the mixture to have a plastic unit weight between num pounds to num pounds and water cement ratio of num num .
adjust the mix water if necessary during production if the mixture has a dull or dry appearance to produce a wet metallic sheen without causing the paste to flow from the aggregate .
additional mix water may be added at the project if necessary to achieve this condition provided the plastic unit weight is within num pounds per cubic foot of the target design unit weight .
if reactive aggregates are used in the mixture remediate for asr in accordance with the departments latest specification requirements .
furnish the proposed mix design identifying all mixture components and weights or dosage amounts to the dmedmm at least num weeks before the scheduled start of producing the mixture for the project .
include the target insitu void content and num day unit weight values on the mix design form .
h concrete curing material .
a polyethylene curing sheet in accordance with astm c num. i qc plan .
prepare and submit a qc plan as specified in section num .
provide the qc plan to the representative at the start of the project .
do not begin production until receiving approval of the qc plan from the representative .
numi numg num num change no .
num num .
cold weather .
include provisions to protect pervious concrete from freezing throughout the num day curing period in accordance with aci num .
num .
hot weather .
include detailed plans indicating the amount of hydration stabilizing admixture that will be added in numf increments to provide time for placing and finishing the pervious concrete before initial set .
num construction a test sections .
produce two test sections using the approved mix design and placement and finishing operations to be used in production and construct at the project site on a prepared subgrade and base using the material and construction requirements used in production .
each section must have an area of at least num square feet .
perform infiltration on both test sections in accordance with astm c num .
the average of both infiltration values must exceed num inches per hour .
submit the following information for each test section to the representative test section thickness section nums .
thickness can not be more than numinch less than the design thickness .
void content astm c num .
void structure of num num .
hardened density astm c num the average hardened densities of the two test sections will be the hardened density used as the basis of acceptance for the remainder of the project with a tolerance of num pounds per cubic foot and not to exceed num pounds per cubic foot .
note test sections may with the approval of the representative be incorporated into the project .
b equipment .
provide equipment to strike off pervious concrete that provides an acceptable final finish using either a formriding paving machine roller screed vibrating screed or an asphalt paver .
the final surface finish may be applied with steel finishing equipment or a motorized pan finisher provided the surface voids are not sealed .
num .
rollers .
use smooth steelwheeled rollers in the static mode seating with one to four passes .
do not use pneumatic tire rollers .
c subgrade preparation .
excavate subgrade to undisturbed soil without compaction allowing the subgrade to be left as permeable as possible .
where erosion of subgrade has caused accumulation of fine materials andor surface ponding remove the accumulated material using light equipment and scarify the underlying soil to a minimum depth of num inches using a spring tooth rake or equivalent and a light tractor .
avoid driving concrete mixers or other equipment through the installation area .
correct and repair any damaged or compacted areas to the satisfaction of the representative .
notify the representative upon completion of subgrade work for final inspection and acceptance before proceeding with basin and choker course installation .
d detention basin .
prevent sediment from washing into beds during site development .
cover the bottom of the detention base with a minimum of num inches of fine aggregate to prevent soils from migrating into the storm water storage area .
wrap basin sides with a nonwoven geotextile fabric .
install detention basin coarse aggregate in num inch maximum lifts .
compact the course as specified in section num .
install aggregates to grades indicated on drawings .
place the specified depths of coarse aggregate on top of the fine aggregate and roll as specified in section numbnum .
remove temporary sediment control materials when the site is fully stabilized .
e setting formwork .
set align and brace forms so that the cured concrete meets the tolerances and specified elevations .
apply formrelease agent to any formed faces in contact with the concrete immediately before placement .
undamaged vertical faces of previously placed concrete may be used for subsequent placement .
f mixing and hauling .
operate truck mixers at the speed designated by the manufacturer for a minimum of num to num revolutions of the drum .
unless otherwise approved place pervious concrete within num minutes after final introduction of any mix water .
g placing and finishing fixed form pavement .
wet the subgrade or subbase with water before concrete placement such that the material is saturated but without standing water .
deposit the concrete either directly from the numg numn num num change no .
num transporting equipment or by conveyor onto the subgrade .
do not place pervious concrete on frozen material .
deposit concrete between forms to an approximate uniform height .
spread the concrete using mechanized equipment or hand tools without segregation .
where trucks or buses may access the concrete utilize a paver equipped with compaction tampers .
for other areas a roller screed or vibrating screed may be used .
h final surface finish .
final finish for paver placed concrete is to be achieved with a maximum numton roller to eliminate seams .
do not allow rollers to bridge previously placed and cured concrete for num days or before the representative is satisfied that the concrete has achieved sufficient strength to prevent damage .
steel troweling may be used provided the surface voids remain open and the average density requirement and permeability values are met .
i edging .
edge exterior formed surfaces to a radius of not less than numinch .
j curing .
begin curing within num minutes of concrete discharge .
completely cover the pavement surface with a num mil minimum polyethylene sheet .
thoroughly secure the curing sheet at all exterior edges and interior laps to prevent removal from wind .
maintain curing for a minimum of num days .
k construction joints .
construct joints in the locations specified by either tooling into the pervious concrete immediately upon final finishing to approximately num slab thickness using a pervious concrete cross rolling tool or saw cut after the concrete has achieved sufficient compressive strength to prevent aggregate from being dislodged .
if joints are saw cut remove fines produced from the operation by vacuum to avoid clogging .
if curing is interrupted control the operation such that the polyethylene sheeting and curing is reinstituted within num minutes of the initial removal .
l weather .
do not place pervious concrete when air temperatures are projected to fall below numf or lower any time during the numhour period following concrete placement or if rain is forecasted to occur before final finishing and curing .
in the event that a rainfall event occurs immediately stop production form a construction joint and apply the polyethylene sheeting .
with the approval of the representative a construction joint may be saw cut before resuming placement .
pervious concrete subjected to rainfall will be evaluated after curing for loss of mortar at the surface and repaired or removed and replaced at the discretion of the representative .
m testing and acceptance .
num .
plastic concrete .
perform unit weight testing on every truck in accordance with astm c num .
num .
in place hardened concrete .
identify and remove three numinch diameter cores for each num square feet in accordance with ptm no .
num .
transport the cores to the lts for testing indicating the required concrete thickness density and void content from the test sections .
num.a project core lengths tested by lts will be considered acceptable when meeting the following average core length numinch numinch length of any individual numinch num.b oven dry density .
astm c num .
num.c core void content .
acceptance will be num of the average voids in the cores of the accepted test section .
num .
infiltration testing .
perform infiltration on three areas selected in accordance with ptm no .
num for every num square feet of pervious concrete placed in accordance with astm c num .
remove and replace pervious concrete not meeting or exceeding a minimum average infiltration rate of num inches per hour .
document the average infiltration value from testing for use in future maintenance activities .
n opening to traffic .
do not open the pavement to vehicular traffic until the concrete has cured for at least num days during which the ambient temperature has exceeded numf during any time of the day .
num num num num change no .
num num measurement and paymentsquare foot num num num num initial edition section numtransverse joint cleaning and sealing num descriptionthis work consists of cleaning and sealing existing transverse joints in cement concrete pavements .
num material joint sealing materialsection numb or c joint backing materialsection num num constructioncompletely remove all existing joint sealing material neoprene compression seals bituminous material and other foreign material in a manner that provides a clean newly exposed concrete surface .
clean to a minimum depth of num num inches .
immediately before placing backer rod clean the joint faces by sandblasting and airblasting .
for airblasting use a compressed air stream of at least num pounds per square inch measured at the source .
use air free of oil moisture and other contaminants .
immediately before sealing the joint place the backer rod to a depth of num inch below the pavement surface .
use a backer rod num to num larger in diameter than the joint opening .
seal joint as specified in section numn and as follows do not place sealant unless joint is dry .
do not place joint sealant unless the ambient air and the pavement temperatures are numf or greater .
fill the joint reservoir to a level of num inch to num inch below the pavement surface .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num numd num num change no .
num section numultrathin portland cement concrete overlay num descriptionthis work is the construction of an accelerated strength ultrathin portland cement concrete overlay as indicated .
num material a accelerated strength portland cement concrete .
section numb modified as follows delete table a .
use concrete reinforced with polypropylene fibers according to astm c num type iii num and astm c num ref astm c num performance level num outlined in section num note num and residual strength .
use num virgin polypropylene pe manufactured to an optimum gradation for use as concrete reinforcement .
b design basis .
section numc modified as follows revise the first sentence of the first paragraph as follows make trial mixtures and computations for accelerated strength portland cement concrete including the molding and curing of test specimens .
revise the first sentence of the second paragraph and add a second sentence as follows design a concrete mix for having a numday minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch for acceptance when tested according to ptm num and a numhour minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
measure concrete consistency in inches of slump as specified in section numv .
add the following sentence to the third paragraph if the overlay depth is less than num inches use no .
num coarse aggregate instead of no .
num coarse aggregate .
revise the fifth paragraph as follows use a cement factor of num pounds minimum per cubic yard and a watercement ratio of num maximum .
revise the sixth paragraph as follows the contractor may substitute flyash for portland cement at a maximum rate of num by weight for cement .
include flyash with cement when determining the watercement ratio .
add pe fiber at the rate of num pounds minimum per cubic yard .
num .
air content .
section numcnum .
revise the first sentence as follows design cement concrete with an air content of num in the plastic state .
num .
class of cement concrete .
section numcnum .
revise the heading and first sentence as follows accelerated strength portland cement concrete .
the concrete design submitted for review is required to comply with the specified requirements supported by air content and compressive strength test data according to aci num .
delete the last paragraph .
c concrete admixtures .
section num and as follows if accelerating admixtures are used provide accelerating admixtures that do not contain chlorides .
d concrete curing material .
section num and section numa type num num numn num num change no .
num num constructionsection num modified as follows a general .
section numa with the following additions prepare a qc plan as specified in section num detailing the timing and sequence of the work including timing of mixing hauling placing curing monitoring of concrete temperature joint sawing and sampling and testing for compressive strength for opening to traffic .
indicate variations on timing in response to anticipated variations in the air temperature for the time of placement .
submit the qc plan for review before the start of the project .
do not start work until the qc plan has been approved .
e preparation and protection of base course .
replace section nume with the following e bituminous surface preparation .
completely clean milled pavement surface .
limit cleaning to area that will be overlaid the same day .
protect the cleaned and prepared surface from oil or grease drippings from compressors concrete trucks spreaders pavers etc .
by using protective covers .
remove all deleterious materials before overlaying .
sprinkle to thoroughly dampen the bituminous surface immediately before placement of cement concrete without causing pooled or puddle water .
h handling and placing reinforcement .
delete section numh .
i transverse joint .
replace section numi with the following i joints .
saw joints as soon as concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without excessive raveling resulting from the sawing operation .
space joints equidistant longitudinally and transversely .
determine spacing using formula of num foot of joint spacing per numinch of depth of cement concrete overlay .
saw joints with a green cut saw to a depth of dnum and a minimum width of num inch .
do not seal joints .
clean joints of all deleterious material after sawing .
saw soon enough after placement to prevent random cracking .
if necessary conduct sawing operations continuously both day and night regardless of weather conditions .
omit sawing if a crack occurs at or within num feet of a joint location before the time of the sawing or during sawing .
if a crack occurs before acceptance of pavement remove and replace one full panel width and length .
other than white curing compound remove curing materials from overlay at the location where a joint is to be cut .
remove only sufficient covering to provide space necessary for sawing joints .
as soon as the joint is made replace the covering .
the maximum time period allowed for pavement curing covers to be removed is num hour .
if white membrane curing compound is used cure the joint area as specified in the first six paragraphs in section numlnum.c .
do not displace coarse aggregate from the joint location using a vibrating tbar or using a filler strip at the joint .
j longitudinal joints .
delete section numj .
l curing concrete .
section numl revised as follows num .
normal curing .
revise the first sentence as follows allow curing materials to remain in place and maintain as specified for a period of num hours or until the concrete has reached num pounds per square inch compressive strength .
add the following paragraphs provide adequate insulating blankets to prevent rapid heat loss if the air temperature is numf or less .
remove any insulation when a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch has been attained .
remove insulation at such a rate that the temperature change in the concrete does not exceed numf within any numhour period .
if a temperature change in the concrete in excess of numf occurs within any numhour period whether insulation is used or not consider the work defective .
the application or removal of insulation covers may be controlled by the use of maturity concepts provided the minimum degreehours of curing has been achieved at the top of the slab .
n sealing joints and cracks .
delete section numn .
numr numc num num change no .
num r opening to traffic .
replace section numq with the following r opening to traffic .
sample plastic concrete for compressive strength testing ptm no .
num before opening to traffic according to the approved qc plan .
the representative will select sample locations according to ptm no .
num .
the representative will determine when pavement will be opened to traffic but no sooner than num hours or when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength .
if concrete pavement has not attained a minimum numhour compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at the time of opening to traffic consider the work defective .
t tests for depth .
section nums with the following exception for projects at intersections and less than num square yards drill two cores .
u defective work .
section numt except revise the first paragraph as follows unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace at no expense to the department pavement that is defective in surface tolerance as specified in section numo defective in compressive strength as specified in section numb defective in depth as specified in section numt defective in air content as specified in section numbnum where the temperature change in concrete in excess of numf occurs within a numhour period or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of rain hail improper final finish excessive raveling of joints during sawing or honeycombing which in the representatives opinion can not be repaired .
v test slab .
construct an offsite slab num weeks before placement of accelerated concrete pavement on the project as follows construct the test slab one lane width wide and num feet long .
use the concrete mix design specified in section numa and b in the test slab .
establish a target value for the consistency during placement of the test slab .
the slump for production shall be the consistency of the test slab num inch .
submit any adjustments for review .
if maturity concept is being used correlate degreehours of cure to compressive strength breaks at num num num and num hours following placement of the test slab .
establish the minimum number of degreehours of cure by correlation with compressive strength tests .
verify maturity curves with first num days production work regardless of quantity placed by recording compressive strength breaks at num num num and num hours following placement .
appropriately time joint saw cut operations as they are proposed for the actual work .
the results of this test slab will be used to adjust the timing of joint sawing during construction of the actual project .
cure the test slab as proposed for the actual work and demonstrate by compressive cylinder breaks and maturity data if maturity concepts are used that the mix conforms to the opening to traffic requirement within num hours of placement .
num measurement and payment a surface preparation .
square yard b ultrathin portland cement concrete overlay .
square yard this unit price includes saw cutting of transverse and longitudinal joints and construction of test slab .
c concrete pavement cores .
each the price includes the measuring apparatus which remains the contractors property upon completion of the project .
the department will not pay for additional cores drilled if the depth is deficient by more than num inch .
num numd num num change no .
num section numconcrete pavement partialdepth repair num descriptionthis work is the construction of a partialdepth repair of an existing concrete pavement .
this type of repair is suitable for use on transverse or longitudinal joints cracks and interior slab spalls when the depth of the repair is no greater than half the slab thickness .
areas that require repair depths that are greater than half the slab thickness are to be repaired with fulldepth concrete pavement patches as specified in section num .
concrete pavement partialdepth repair is classified by two types as follows a concrete pavement partialdepth repair type num .
spot repairs of transverse or longitudinal joints cracks and interior slab surface spalling between num inches and num feet in length .
b concrete pavement partialdepth repair type num .
extended length repairs of transverse or longitudinal joints cracks and interior slab surface spalling in lengths greater than num feet .
num material a class aa cement concrete modified .
class aa cement concrete as specified in section num except as follows coarse aggregate type a no .
numsection num maximum water cement ratio lbslbs num b class aa cement concrete accelerated .
class aa cement concrete as specified in section num except as follows coarse aggregate type a no .
numsection num maximum water cement ratio lbslbs num submit mix design having a minimum target value of num pounds per square inch compressive strength at num hours when tested according to ptm no .
num. c rapidset concrete patching material .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num meeting the requirements of astm cnum .
the material must be tested and meet the minimum test results for the astm and aashto test methods outlined below the material must have a minimum durability factor of num at num cycles when tested in accordance with astm cnum procedure b with and without aggregate extenders .
a minimum initial set time of num minutes at num f num f as tested in accordance with aashto t num .
when the depth of the repair is greater than num inches use aggregate extenders in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use only aggregate extenders included with the prepackaged rapidset concrete patching material .
if aggregate extenders are not included as part of the prepackaged rapidset concrete patching material use aashto no .
num coarse aggregate from a bulletin num approved supplier with and expansion index less than num and only if allowed in writing by the material manufacturer .
d grout .
use the following initial weight proportions cement water fine aggregate num num num to be placed within num minutes of mix completion .
nume numc num num change no .
num e epoxy bonding compound .
type ii grade num astm cnum as specified in section num and as follows use epoxy bonding compound within the shelf life established by the manufacturer but not to exceed a maximum of num year from the manufactured date .
apply the epoxy bonding compound within the temperature limitations established by the manufacturer .
f concrete curing materials .
for normal strength use section numa b c and d section numa type num .
for accelerated strength use section numb and section numa .
g preformed cellular polystyrene .
astm cnum h expansion joint filler .
section num i joint sealing material .
section numb or d j tape bond breaker .
an acceptable selfadhesive tape the width of the sealant reservoir .
num construction a general .
prepare and submit for approval a qc plan specifically for concrete pavement partialdepth repair as specified in section numanum .
detail appropriate action points for all phases of construction including removal of deteriorated concrete concrete mixing and curing joint sawing and sealing and sampling and testing for opening to traffic .
b repair area preparation .
in the presence of the inspector sound the concrete to determine the extent of the concrete delamination using a steel bar drag chains or a hammer .
lay out rectangular repair limits to extend approximately num inches beyond the edges of the delaminated area .
all repair areas will be rectangular with a minimum dimension of num inches by num inches by num inches deep .
if partialdepth repair areas are less than num inches apart combine them into one partialdepth repair area .
for areas where delamination extends through a pavement joint the area should be repaired by maintaining the joint with two separate minimum repair areas .
c concrete removal .
remove all deteriorated concrete in the designated repair area to a minimum depth of num inches and a maximum depth of half of the slab thickness .
for type numpartialdepth repairs only saw cut the perimeter of the repair area to a minimum depth of num inches .
remove the existing concrete within the repair area to a minimum depth of num inches .
use a chipping hammer weighing not more than num pounds .
operate the chipping hammer at a num num degree angle to remove damaged concrete without causing additional damage and to create a rough surface for proper bonding .
for type num and type num partialdepth repairs when using the milling machine mill along the joint or crack .
the head of the milling machine must be a v head flat head or a rounded head .
when using a milling machine square the corners of the repair area by making a saw cut to a minimum depth of two inches .
remove the existing concrete in the corner of the repair area using a chipping hammer weighing not more than num pounds .
operate the chipping hammer at a num num degree angle to remove the concrete in the corner of the repair area .
cut and remove any reinforcement in jointed reinforced concrete pavement that is exposed after the removal of delaminated concrete .
do not cut or remove the reinforcement in continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
do not disturb concrete outside the limits of the repair area .
if the partialdepth repair area becomes a fulldepth concrete pavement patch due to excessive unnecessary removal of concrete or damage to the dowel bars during the concrete removal process construct a fulldepth concrete pavement patch as specified in section num at no additional cost to the department .
if dowel bars in the transverse joint are exposed and show little sign of corrosion or other damage apply a bond breaking material to all exposed surfaces of these bars .
when the representative determines the dowel bars are unacceptable due to misalignment of extensive deterioration construct a fulldepth concrete pavement patch as specified in section num .
resound the repair area in the presence of the representative to ensure that all delaminated concrete has been removed .
remove any additional delaminated concrete as necessary within the repair area but do not exceed half the slab thickness .
sandblast any edge created by sawing in order to create a rough surface for material bond .
numc numg num num change no .
num use air blasting as the final cleaning method within num minutes before placing the partialdepth repair material .
use a compressed air stream free of oil moisture and other contaminants and that has a minimum pressure of num pounds per square inch measured at the source .
reclean areas not repaired within num minutes of the final cleaning .
d mixing equipment .
furnish mixing equipment for volumetrically mixed concrete as specified in section num or prepare handbatched mixtures using a powerdriven revolving and tilting drum mixer or suitable revolving paddle mixer capable of thoroughly mixing the repair material .
when using drum and paddle mixers repair material batch sizes must be selected to fall within the minimum and maximum recommended batch size for the mixer .
e transverse and longitudinal joints .
if the partialdepth repair abuts an existing transverse or longitudinal joint install preformed cellular polystyrene in the joint .
the preformed cellular polystyrene should extend at least num inch below the bottom of the repair whenever possible .
when the repair material can be sawed without damage re establish the joint by sawing through the full depth of the repair .
seal longitudinal joints in accordance with section num and seal transverse joints in accordance with section num. f partialdepth repair .
num .
class aa cement concrete modified .
immediately after final cleaning apply grout or epoxy bonding compound to all exposed surfaces within the repair area .
mechanically mix the grout and apply by brushing or scrubbing in a thin layer onto the concrete surface .
prepare and apply the epoxy bonding compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
do not allow the grout or epoxy bonding compound to run or puddle in low spots .
place concrete in the repair area before grout begins to dry or while epoxy bonding compound is still tacky .
sandblast and remove grout that has dried or epoxy bonding compound that has hardened .
reclean the repair area as specified in section numc and recoat the repair area with fresh grout or epoxy bonding compound .
place concrete when the ambient air and surface temperatures are num f and rising .
discontinue placement of the mixture when the ambient air and surface temperatures fall below num f. protect repairs from freezing for a minimum of num hours .
consolidate the concrete using a spud vibrator or other appropriate means .
work concrete into saw cuts extending beyond the corners of the repair area .
strikeoff and shape concrete to match the surrounding pavement including wheel ruts .
use preformed cellular polystyrene temporary forms that extend to the pavement surface to keep the concrete out of existing joints .
do not patch across a joint and saw cut later .
num .
class aa cement concrete accelerated .
section numfnum num .
rapidset concrete patching material .
place the mixed material only within the manufacturers recommended installation temperature range and when the ambient air and surface temperatures are num f or greater .
discontinue placement of the mixture when the ambient air and surface temperatures are outside of the manufacturers recommended installation range or lower than num f. protect repairs from freezing for a minimum of num hours .
use vibration or tamping to consolidate the rapidset concrete patching material .
work concrete into saw cuts extending beyond the corners of the repair area .
strikeoff and shape concrete to match the surrounding pavement including wheel ruts .
use preformed cellular polystyrene temporary forms that extend to the pavement surface to keep the concrete out of existing joints .
do not patch across a joint and saw cut later .
the returntoservice time must be considered when placing the last partialdepth repair before opening to traffic .
g curing .
num .
class aa cement concrete modified .
use white membrane forming curing compound as specified in section numlnum.c except use an atomizing type spray tank with an adjustable nozzle and agitate the solution before each application .
num .
class aa cement concrete accelerated .
apply white membrane forming curing compound as specified in section numlnum.c .
cure test cylinders under the same conditions as the partialdepth repair .
provide insulation or heating of repair areas if the ambient air temperature drops below num f during the curing operation .
control the curing temperature and monitor at least hourly to ensure that the repair area does not experience a curing temperature change in excess of num f within any numhour period during the curing operation .
if a change in curing temperature in excess of num f occurs in the concrete pavement patch within any numhour period the work will be considered defective .
numg numb num num change no .
num num .
rapidset concrete patching material .
cure according to the manufacturers recommendations .
h joint sealing .
section nume i resounding repairs .
resound all completed repair areas in the presence of the inspector .
replace any completed repair areas that are delaminated at no cost to the department .
j opening to traffic .
num .
class aa cement concrete modified .
do not open the repaired area to traffic until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to ptm no .
num .
num .
class aa cement concrete accelerated .
obtain samples of plastic concrete for compressive strength testing for opening to traffic from each num cubic yards or fraction thereof of the days placement and unless otherwise required from the last mixer load of the day according to the approved qc plan .
sample locations will be selected according to ptm no .
num .
test concrete for compressive strength according to ptm no .
num but no later than num hours after the test specimens were molded .
concrete lots that have not attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch will be considered defective work .
num .
rapidset concrete patching material .
do not open to traffic until the rapidset concrete patching material has attained a minimum numhour compressive strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to ptm no .
num .
rapidset concrete patching material that has not attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch will be considered defective work .
num measurement and payment a concrete pavement partialdepth repair .
square foot for the type indicated .
the unit price includes removal of existing pavement and repairs or corrections specified in section num that are needed as a result of partialdepth repair operations .
b joint sealing .
linear foot if transverse andor longitudinal joint cleaning and sealing are part of the contract sealing of joints at partialdepth repair areas are incidental to that item and will not be payable under concrete pavement partialdepth repair .
num numd num num initial edition section numrubblizing of concrete pavements num descriptionthis work is rubblizing and seating of existing concrete pavements before the placement of a pavement overlay .
rubblizing is classified into two types as follows a type num .
rubblizing pavement into pieces having a maximum horizontal dimension of num inches .
b type num .
rubblizing pavement into pieces having a maximum horizontal dimension of num inches and with at least num of the pieces per square yard having a maximum horizontal dimension of num inches .
num material a coarse aggregate type a or type b no .
num .
section num b subbase no .
numa .
section num num construction a equipment .
submit a pavement rubblizing plan and list of proposed equipment for department approval before the start of construction .
if during rubblizing operations results are not being obtained cease all rubblizing operations and submit an alternate plan and list of equipment capable of obtaining the specified results to the representative .
resume rubblizing operations upon acceptance of the alternate plan .
b existing bituminous surfaces .
remove any existing bituminous paving materials that are overlaying the concrete pavement as specified in section num before beginning rubblizing operations .
do not remove any existing full depth bituminous patches .
c rubblizing .
use mechanical or sonic vibratory equipment capable of providing concrete pieces of the specified dimensions throughout the full depth of the pavement on a regular and continuous basis .
provide equipment suitable to the representative .
for type num rubblizing ensure that pieces are free of bond with reinforcement to allow adequate seating .
excavate two numfoot by numfoot fulldepth sections of rubblized pavement within the first num mile of rubblizing operations to ensure that the pavement is being rubblized to the specific dimensions .
excavate additional areas as directed to ensure that the specified dimensions are being maintained .
repeat the initial twosection fulldepth pavement removal testing procedure whenever the equipment rubblizing pattern or breaking force is changed .
use coarse aggregate to backfill all excavated areas .
place backfill in maximum numinch lifts and compact by rolling until nonmovement is achieved .
do not allow any shoving or wave motion under the roller .
cut off and remove any reinforcement steel exposed at the surface of the rubblized pavement .
if the transverse joints of the original pavement contained steel plates remove any steel plates that are exposed .
exercise care during rubblizing operations to prevent shattering pavement edges adjacent to bituminous base repairs .
exercise extreme care during rubblizing operations to protect and prevent damage to underground utilities drainage facilities bridge approach slabs and bridge decks .
repair any damage that occurs to these areas at no cost to the department .
d seating .
following the rubblizing operation use a numton pneumatictired roller as specified in section numcnum.e to seat the rubblized pavement .
establish a rolling pattern that ensures all areas of rubblized pavement surface are directly contacted by the roller in no more than four passes .
do not use vibratory rollers .
numd nume num num initial edition final seating of the rubblized pavement is satisfactory when vertical deflection under the roller is less than num inch .
undercut areas where this condition is not achieved .
remove all unsuitable or unstable material .
backfill to existing subgrade with suitable material to the top of existing subbase with subbase material and to the top of the rubblized pavement with coarse aggregate .
compact backfill as previously specified in section numc .
fiftyton rollers may only cross bridges as approved by the bridge engineer .
repair any damage that occurs to bridge approach slabs and bridge decks during the seating operation at no cost to the department .
e final surface .
after final seating sweep and clean the surface of the rubblized and seated pavement to remove all loose material .
prohibit traffic on the roadway after the pavement has been rubblized and seated .
repair all rubblized and seated pavement areas disturbed by construction traffic at no cost to the department .
complete all operations before construction of the leveling course .
if a bituminous leveling course is indicated apply a prime coat to the rubblized and seated surface as specified in section num before placing the leveling course .
complete placement of the overlay within num calendar days after rubblizing and seating .
do not leave the rubblized and seated pavement exposed to freezing conditions .
num measurement and payment a rubblize and seat concrete pavement .
square yard b class numa excavation .
cubic yard c class numb excavation .
cubic yard measured to existing subgrade level .
d coarse aggregate .
cubic yard for the size indicated .
e removal of existing bituminous surface course .
section num num numd num initial edition section num dowel retrofit num description this work is the installation of epoxycoated smooth dowel bars into existing concrete pavement across cracks or transverse joints without dowels .
num material a forcetransfer units .
section num a and b b caulking compound .
section numb c preformed cellular polystyrene .
astm c num d rapid set concrete patching material .
supplied by a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
use within the shelf life and temperature limitations set by the manufacturer .
e concrete curing materials .
section numa and b f intermediate curing compound .
section numc g concrete admixtures .
section num if accelerating admixtures are used provide only accelerating admixtures that contain no chlorides .
h joint sealing material .
section numa b and c i graphite lubricant .
section num num construction as shown on standard drawing rc numm and as follows a equipment .
provide a power driven self propelled saw capable of making two parallel cuts per dowel bar slot for a minimum of four slots simultaneously .
do not use equipment that may cause pavement to spall or cause surface aggregates to fracture .
b slot preparation and cleaning .
saw cut pavement to place center of dowel at middepth of pavement slab .
if repair area spans different pavement thicknesses e.g .
mainline to ramp transitions place at the middepth of the thinner thickness .
align saw cuts parallel to roadway centerline .
cut a minimum of four dowel slots simultaneously eight saw cuts .
provide four dowel bar slots in each wheel path .
use chip hammer weighing not more than num pounds to remove concrete between saw cuts .
if pavement damage occurs from num pounds chip hammer use a num pound chip hammer .
create a level surface at bottom of slot parallel to roadway surface .
c clean slots .
clean exposed surfaces of slots .
remove all loose and foreign material by sandblasting or water blasting within num hours before concrete placement .
use air blasting as final cleaning within num minutes before concrete placement .
reclean areas not repaired within num minutes of final cleaning or if contamination occurs before concrete placement .
for air blasting use a compressed air stream of at least num psi measured at the source free of oil moisture and other contaminates .
d dowel preparation and placement .
num .
prepare dowels .
cut num inch thick preformed cellular polystyrene material to the crosssection dimensions of the slot at the joint .
cut an opening in the polystyrene joint material to allow the dowel to fit without stretching and without gaps .
place the material centered on the dowel to form a temporary joint .
apply graphite bondbreaker lubricant to type b coated dowel bars unless a bond breaker lubricant has been applied in the shop .
stir the lubricant and apply by daubing mopping or with a gloved hand to produce a thorough coating .
do numd num num initial edition not use brushes for lubricant application .
apply the lubricant as specified at least num hour before placing the concrete around the dowel assembly .
type a coated dowel bars do not require lubricant as per section numi .
place num num inch nonmetallic expansion caps with num inch clearance from the end of the dowel to the bottom of the cap .
num .
place dowels .
provide plastic or nonmetallic chairs with a minimum num inch clearance between dowel bar cap and all slot surfaces including end both sides and bottom .
place chairs on the bottom of the slot .
place coated dowel bars parallel to roadway centerline and pavement surface allowing no greater than num inch tolerance out of plane .
place dowels to align the temporary joint material with the existing joint or crack .
seal the temporary joint material at the sides and bottom of transverse joint or crack with caulking compound to prevent concrete patching material from entering into existing joint or crack .
num .
epoxy bonding compound .
apply according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
fill slot .
fill slot with concrete patching material .
vibrate to thoroughly consolidate the material in the slot and around dowel bar .
place concrete patching material .
do not allow the dowel bar to move from the specified position .
e final finish for pavements not being overlaid or diamond ground .
finish the surface of the slots to match the existing pavement surface profile including any existing wheel ruts .
f curing of concrete .
as specified in the applicable parts of section numi .
g saw and seal joint .
saw and seal transverse contraction joint sealant reservoirs for entire lane width as required h opening to traffic .
as specified in section numq .
i defective work .
remove and replace dowel retrofits that are considered defective at no additional cost to the department .
the numday minimum compressive strength testing for acceptance will not be conducted for any work that is considered defective .
num measurement and payment each for the existing joint or crack preparation patching curing and sealing operations .
includes eight dowel bars per joint or crack .
num nume num initial edition section numconcrete pavement crossstitching num description this work consists of crossstitching longitudinal cracks and may include crossstitching longitudinal joints in plain cement concrete pavement by placing epoxy coated deformed tie bars at an angle across the longitudinal joint or crack .
num material a reinforcement .
section numa b epoxy bonding compound .
type i grade num class b or c as specified in section num from a supplier listed in bulletin num .
follow the manufacturers recommended procedures .
provide the representative with the material data sheets before the start of work .
c joint sealing material .
section num b or c num construction a general .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and submit it for review a minimum of num days before the start of work .
detail all of the construction procedures equipment and materials to be used .
demonstrate the crossstitching operation to the representative to receive final approval of operation procedures and an assessment of the capability of the equipment to be used .
perform the demonstration on a longitudinal crack or a longitudinal joint located within the project limits .
do not perform work if either the ambient air temperature or the pavement surface temperature is below numf .
do not move drifted slabs back into position against the adjacent slabs .
do not use crossstitching on transverse joints or cracks .
before crossstitching longitudinal pavement joints make a full depth saw cut in the existing longitudinal joint along the entire length of the slab .
b equipment .
use a hydraulic powered drill that minimizes damage to the concrete surface .
provide a drill rig to assure that the proper drill angle is maintained .
the use of a gang mounted drill is allowed .
c drill holes .
drill holes no more than num inch larger in diameter than the tie bar on each side of the longitudinal joint or longitudinal crack at the required angle offset distance and spacing as shown on the standard drawing rcnumm .
if spalling of the concrete pavement surface occurs drill shallow vertical holes at each tie bar location .
drill angled holes to intersect the crack at approximately middepth of the pavement thickness .
do not allow the drilled hole to extend through the bottom of the slab .
thoroughly clean the drilled holes of all dust and debris using a compressed air stream measuring at least num pounds per square inch at the source free of oil moisture and other contaminants .
when crossstitching existing longitudinal joints drill holes to the alignment shown on rcnumm .
change location of drill holes num inch to avoid existing longitudinal tie bars .
d installing tie bars .
assure the drilled holes are dry and clean .
inject the epoxy bonding compound into the hole using a caulking gun or other approved method leaving adequate space for the tie bar .
rotate the tie bar three to five complete rotations while inserting the tie bar to purge air voids as completely as possible .
provide num inch coverage for the tie bar at the surface of the pavement .
trowel the epoxy bonding compound flush with the pavement surface .
e sealing .
route the longitudinal crack or longitudinal joint to a width of num inch wide and a depth of num inch .
immediately after routing flush the entire longitudinal crack or longitudinal joint with water .
do not seal the same day as routing or if the longitudinal crack or longitudinal joint is damp due to weather conditions .
immediately before placing the sealant clean the longitudinal crack or longitudinal joint by using a compressed air stream measuring at least num pounds per square inch at the source free of oil moisture and other contaminants .
nume num num initial edition do not place sealing material if either the ambient air temperature or the pavement surface temperature is below numf .
fill the longitudinal crack or longitudinal joint to a level of num inch to num inch below the pavement surface .
do not let sealing material spread over the pavement surface .
f opening to traffic .
do not open to traffic until the anchoring material has fully cured in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
g defective work .
remove and replace any pavement slab where drilled holes have extended through the bottom of the slab with a full depth pavement patch at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement and payment each measurement of crossstitching will be made per tie bar at each individual location .
drilling holes epoxy bonding compound tie bar installation crack sealing and all other items of work will be incidental to the payment for cross stitching .
num numa num num change no .
num section numlonglife concrete pavement llcp num descriptionthis work is the construction of longlife concrete pavements llcp and is intended to provide a longer service life than conventional concrete pavement .
num material a class aa cement concrete modified .
section num except as follows section numb revise third bullet to read as follows coarse aggregate type a section num except as follows no .
num no .
num no .
num or no .
num .
do not exceed num absorption for gravels and num absorption for all other aggregates .
limit thin and elongated coarse aggregate retained on the num inch sieve to num or less with a ratio of num conforming to astm dnum method a .
section numb table a replace with the following table a cement concrete criteria class of concrete use cement factornum lbs.cu.yd .
water cement rationum lbslbs minimum mix design compressive strength psi proportions coarse aggregate solid volume cu.ft.cu.yd .
numday structural design compressive strength psi days min .
max .
min .
max .
num num num aa slip form paving num num num num num num num aa paving num num num num num num num notes num where the cement is replaced by pozzolan use a water to cement plus pozzolan ratio by weight .
num the dmedmm may allow a lower cement factor if the mix design is demonstrated to perform adequately .
section numcnum .
add the following to the first paragraph for llcp mix designs use the method described in ptm no .
num to determine the optimized aggregate gradation and coarse and fine volumes of the fine aggregate portion of the optimized gradation for the mix design .
the coarse and fine volumes of the fine aggregate portion of the mix design gradation must fall within the limits in ptm no .
num .
gradations that fall less than num outside of the limits of ptm no .
num on one sieve may be allowed by the dmedmm on a case by case basis .
the dmedmm will immediately report acceptance of design gradations outside of the limits in ptm no .
num to cmd qa personnel in writing .
section numcnum .
add the following after the first paragraph design the cement concrete for paving applications to meet the following requirements maximum permeability design the concrete mixture to meet a target maximum permeability of num coulombs after a num day curing period in accordance with aashto t num .
shrinkage microstrain the maximum numday shrinkage based on astm cnum air dried method of num microstrain .
the dmedmm has the option of accepting mix designs above the permeability or shrinkage limits if it is suspected that variation in the specimen curing or testing caused inconsistent test results .
numa nume num num change no .
num section numcnum .
replace the second sentence in the second paragraph with the following ternary mixtures are allowed .
section numcnum .
revise the first sentence to read as follows design cement concrete to have an air content of num num in the plastic state .
section numdnum .
revise the seventh sentence in the second paragraph with the following once material control is established the frequency of testing may be reduced to a minimum of one set of tests every num minutes .
b high early strength cement concrete .
do not use high early strength concrete in llcp .
c expansion joint filler .
section num d longitudinal joint material .
section num e forcetransfer units ftu .
section num revised completely as follows num .
general .
as indicated and as follows num.a .
alternate shaped coated dowel bars .
bars with properties equivalent to conventional round steelcoated dowel bars may be used when accepted by the lts .
num.b .
bondbreaking requirements .
aashto m num num.b.num type a .
coating material develops sufficiently low bond strength with concrete so that a bondbreaker is not necessary .
num.b.num type b .
coating material develops bond strength with concrete so that a bondbreaker is necessary .
shopapplied bondbreakers are to conform to the pullout load requirements of aashto m num .
num.c .
dowel bar requirements .
provide dowel bars or tubes with a smoothfinished surface and the following physical requirements diameter of num inches or num inches num inch num inch as specified in pub .
numm rcnumm or as indicated .
length of num inches num inch .
stainless steel type numl clad dowel bars with a minimum cladding thickness of num inch over astm anum grade num or higher carbon steel .
stainless steel type numl press fit tubes with a minimum wall thickness of num inch press fit using a suitable epoxy adhesive over an astm anum grade num or higher epoxy coated carbon steel bar .
stainless steel type numl filled tubes with a minimum wall thickness of num inch filled with polyester resin vinylester resin or portland cement grout with a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
stainless steel type numl schedule num astm anum pipes with a minimum wall thickness of num inch filled with a durable material or fitted with snug fitting plastic or stainless steel end caps to prevent intrusion of foreign materials .
stainless steel type numl bars rolled zinc alloy u.n.s .
znum sleeve with a minimum thickness of num inch mechanically bonded to an astm anum grade num or higher solid carbon steel core .
glass fiberreinforced polymer gfrp coated steel bars having a finished smooth nume numo num num change no .
num surface .
gfrp coated steel bars consist of an astm a num grade num or higher carbon num inch minimum diameter for num inch dowels and num inch minimum diameter for num inch dowels steel bar fully bonded to minimum num inch thick gfrp coating meeting the requirements of section num of aashto lrfd bridge design guide specifications for grfp reinforced concrete bridge decks and traffic railingsnum edition .
do not weld bars to ftu .
any combination of high performance dowel bar materials that meet the above requirements with the minimum specified diameter and a length of num inches num inch .
num.c.num dowel bar acceptance .
for ftu not listed in the bulletin num as high performance dowel bars provide minnesota department of transportation mndot approval as a high performance dowel bar documentation complete testing reports that mndot approval was based on not executive summaries shop drawings and ftu samples to the representative for verification testing at least num days before starting paving operations .
provide one ftu that accommodates a minimum of six dowel bars in its length and one quart of any lubricant that is to be used as a bondbreaker and complies with the requirements of section numg for verification testing .
do not begin concrete paving until the representative approves the ftu documentation and passing test results for the ftu material properties are received from lts .
for high performance dowel bars listed in the bulletin num provide one ftu that accommodates a minimum of six dowel bars in its length and one quart of any lubricant that is to be used as a bondbreaker that complies with the requirements of section numg for verification testing at least num days before starting paving operations .
only one type of dowel bar can be used on a project unless approved by the representative .
do not begin concrete paving until passing test results for the ftu material properties are received from lts .
num.d .
storage handling and placement .
where possible do not store dowel bars at the jobsite for more than num days .
store in accordance with section numb to allow air circulation .
if field storage is expected to exceed num days cover bars with opaque polyethylene or other protective material .
store stainless steel dowel bars in accordance with section numinum .
provide dowel bars having uniform appearance .
do not use dowel bars with visible corrosion deposits uncoated spots or acid flux or black spots .
do not place or store dowel bars in contact with uncoated reinforcement bars or other uncoated steel or stainless steel .
after placement inspect the dowel bars and replace dowel bars damaged during placement .
num.e .
certification .
section numbnum f joint sealing material .
section numa b or d g lubricant .
provide a commercially available chemical release agent with a flash point of not less than numf and recommended for contact with steel materials in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
do not use graphite based lubricants .
h concrete curing material .
sections num and numb i concrete admixtures .
section num j mortar .
section numb k tape bond breaker .
an acceptable selfadhesive tape the width of the sealant reservoir .
l epoxy bonding compound .
section num m joint backing material .
section num n fiberglass dowel sleeve .
an approved type as listed in bulletin num. o premixed nonshink grout .
an approved type as listed in bulletin num .
num numg num num change no .
num num constructionsection num with the following modifications a general .
add the following to section numa .
the slipform method of construction is the standard construction method .
fixed forms may be used for pavement gaps and nonuniform areas with the approval of the representative .
use plant mixed concrete except for areas approved by the representative .
areas that truck mixed concrete would be appropriate for include shoulders closure pours and projects with less than num square yards of mainline concrete paving .
monitor aggregate gradations during concrete production by performing sieve analysis using plant stockpiled aggregate before beginning daily production and when restocking bins but no more than daily .
from the results of the sieve analysis generate the cumulative percent retained chart .
verify that the daily production plots within the limits defined by the cumulative percent retained chart in ptm no .
num .
if necessary adjust aggregate proportions during production to maintain the combined percent retained gradation within limits in ptm no .
num .
adjustments to aggregate proportions that also require adjustments to cementitious material or water content will require the development of new mix designs including trial concrete batches .
the dmedmm may allow combined gradations during production that are less than num outside of the required percent retained gradation in ptm no .
num .
the dmedmm will immediately report acceptance of production gradations outside of the limits in ptm no .
num to cmd qa personnel in writing .
num .
field operation qc plan .
add the following to section numanum include a concrete temperature control plan that outlines the actions that will be taken to control concrete temperatures if they exceed numf at the point of placement .
provide a written qc plan for department approval that specifies a method for keeping the ftu assemblies anchored to the foundation .
the ftu quality control plan includes the following minimum requirements proposed type number and installation locations of fasteners .
ftu assembly anchoring plan .
a method for measuring proper alignment of ftu as specified in section numi .
action plan if the proposed method fails to adequately anchor the assemblies .
the qc plan must require that the first truck load in each lot be sampled for plastic air and state that truck loads that do not meet the requirement of num num will not be incorporated .
each truck load after any failing plastic air test will be tested until three consecutive passing test results are obtained .
the qc plan must include the method proposed to be used to cure and protect joints during the curing period to prevent moisture loss from concrete in and adjacent to joints during and following joint sawing .
submit an organizational chart listing names and telephone numbers of individuals and alternates responsible for mix design process control administration and quality control .
post the organizational chart in the contractors on site field office .
assign a qc supervisor to manage all testing and plant operations .
the qc supervisor must be onsite at all times during llcp placement or oncall and must be able to arrive at the project or plant site within num hour after initial contact .
g slipform paving method .
revise section numg as follows num .
equipment .
add the following to section numgnum .
provide a slipform paver with the following characteristics automatic controls to control line and grade from either or both sides of the machine .
a positive interlock system to stop all vibration and tamping elements when forward motion of the machine stops .
a mechanical device that accurately spaces and positions the required tie bar reinforcement that allows satisfactory mechanical or manual tie bar insertion and a nonoscillating extrusion plate with an adjustable angle of entry .
numg numk num num change no .
num provide an electronic monitoring device meeting the following characteristics and requirements to display the operating frequency of each individual internal vibrator for concrete pavement placed by the slipform method contains a readout display near the operators controls visible to the operator and the representative .
operates continuously as the paving machine operates .
displays all the vibrator frequencies with manual and automatic sequencing for each of the individual vibrators .
records the following at least every num feet of paving or at least every num minutes clock time station location paver track speed operating frequency of individual vibrators do not operate equipment other than sawing equipment or a lightweight profiler on the new pavement slab as specified in section numq .
do not operate equipment wheels or tracks within num inches of the slab edge .
i transverse joints .
replace the second paragraph of section numi with the following handle load transfer ftu with care to avoid damaging the corrosion protection barrier .
repair coating damage using ftu manufacturer approved techniques .
reject ftu assemblies and dowels that in the opinion of the representative can not be repaired adequately .
place and anchor ftu assemblies so that dowel misalignments before concrete placements do not exceed the following limits vertical or horizontal rotation relative to the plane of the grade and the centerline of the constructed pavement num inch maximum displacement of each end of the dowel relative to the midpoint of the dowel .
horizontal dislocation relative to the intended transverse joint location along the direction of travel num inch maximum lateral dislocation relative to the intended location across the joint num inch when ftu are used secure them in place at the designated locations as shown on standard drawing rcnumm in advance of paving operations to prevent their movement during paving operations .
before paving demonstrate the fastening method to the representative for approval .
provide a shopapplied bondbreaking protective coating or manually apply a commercially available chemical release agent as specified in section numg to each dowel bar within num hour before covering the dowels with concrete .
j longitudinal joints .
add the following to section numj when tie bars are mechanically inserted verify location of tie bars every num feet in tangent sections and num feet through horizontal curves to confirm that ties bars are inserted no closer than num inches from the transverse joint .
k final strikeoff consolidation and finishing .
revise section numk as follow num .
floating .
add the following to section numknum .
do not use steel or fresno floats .
num .
final finish .
add the following to section numknum .
finish the surface of all travel and passing lane pavements with a longitudinal texture as specified in section numknum.a .
finish all other pavement surfaces as specified in section numknum or section numknum.a .
num.a .
longitudinal texture .
delete the first sentence of the first paragraph of section numknum.a .
numl nums num num change no .
num l curing concrete .
revise section numl as follows num.c white membrane forming curing compound .
replace section numlnum.c .
with the following num.c white polyalphamethylstyrene pams liquid membrane forming curing compound .
the representative will allow this method of curing if the air temperature is above numf at the time of application and the air temperature is forecast to remain above numf a period of num hours after application .
following the final finishing immediately after free water has left the pavement surface and while the surface is still damp seal exposed concrete areas with an application of curing compound .
apply curing compound homogenously to produce a uniform solid white opaque coverage like a white sheet of paper on all exposed concrete surfaces .
apply the curing compound at minimum application rate of num gallon per num square feet or as specified by the manufacturers recommendations .
using a selfpropelled mechanical spreader apply in a fine mist without marring the concrete surface .
use atomizing type spraying equipment equipped with a tank agitator providing continual compound agitation during application .
provide proper calibration to allow accurate control of the amount of material being placed .
use a hood to protect the spray device against the wind and control so the spray overlaps transversely num to produce two coverages of a continuous uniform membrane .
do not drip curing compound on the pavement .
if rain falls on newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or if film is damaged in any way before the pavement is cured apply a new coat immediately in an amount equal to the original specified application .
alternate methods for the application of curing compound may be approved in writing by the district executive .
areas inaccessible to selfpropelled mechanical spray equipment may be coated using manual or alternate methods .
after form removal apply a uniform coat to the sides at the rate specified for the surface .
manual spraying equipment may be used for spraying the sides and for any small or irregular areas not reached by surface spraying equipment .
cure and protect joints during the curing period to prevent moisture loss from concrete in and adjacent to joints by an acceptable method .
include the method of joint curing in the pavement qc plan as required in section numanum .
keep workmen materials and equipment off the membrane film during curing until the concrete has achieved sufficient strength to prevent marring unless adequate precautions are taken to protect the film .
o surface tolerance .
replace section numo with the following o surface tolerance .
test the surface of pavement as follows num .
mainline paving .
test as specified in section num and section numonum .
these pavements include but are not limited to any full width lane used for travel passing climbing center turn acceleration deceleration and ramps .
num .
other than mainline pavement .
test as specified in section numo .
these pavements include but are not limited to approach slabs bridge decks tapers shoulders medians or other pavement surfaces as directed .
q opening to traffic .
replace section num q with the following q opening to traffic .
the representative will determine when pavement may be opened to traffic .
do not open pavement to traffic or operate heavy equipment on it for a minimum of num hours and until the concrete has reached a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
ptm no .
num can be used as an alternate method of determining the compressive strength of the finished pavement .
perform operations on new pavement as approved by the representative and in accordance with the following when moving on and off the pavement construct a ramp to prevent damage to the pavement slab .
take positive action to prevent damage to the pavement surface and joints .
before placing the protective mats sweep the pavement surface free of debris .
operate equipment on a slab without causing damage .
if damage results suspend operations and take corrective action as approved by the representative .
new pavement will not be opened to any traffic until all joints have been sealed unless an acceptable method to protect joints from damage and keep noncompressible materials from entering the joint is approved by the representative .
s tests for depth .
replace section nums with the following s tests for depth .
the representative will determine lots and sublots as specified in section numu .
nums numu num num change no .
num complete any surface corrective work before testing for pavement depth .
test pavement depth by obtaining one core or one nondestructive test in each sublot .
the representative will determine the location of each depth test using ptm no .
num .
if the drilled core measurement method is used for depth measurement submit the first sublot core and every tenth core thereafter as an information core immediately to the representative .
if the nondestructive depth measurement method is used drill one information core in the first sublot placed and one information core for every tenth sublot thereafter .
verify the depth of all drilled cores as required in section numsnum .
the representative will determine sublot and core locations using ptm no .
num .
for a partial lot the representative will randomly select one core or core location using ptm no .
num.the representative will immediately submit the information cores to the lts for an evaluation of entrained air content according to ptm no .
num .
if the entrained air content is below num or above num provide a written evaluation of the problem and proposed solution to the department within num days .
if positive action is not taken to address hardened entrained air results below num or above num within num days the district executive may require that paving operations be stopped until an acceptable solution is agreed upon .
num .
measurement of drilled cores .
drill cores at each sublot location as specified in ptm no .
num in presence of the representative .
thoroughly clean the vertical surface of the core hole of laitance and loose and foreign material .
fill the holes with the mixture used to construct the course and consolidate .
as an alternative use a premixed nonshrink grout .
provide a measuring apparatus conforming to the requirements of ptm no .
num .
the representative will determine the core length as specified in ptm no .
num determine the average lot pavement thickness by averaging the individual sublot core thicknesses accept concrete as specified in section numu and determine price adjustments as specified in section numa .
num .
measurement by nondestructive testing .
when indicated or when requested in writing and approved by the district executive test the depth of the finished pavement as indicated in section numsnum .
t defective work .
replace section numt with the following t defective work .
unless otherwise directed in writing as specified in section numdnum .
by the district executive remove and replace pavement determined defective as follows num .
depth .
the lot will be defective if the average core depth of the lot is less than the design thickness d minus num inch or more than one individual sublot core depth is less than the design thickness minus num inch .
num .
compressive strength .
the lot is defective if the percent within limits pwl for compressive strength is less than num as specified in section numunum .
num .
other conditions .
the lot is defective if the pavement contains surface defects from rain improper final finish cracking or honeycombing that can not be satisfactorily repaired as determined by the representative .
num .
other than mainline pavement surface tolerance .
the lot is defective if the pavement contains depressions or high points as specified in section numo that can not be satisfactorily corrected as determined by the representative .
num .
edge slumping .
the pavement is defective if the requirements specified in section numgnum are not met .
remove and replace a minimum of an entire panel of llcp pavement as shown in rcnumm .
longitudinal edge spall repairs are not considered satisfactory repairs for edge slumping or spalling between adjacent lanes or outside pavement edges .
u acceptance .
add this section to section num as follows u acceptance .
lots and sublots for the combined pavement characteristics of depth and compressive strength will be determined based on the full width of pavement placement .
lots and sublots will begin at the starting numu numv num num change no .
num point of paving and continue until num square yards are placed .
lots and sublots will be calculated as the work progresses and will include any pavement designated as llcp pavement .
do not combine pavement with different depths into any lot or sublot .
a full lot is defined as num square yards of pavement of the same constant depth and consists of four equal sublots of num square yards each .
combine partial lots with the last full lot or make a separate lot according to the following procedure if less than num square yards remain combine the remaining pavement with the last full lot .
if the remaining pavement is equal to or greater than num square yards consider the remaining pavement as a separate lot .
determine sublots for the last pavement lot by establishing a number of equal size sublots .
determine the number of sublots by dividing the area of the combined lot or partial lot by num square yards and then rounding to the nearest whole number .
determine the equal size of each sublot by dividing the combined lot or partial lot quantity by the number of whole sublots calculated .
determine lots and sublots based on the full width of pavement placement .
num .
depth .
the representative will accept each lot for compliance with the specifications for depth if the average core depth of the lot is more than the design thickness d minus num inch and not more than one individual sublot core depth is less than the design thickness minus num inch .
num .
compressive strength and plastic air content .
the representative will accept concrete for compliance with the specification requirements for compressive strength on a lotbylot basis as specified in section num and section num .
the representative will determine locations where acceptance samples of plastic concrete will be taken using ptm no .
num .
make one set of compressive strength specimens and one test for percentage of plastic air content on samples from each sublot .
all sampling and testing must take place before concrete placement .
provide a testing station within num mile of the final concrete placement location unless an alternate location is approved by the representative .
truck loads selected for acceptance testing with plastic air results that are outside specification limits will not be placed .
if a truck load is discarded because of low plastic air content test consecutive truck loads as specified in section numdnuma .
discard all concrete with failing plastic air results .
mold acceptance cylinders at the determined sublot location .
the average of the test results from two cylinders made from the same sample tested as specified in ptm no .
num will constitute the numday compressive strength .
cure test specimens according to subsection num of ptm no .
num .
the representative will accept concrete based on the adequacy and uniformity of compressive strength at the age of num days when the pwl is num or greater .
for compressive strength calculate the value of q by the following equation where xnum is the average of the sublot test results .
ql is the lower quality index and s is the standard deviation as specified in section numanum.a.num .
num.a for class aa numday concrete compressive strength ql xnum numpsi s determine the percentage of material within specification limits as specified in section numanum v watercementitious ratio incentive wc ratio .
add this section to section num as follows v watercementitious ratio incentive wc ratio .
provide and place concrete with a wc ratio between num and num .
the department will not make incentive payments for wc ratio on highearly strength mixtures .
numv numa num num change no .
num do not add water or finishing aids to the surface of the concrete to aid in finishing .
the department will determine the wc ratio for concrete hauled in dump or agitator trucks in accordance with the following concrete hauled in truck mixers is not eligible for wc ratio incentives num .
wc ratio incentive lots and sublots .
the representative will determine the sample location for each sublot as specified in section numunum .
the representative will compute the average wc ratio for each lot of material established as specified in section numu as follows num.a water content determination .
for plant mixed cement concrete use a representative approved electronic meter that is capable of recording and printing on the batch ticket the total amount of water added to the mix including temper water .
the amount of temper water may be hand written on the delivery ticket if the district provides inspection personnel to certify the hand written information .
all temper water must be from a metered and calibrated source .
the representative will determine the water content for calculating the wc ratio for each sublot and lot .
num.b cementitious content determination .
the representative will use the sum of all cementitious material weights printed on the plant delivery slip for each sublot to determine the cementitious content of each sublot .
num.c water content verification .
provide the microwave oven and the ancillary equipment required by the representative to perform this test .
the representative will use ptm no.num to select num sublot in each lot placed .
take verification samples from the same truck load of concrete as specified in section numvnum .
plastic concrete samples will be taken at the same site as the compressive strength and plastic air content as approved by the representative .
the representative will determine the water content of the plastic concrete mixture in accordance with the test procedure specified in aashto t num standard test method for water content of freshly mixed concrete using microwave oven drying .
the representative will begin the test within num minutes after the water has contacted the cement .
the representative will determine the average wc ratio for the lot as the average of all sublot test results in the lot .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard the department will pay on a lotbylot basis at the contract price adjusted for pavement characteristics relative to depth a n d compressive strength .
the lot payment will be determined according to the multiple characteristic formula specified in section numanum .
a adjustment for pavement characteristics .
num .
depth .
the lot average pavement depth will be determined as specified in section nums .
the characteristic percentage for depth will be determined using table a .
the characteristic percentage for depth will be placed in the multiple characteristic formula as pd specified in section numanum to determine the lot payment .
num .
compressive strength .
the pwl will be determined for the lot as specified in section numunum .
the characteristic percentages for compressive strength will be determined by using table b .
the characteristic percentage for compressive strength will be used as ps in the multiple characteristic formula specified in section numanum to determine the lot payment .
num .
multiple characteristic formula .
the lot payment will be determined according to the following formula multiple characteristic formula no incentive disincentive   num num num numa numa num num change no .
num multiple characteristic formula with incentive   num num num  lp lot payment cp contract price per lot contract price times lot size ps characteristic percentage of compressive strengthtable b pd characteristic percentage for depthtable a wc incentive pay factor table c table a characteristic percentages for concrete pavement depth pd relative to specification limits numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average percentage average percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average percentage average percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average percentage average percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numa numa num num change no .
num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average percentage average percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average percentage average percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average percentage average percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numinch design thickness numinch design thickness characteristic characteristic average percentage average percentage thickness inches pd thickness inches pd num or greater num num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num less than num numa numd num num change no .
num numinch design thickness characteristic average percentage thickness inches pd num or greater num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num defective work as specified in section numt .
table b characteristic percentages for concrete pavement compressive strength ps relative to specification limits percent within specification limits characteristic percentage num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num below num defective work as specified in section numt .
num .
adjustment for wc ratio incentive .
the lot average wc ratio will be determined as specified in section numv .
the incentive pay factor will be determined using table c. the incentive pay factor will be placed in the wc ratio formula as wc in section numanum to determine the lot payment .
table c adjustment for wc ratio incentive wc test result incentive pay factor num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num if a wc ratio greater than num is approved no incentive pay will be paid .
b defective pavement left in place .
the department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive .
when the district executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at num of the contract unit price .
c concrete pavement cores .
each the contract unit price includes measuring apparatus which remains the contractors property upon completion of the project .
d evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive .
as specified in section num .
num nume num num change no .
num section numbonded concrete overlay of asphaltsurfaced pavement num descriptionthis work is the construction of a portland cement concrete overlay with a thickness of num to num inches and is bonded to an existing asphaltsurfaced pavement .
it includes asphalt surface preparation overlay construction construction of transitions joint sawing and sealing and other construction details as indicated .
num material class aa cement concretesection num except revise the table a maximum water cement ratio by weight to num .
if the maturity method is intended to be used correlate the degreehours of cure to compressive strengths in accordance with ptm no .
num except at time intervals of num hours num num num and num days .
expansion joint fillersection num tape bond breakeran acceptable selfadhesive tape with width matching that of the sealant reservoir .
joint backing materialsection num longitudinal joint materialsection num for use in transition areas only load transfer unitssections numa and b for use in transition areas only joint sealing materialsection numa selfleveling section numb or c concrete curing materialsection num and numa astm c num type num concrete covering materialsection num concrete admixturessection num class num geotextile nonwovensection num for use in transition areas only epoxy bonding compoundsection num type v premixed nonshrink groutan approved type as listed in bulletin num .
num constructionsection num modified as follows a general .
section numa with the following modifications num .
field operation qc plan .
replace with the following num .
comprehensive qc plan .
prepare a comprehensive qc plan detailing all operations related to this work including but not limited to surface preparation the timing and sequence of the work including timing of mixing hauling placing curing monitoring of concrete temperature joint sawing and sampling and strength testing or evaluation for opening to traffic .
indicate variations in timing of activities in response to anticipated variations in air temperature at the time of placement .
submit the qc plan for the representatives review before the start of the project .
do not begin constructionrelated work until the qc plan has been accepted .
e preparation and protection of base course .
replace with the following e asphalt surface preparation .
profile mill the existing asphalt pavement surface to the depth indicated in the plans as specified in section num .
in lieu of replacing unsound pavement as specified in section numc with asphalt nume numl num num change no .
num materials replace with class aa cement concrete in conjunction with the placement of the concrete overlay .
saw cutting and chipping with pneumatic hammers may be used to remove areas inaccessible by a milling machine .
clean and fill in cracks greater than num inches with nonshrink grout or other material approved by the department which will enable bond to the concrete overlay prior to pavement surface cleaning .
no standing water should remain on the surface after the milling operation .
if standing water occurs immediately provide measures acceptable to the department to drain the water from the milled surface .
completely clean the milled pavement surface using a vacuum truck or other approved means .
protect the cleaned and prepared surface from oil or grease drippings from compressors concrete trucks spreaders pavers etc .
remove all deleterious materials before overlaying .
conduct final cleaning of the surface with compressed air no more than num minutes before the placement of the concrete overlay to remove loose material and debris .
use a compressed air stream that is free of oil moisture and other potential contaminants and that has a minimum pressure of num pounds per square inch measured at the source .
immediately before placing the concrete overlay ensure the asphalt surface is less than numf .
fogmisting protective covers or blankets will be allowed to achieve the proper condition of the surface however do not allow any standing water or moisture to remain on the pavement surface .
h handling and placing reinforcement .
delete section numh .
i transverse joints .
replace with the following i joints .
space joints as indicated on the project plans and special provisions .
if no joint spacing is indicated develop a joint layout plan to be accepted by the department and lay out joints before placement of concrete .
avoid placing longitudinal joints in the wheel paths .
in general maximum panel dimensions should not exceed num times the concrete overlay thickness and the length of the longer panel dimension divided by the shorter panel dimension should not exceed num .
the representative may allow or require slight deviations from nominal panel dimensions in order to match joints in adjacent pavement or structures or to avoid the construction of panels with dimensions or shapes that would otherwise be subject to premature cracking .
sawing is the only acceptable technique for creating concrete overlay joints .
saw joints as soon as concrete has sufficiently hardened to permit sawing without excessive raveling resulting from the sawing operation and to prevent random cracking .
the use of early entry saws is recommended .
fhwas hiperpav or similar software approved by the department may be used in determining a projectspecific sawing window .
if necessary conduct sawing operations continuously both day and night regardless of weather conditions .
saw joints with a green cut saw to a depth of dnum and a minimum width of num inch .
if initial saw cuts do not extend through the slab edge to avoid blowouts or edge damage of green concrete extend these cuts through the edge as soon as it can be done without causing damage .
omit sawing if a crack occurs at or within num feet of a joint location before or during sawing and address as specified in section num .
do not seal joints at this time .
clean joints of all deleterious material after sawing .
if pavement is cured by means other than whitepigmented liquid membraneforming curing compound remove curing materials from overlay at the location where a joint is to be cut .
remove only sufficient covering to provide space necessary for sawing joints .
as soon as the joint is made replace the covering .
the maximum time period allowed for pavement curing covers to be removed is num hour .
if whitepigmented liquid membraneforming curing compound is used cure the joint area as specified in section numlnum.c .
j longitudinal joints .
replace with the following j concrete overlay transitions .
construct transitions at the limits of the concrete overlay as indicated .
in areas where transitions contain existing treated base course or concrete pavement directly below the overlay place geotextile as a debonding layer as specified in section num. l curing concrete .
section numl with the following modifications replace the first sentence of section numlnum with the following apply curing materials after finishing and texturing and within num minutes of the dissipation of bleed water .
maintain the curing materials until the pavement has achieved sufficient strength for opening to traffic as specified in section numq .
add the following paragraphs at the end of section numlnum provide adequate insulating blankets to prevent rapid heat loss if the air temperature is numf or less .
insulation may be removed when the air temperature exceeds numf or when the average compressive strength of the concrete numl numt num num change no .
num exceeds num pounds per square inch .
remove insulation in a manner such that the rate of temperature change at the concrete surface does not exceed numf within any numhour period .
concrete that experiences a higher rate of temperature change will be considered defective .
the application or removal of insulation covers may be controlled by the use of maturity method as specified in section numq with full removal of insulation allowed after the minimum required degreehours of curing has been accumulated at the top of the slab .
replace the second sentence of the second paragraph of section numlnum.c with the following apply curing compound homogenously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces .
apply at a minimum rate of num gallon num gallon per num square feet or as specified by the manufacturers recommendations whichever is greater .
if conditions warrant the curing compound can be applied in two equal rates of application with the first applied as stated previously and the second applied immediately after sawing operations have been completed .
joint faces must be protected from exposure to curing compound or cleaned thoroughly prior to sealant installation .
n sealing joints and cracks .
replace with the following n sealing joints .
seal all transverse and longitudinal joints with an approved hotpour or silicone sealant material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as specified in section numn .
o surface tolerance .
replace with the following section numo q opening to traffic .
replace with the following the representative will determine when pavement will be opened to traffic based on when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength of num pounds per square inch as measured either by compressive strength testing of cylinders in accordance with ptm no .
num or by the maturity method in accordance with ptm no .
num. s tests for depth .
replace with the following before final acceptance of the each phase of the project proceed as follows the department will divide the concrete overlay pavement into lots representing not more than num square yards of pavement in each traffic lane .
include ramps in a separate lots .
the inspector will select one coring location at random within each lot according to ptm no .
num .
drill cores according to ptm no .
num and in the presence of the inspector .
for projects at intersections or less than num square yards drill two cores .
thoroughly clean the vertical surface of the core hole of laitance and loose and foreign material .
fill the holes with the mixture used to construct the course and consolidate .
as an alternative use a premixed nonshrink grout .
provide a measuring apparatus conforming to ptm no .
num .
the inspector will determine the core depth according to ptm no .
num .
if any core measurement is deficient by more than num inch in required depth drill additional cores in the presence of and for measurement by the inspector .
drill the additional cores at numfoot intervals in both directions longitudinally from each deficient core in the same traffic lane until the depth is no more than num inch deficient .
each core will represent the condition in the same traffic lane for a distance of num feet in both directions longitudinally .
the inspector will consider the pavement to be defective if any core measurement is deficient in required depth as indicated in table b. t defective work .
replace with the following unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace at no expense to the department pavement that is defective in construction or sawing of joints as specified in section numi defective in curing requirements as specified in section numl defective in surface tolerance as specified in section numo defective in depth as specified in section nums defective in air content as specified in section numcnum defective in numt numf num num change no .
num compressive strength as specified in section numd or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of freezing and thawing rain hail improper final finish or honeycombing .
the minimum pavement removal and replacement will be one panel in length and width .
where deficiencies are exhibited in successive panels of pavement remove and replace entire panels .
after removal of defective pavement reestablish replaced joints .
if removing and replacing pavement defective in depth start at the determined point of deficiency as determined by the representative .
remove and replace defective work transversely for the fulllane width and longitudinally until the pavement is not more than num inch deficient in depth as specified in section nums .
num measurement and payment a profile milling of asphalt pavement surfaces .
section num ownership of the milled material will be indicated by the selected item of work .
the transition areas will be excluded .
b bonded concrete overlay of asphalt pavement .
square yard this unit price includes all work associated with the construction of the concrete overlay with the exception of the cement concrete material and the profile milling .
the price also excludes the concrete overlay transitions and the concrete pavement cores .
c cement concrete class aa .
cubic yard for producing the cement concrete needed for the overlay and delivering it to the jobsite .
pay quantity for the overlay will be computed based on the indicated depth and the placement area .
an additional quantity not to exceed num of the computed overlay quantity may be paid as compensation for the cost of cement concrete material needed to replace unsound pavement material removed as part of the profile milling operation .
excludes cement concrete material used in transition areas .
submit written request for additional compensation with justification .
the justification should indicate the cubic yardage of concrete delivered to the job site from delivery tickets and show a deduction for the volume of the overlay and the quantity of concrete wasted .
d concrete overlay transition .
each this unit price includes all associated items of work within the limits of the transitions .
e concrete pavement cores .
each the price includes the measuring apparatus which remains the contractors property upon completion of the project .
the department will not pay for additional cores drilled when the depth is deficient by more than num inch .
f adjustment for deficient pavement thickness depth .
where a deficiency exists as determined by cores lot payment for both the bonded concrete overlay and the cement concrete material will be adjusted as specified in table b .
table b adjustment for depth deficient in depth determined by cores inches payment percent of contract unit price by lot based on nominal overlay depth num inches num to num inches num inches num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num num num num num to num defective work num num num to num defective work defective work num num defective work defective work defective work numg numh num num change no .
num g defective pavement left in place .
the department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive .
when the district executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at num of the contract unit prices of the concrete overlay and the cement concrete .
h evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive .
section num num numd num num change no .
num section numbonded concrete overlay of concretesurfaced pavements num descriptionthis work is the construction of a bonded concrete overlay or inlay of concrete pavements including surface preparation and joint sawing and sealing .
num material a cement concrete class aa .
section num modified as follows b material .
section numb modified as follows coarse aggregate type a no .
num no .
num or no .
num stone gravel or slagsection num modified as follows a general .
section num modified as follows num .
stone .
provide durable stone free from slate texture or cleavage planes .
for use in cement concrete wash thoroughly during production .
num .
gravel .
provide durable gravel particles .
for use in cement concrete wash thoroughly during production .
num .
blast furnace slag aggregate .
blast furnace slag aggregate is not allowed for use in cement concrete paving applications .
section numb table a modified as follows num .
minimum cement factor for aa slip form paving paving and accelerated patching num lbscu .
yd .
num .
maximum cement factor for aa slip form paving and paving but not accelerated patching num lbscu .
yd .
num .
maximum watercement ratio num lbslbs for all class aa concrete .
num .
delete note num and replace with the target watercement ratio is num lbslbs and will not fall below num lbslbs for all class aa concrete .
c design basis .
section numc revised as follows add the following paragraph to the end of section numcnum .
for class aa paving portland cement may be replaced with pozzolan flyash or ground granulated blast furnace slag weighing as much or more than portland cement replaced provided that at least num pounds per cubic yard of portland cement is used and the total cementitious cement plus pozzolan content does not exceed the limits in table a .
the maximum ground granulated blast furnace slag content if used is not to exceed num of the total cementitious material by weight .
replace the first sentence of section numcnum with the following for class aa slipform paving and aa accelerated patching concrete design cement concrete to have an air content of num within a tolerance of num at the time and point of placement .
d testing and acceptance .
section numd add the following numd numb num num change no .
num num.c verify watercement ratio .
verify watercement ratio in the field using batch tickets for cementitious content determination and aashto t num standard method for test for water content of freshly mixed concrete using microwave oven drying for water content determination .
g mix designs using potentially reactive aggregate .
section numg revised as follows replace the first sentence of the second paragraph in section numgnum with the following use aggregates that are deemed reactive or potentially reactive with numday expansion between num and num only with an approved cementpozzolan combination that is sufficient to mitigate the numday expansion to a value less than num and as specified in section numgnum .
reject aggregate with numday expansion greater than num .
this requirement applies to all paving concrete on this project .
for other applications use any of the cements or cementpozzolan combinations specified in section numgnum .
revise section numgnum.b with the following num.b blended hydraulic cement .
type is or ip astm c num from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
if any blended cement is used for any paving and patching concrete the maximum allowable mortar expansion at num days and num weeks are num and num respectively .
b concrete admixtures .
section num c concrete covering material .
section numa d concrete curing materials .
section num or numa type num e joint backing material .
section num f joint sealing material .
section numa b or c g tape bond breaker .
an acceptable selfadhesive tape the width of the sealant reservoir .
num constructionsection num and as follows a weather restrictions .
section numb with the following modifications num .
cold weather .
replace the fourth sentence with the following place concrete when the concrete temperature is between numf and numf .
b surface preparation .
prepare the existing concrete surface as follows num .
equipment .
num.a scarifying equipment .
provide a selfpropelled mechanical scarifier capable of uniformly removing the old surface across the entire cutting path to the depth indicated as specified in section num .
num.b shot blasting sand blasting or water blasting equipment .
provide equipment capable of removing any loose concrete and rust from exposed reinforcement .
num .
scarification of the existing pavement surface .
when used to lower the pavement elevation scarify the existing pavement surface to the depth indicated .
cut off and remove any reinforcement that is exposed and loose .
after scarifying remove any deteriorated concrete or asphalt materials that extend below the level of the scarification as indicated or directed .
remove all fulldepth asphalt patches and replace with concrete as specified in section num .
remove all loose material from the pavement surface before cleaning .
minimal minor repairs of surface defects can be replaced with overlay .
numb numg num num change no .
num num .
steel plates .
if inlaying and the existing transverse pavement joints have steel plates remove exposed steel plates .
num .
final preparation .
shot blast or water blast to produce a roughened surface following the milling .
provide measures acceptable to the department to drain or remove standing water from the prepared surface as directed by the department .
completely clean the prepared surface using a power broom vacuum truck or other approved means .
protect the cleaned and prepared surface from oil or grease drippings from compressors concrete trucks spreaders pavers etc .
remove all deleterious materials before overlaying .
conduct final cleaning of the surface in front of the paver with compressed air no more than num minutes prior to the placement of the concrete overlayinlay .
use a compressed air stream that is free of oil moisture and other potential contaminants and that has a minimum pressure of num pounds per square inch measured at the source .
install joint backing or other approved joint filling material to within num inch of the pavement surface in all existing transverse joints including those associated with fulldepth repairs prior to placement of the overlay .
ensure that the joint backing or filling material can not be dislodged by the paving operation .
immediately prior to placing the concrete overlayinlay ensure the surface is less than numf .
fogmisting protective covers or blankets will be allowed to achieve and maintain proper temperature and moisture conditions of the surface .
completely blow off standing water with compressed air from the pavement surface .
c overlay transition .
construct paving notches as indicated .
d transverse joint location .
accurately mark the location of all transverse joints with the use of guide nails tacks or other representativeapproved devices to accurately mark the locations of the centers of all transverse joints prior to placing the concrete overlay so that they can be located after the overlay has been placed .
submit the proposed method of location marking for approval num days before the start of construction .
do not begin paving without approval .
e bond strength .
after the surface preparation has been completed and before placement of the overlay test the prepared surface in the presence of the inspector .
bond strength testing will be performed at num days according to astm c num .
provide the test equipment .
num .
lot testing .
for each area represented by each days placement of not more than num square yards the inspector will select five test locations at random according to ptm no .
num and test according to astm c num .
if the average of the test results on the three tests is below num pounds per square inch and each individual test has a minimum strength of num pounds per square inch the area represented will be considered defective .
if defective obtain additional tests at numfoot intervals in both directions longitudinally from the defective locations to determine the limits of defective work .
each set of three defective tests will represent the condition in the same traffic lane for a distance of num feet in both directions longitudinally .
f final finish .
section numknum g curing concrete .
section numl with the following modifications replace the first sentence of section numlnum with the following apply curing materials after finishing and texturing operations and within num minutes of the dissipation of bleed water and maintain them in place until the pavement has reached sufficient strength as specified in numl for opening to traffic .
add the following paragraph to the end of section numlnum provide adequate insulating blankets to prevent rapid heat loss if the air temperature is forecasted to be numf or less .
insulation may be removed when the air temperature exceeds numf or when the average compressive strength of the concrete exceeds num pounds per square inch .
remove insulation in a manner such that the rate of temperature change at the concrete surface does not exceed numf within any numhour period .
concrete that experiences a higher rate of temperature change will be considered defective .
numg num num num change no .
num replace the second sentence of the second paragraph of section numlnum.c with the following apply curing compound homogenously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces .
apply at a minimum rate of num gallon num gallon per num square feet or as specified by the manufacturers recommendations whichever is greater .
if conditions warrant the curing compound can be applied in two equal rates of application with the first applied as stated previously and the second applied immediately after sawing operations have been completed .
joint faces must be protected from exposure to curing compound or cleaned thoroughly prior to sealant installation .
h transverse joints .
as soon as the concrete is strong enough for cutting the joints without significant raveling or chipping saw cut transverse joints directly over all existing transverse joints including those produced by pre overlay repairs .
saw cut depth must be equal to the full thickness of the overlay including any additional thickness used for grade corrections plus num inch but must not result in damage to dowel load transfer devices in the original pavement .
to prevent debonding saw cut width should be at least the width of the underlying joint or crack in the existing pavement or greater .
measure joint widths immediately prior to placement of the overlayinlay .
when inlaying saw cut transverse joints to the full depth of the inlay including any extra depth concrete placed at the joint directly over the existing transverse joint and a minimum of num inch wide .
construct a sealant reservoir as shown on the standard drawing for cement concrete pavement joints .
the overlay may be sawed in a second operation or make the initial saw cut equal to the required reservoir width .
after sawing immediately flush the joint with water to remove sawing slurry that might otherwise prevent proper sealant installation .
place backing material to the proper depth and seal the joints as specified in section numn .
in the case of overlaying an existing continuously reinforced concrete pavement crcp only match the terminal joints and joints created from fulldepth repairs .
i intermediate transverse joints .
cut intermediate transverse joints between existing transverse joints such that the overlay panel length does not exceed num feet .
saw cut depth must be equal to the full thickness of the overlay including any additional thickness used for grade corrections plus num inch .
j longitudinal joints .
accurately reference the location of existing longitudinal joints within the overlay area and between the adjacent lane and the overlay area so that they can be accurately located after paving .
after paving saw cut a sealant reservoir num inch wide and the full depth of the overlay plus num inch directly over the existing longitudinal joint .
seal joints as specified in section numn .
provide a neat vertical edge face free of honeycomb and segregation longitudinally along both sides of the overlaid pavement .
k edge slump .
maximum edge slump allowed in the outside num inches next to the shoulder is num inch .
maximum edge slump allowed in the outside num inches next to an adjacent lane is num inch .
l opening to traffic .
the representative can determine when pavement will be open to traffic based on when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength of num pounds per square inch as measured by compressive strength testing of cylinders in accordance with ptm no .
num and the minimum acceptable bond strength as specified in section nume .
m surface tolerance .
section numo n defective work .
unless otherwise directed in writing from the district executive remove and replace pavement overlay that is defective in depth as specified in section numc table a defective in air content as specified in section numcnum modified as specified in section numa defective in bond strength as specified in section nume or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of rain improper final finish or honeycombing which in the representatives opinion can not be repaired .
replace defective pavement overlay as specified in section numt except provide a minimum pavement removal and replacement length between transverse joints of num feet .
num measurement and payment numa numf num num change no .
num a surface preparation .
square yard b cement concrete class aa .
cubic yard for producing the cement concrete needed for the overlay and delivering it to the jobsite .
pay quantity for the overlay will be computed based on the indicated depth and the placement area .
an additional quantity not to exceed num of the computed overlay quantity will be paid as compensation for the cost of cement concrete material needed to replace unsound pavement material removed as part of the surface preparation operation .
excludes cement concrete material used in transition areas .
c bonded concrete overlay of concrete pavements .
square yard the unit price includes all work associated with construction of the concrete overlay with the exception of the cement concrete material and the surface preparation .
also excludes concrete overlay transitions and concrete pavement cores .
num .
adjustment for depth .
the inspector will determine lots and sublots as specified in section numu .
where a deficiency exists as determined by cores lot payment for bonded concrete overlay will be adjusted as specified in table a .
table a adjustment in contract price for depth deficient in depth determined by cores inches payment percent of contract unit price by lot based on nominal overlay depth num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num defective work num .
defective pavement left in place .
the department will not pay for defective pavement left in place unless otherwise directed in writing by the district executive .
when the district executive directs that defective pavement be left in place final payment for this pavement will be at num of the contract unit prices of the concrete overlayinlay and the cement concrete .
d concrete overlay transition .
each this unit price includes all associated items of work within the limits of the transitions .
e evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive .
section num f concrete pavement cores .
each the price includes the measuring apparatus which remains the contractors property upon completion of the project .
the department will not pay for additional cores drilled when the depth is deficient by more than num inch .
num nume num num change no .
num section numunbonded concrete overlay of concretesurfaced pavements num descriptionthis work is the construction of an unbonded concrete overlay of concrete pavements including surface preparation and joint sawing and sealing .
num materialsection num with the following modification a nonwoven geotextile interlayer .
section num class num separation type a modified as follows mechanical properties test method average roll value color visual inspection uniform all same color fibers geotextile type en num annex f certification nonwoven needlepunched no thermal treatment to include calendaring weight per unit area astm dnum num ozsq.yd nominal thickness under load pressure astm dnum num psi num inches num psi num inches num psi num inches wide width tensile strength astm dnum num lbft s wide width maximum elongation astm dnum num water permeability in normal direction under num psi load astm dnum num ftmin inplane water permeability transmissivity under load pressure astm dnum num psi num ftmin num psi num ftmin alkali resistance en num annex b certification num polypropylenepolyethylene uv resistance at num hours astm dnum retained strength num average with no value less than num b geotextilesecuring devices materials or techniques .
anchoring devices materials or techniques approved by the selected geotextile manufacturer for projectspecific use .
c superpave mixture design standard construction of plantmixed hma finegraded courses .
section num and bulletin num. d class aa cement concrete .
section num except for overlays with depth less than num inches use concrete reinforced with polypropylene fibers according to astm cnum type iii num and astm cnum ref astm cnum performance level num outlined in section num note num and residual strength .
use num virgin polypropylene pe manufactured to an optimum gradation for use as concrete reinforcement .
use a synthetic fiber that is a monofilament or bundled monofilament with a minimum length of num inches and a maximum length of num num inches and has a maximum aspect ratio length divided by the equivalent diameter of the fiber of num .
add a sufficient quantity of synthetic fibers to the concrete mixture to have a residual strength ratio rnum of num percent according to illinois modified astm cnum .
do not exceed the maximum dosage rate of num pounds per cubic yard unless the manufacturer can demonstrate through a field demonstration that the concrete mixture will be workable and fiber clumping is not a problem .
add the synthetic fibers to the concrete and mix in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
num constructionsection num modified as follows e preparation and protection of base course .
replace with the following nume numg num num change no .
num e surface preparation .
num .
preoverlay repairs .
num.a general .
areas with unstable slabs and slab fragments e.g .
slabs or fragments that move or rock visibly under normal traffic loads that would otherwise result in nonuniform support of the overlay must be stabilized or repaired before placement of the interlayer material .
num.b concrete pavement patching .
section num except delete section nump num.c slab stabilization .
section num except delete sections numb dnum and e. num.d slabjacking .
section num num.e flexible base replacement .
section num .
num.f shallow repairs .
repair surface defects with a patching material that consists of a bituminous material a cementitious material or a similar pavement repair material meeting the approval of the representative before placing the overlay .
when using a geotextile interlayer fill all surface defects measuring greater than num square inches and num inch deep in the surface of the traffic lanes with a patching material and compact to a flat tight surface .
when using an asphalt interlayer shallow defects can be filled with an asphalt interlayer material as the interlayer is placed provided that the material in the defect can be properly compacted along with the interlayer otherwise the defects must be filled with repair material before placement of the interlayer .
num .
sweeping .
sweep pavement to remove any loose debris by either using a power broom vacuum truck or other approved means before applying pavement interlayer .
num .
separation layer .
num.a geotextile interlayer placement .
mill joints with greater than num inch faulting .
place geotextile flat on the repaired and cleaned existing pavement surface .
overlap edges of geotextile by num inches num inches .
do not allow more than three layers of the geotextile to overlay in any location .
sequence rolling out geotextile to ensure good lapping practice and prevent folding or tearing by construction traffic .
extend free edge of geotextile interlayer a minimum of num inches beyond edge of pavement .
terminate interlayer in a drainable layer or at a daylighted location e.g .
ditch foreslope .
do not impair free drainage of the geotextile .
secure geotextile in accordance with the geotextile manufacturers instructions .
avoid allowing construction traffic on the geotextile whenever possible .
delay geotextile installation on areas subject to potentially damaging traffic such as crossovers until immediately before concrete placement .
minimize sharp turns and braking on geotextiles keep geotextile clean and free of loose debris before overlay placement .
dampen geotextile but do not saturate before overlay placement .
do not allow the surface temperature of the fabric to exceed numf before the overlay placement .
num.b asphalt interlayer .
place a nominal depth of num inch of superpave mix design as specified in section num .
if joint faulting exceeds num inch place a scratch course at the joint or millgrind joints to reduce faulting .
use a rubber tire roller .
do not allow the surface temperature of the pavement to exceed numf before the overlay placement .
control the asphalt surface temperature by misting the surface using whitepigmented curing compound whitewashing with lime water or other method approved by the representative .
g slipform paving method .
modified as follows num .
placing concrete .
add the following if dowel baskets are moving during the paving operation suspend paving operations until a plan for securely anchoring the baskets is approved by the representative and implemented .
num .
joints .
add the following numg numi num num change no .
num leave shipping wires intact unless a magnetic tomographybased device is to be used for dowel placement verification .
secure dowel bar assemblies with anchors to hold the dowel bars in the correct position and alignment while preventing movement during concrete placement in accordance with the following provide a qc plan for anchoring dowel basket assemblies .
fasten the baskets to the substrate surface so that they do not move vertically or horizontally more than num inch .
type location number and length of anchors are dependent upon field conditions .
before starting concrete pavement placement and before each day of concrete pavement placement demonstrate the fastening method to the representative for approval .
i transverse .
modified as follows num .
expansion joints .
add the following identify and mark any transverse expansion joints in the existing pavement .
to allow for slab movement before sawing precut the expansion joints in the plastic concrete .
as soon as sawing is possible saw two fulldepth cuts on each side of the precut joint following the edges of the underlying expansion joint and remove the concrete between the saw joints .
num .
location .
new transverse and longitudinal joints are not required to match existing joint locations nor are they required to be offset by any minimum distance .
num .
panel size .
determine the dimensions of the unbonded concrete overlay panels using lane geometry concrete placement width and the following guidance unbonded overlay thickness maximum nominal panel dimensions num inches to num inches num ft num ft num inches to num inches num ft num ft num inches num ft num ft the aspect ratio longer dimensionshorter dimension of any panel should be as close to num as is feasible and should not exceed num .
num .
saw cut depth .
the saw cut depth must be no less than dnum within num inches of the pavement edges and must be no less than dnum anywhere .
clean joint of all deleterious material after sawing .
seal all transverse and longitudinal joints .
consider concrete panels with cracking outside of the sawed joints defective .
num .
joint spacing .
space joints as indicated on the project plans and special provisions .
if no joint spacing is indicated develop a joint layout plan to be accepted by the department and lay out joints before placement of concrete .
avoid placing longitudinal joints in the wheel paths .
in general maximum panel dimensions should not exceed num times the concrete overlay thickness and the length of the longer panel dimension divided by the shorter panel dimension should not exceed num .
the representative may allow slight deviations from nominal panel dimensions in order to match joints in adjacent pavement or structures or to avoid the construction of panels with dimensions or shapes that would otherwise be subject to premature cracking .
num .
sawing for creating concrete overly joints .
sawing is the only acceptable technique for creating concrete overlay joints .
saw joints as soon as concrete has sufficiently hardened to allow sawing without excessive raveling resulting from the sawing operation and to prevent random cracking .
the use of early entry saws is recommended .
fhwas hiperpav or similar software approved by the department may be used in determining a projectspecific sawing window .
if necessary conduct sawing operations continuously both day and night regardless of weather conditions .
saw joints with a green cut saw to a depth of dnum and a minimum width of num inch .
if initial saw cuts do not extend through the slab edge to avoid blowouts or edge damage of green concrete extend these cuts through the edge as soon as it can be done without causing damage .
omit sawing if a crack occurs at or within num feet of a joint location before or during sawing and address as specified in section num .
clean joints of all deleterious material after sawing .
numi numq num num change no .
num num .
curing .
if pavement is cured by means other than whitepigmented liquid membraneforming curing compound remove curing materials from overlay at the location where a joint is to be cut .
remove only sufficient covering to provide space necessary for sawing joints .
as soon as the joint is sawed replace the covering .
the maximum time period allowed for pavement curing covers to be removed is num hour .
if whitepigmented liquid membraneforming curing compound is used cure the joint area as specified in section numlnum.c .
j longitudinal joints .
add the following additional longitudinal joint requirements are as specified in sections numinum numinum numinum numinum numinum and numinum .
k final strikeoff consolidation and finishing .
modified as follows num .
floating .
add the following do not use steel or fresno floats .
l curing concrete .
modified as follows num .
normal curing .
replace the first sentence with the following apply curing materials after finishing and texturing and within num minutes of the dissipation of bleed water .
maintain the curing materials until the pavement has achieved sufficient strength for opening to traffic as specified in section numq .
add the following paragraph provide adequate insulating blankets to prevent rapid heat loss if the air temperature is numf or less .
insulation may be removed when the air temperature exceeds numf or when the average compressive strength of the concrete exceeds num pounds per square inch .
remove insulation in a manner such that the rate of temperature change at the concrete surface does not exceed numf within any numhour period .
take temperature readings of the concrete surface during insulation removal .
concrete that experiences a higher rate of temperature change may be considered defective .
num.c white membrane forming curing compound .
replace the second sentence of the second paragraph with the following apply curing compound evenly to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces .
apply at a minimum rate of num gallon num gallon per num square feet for pavements num inches and per num square feet for pavements num inches or according to the manufacturers recommendations whichever is greater .
if conditions warrant the curing compound can be applied in two equal rates of application with the first applied as stated previously and the second applied immediately after sawing operations have been completed .
joint faces must be protected from exposure to curing compound or cleaned thoroughly prior to sealant installation .
o surface tolerance .
replace with the following section numo q opening to traffic .
replace with the following the representative will determine when pavement will be open to traffic based on when the concrete attains the minimum required compressive strength according to table a as measured either by compressive strength testing of cylinders in accordance with ptm no .
num or by concrete maturity specifications in accordance with ptm num .
table a slab thick inches strength for opening to traffic psi length num ft length num ft fc mr numrd fc mr numrd num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numu numm num num change no .
num u concrete overlay transitions .
add this section as follows construct transitions at the limits of the concrete overlay as indicated .
in areas where transitions contain existing treated base course or concrete pavement directly below the overlay place geotextile as a debonding layer as specified in section numenum.a .
num measurement and payment a concrete pavement patching .
section numc b slab stabilization .
section numb and c c slabjacking .
section numb and c d flexible base replacement .
section num e shallow repairs .
square foot f cement concrete class aa .
cubic yard for producing the cement concrete needed for the overlay and delivering it to the jobsite .
computed based on the indicated depth of the overlay and the placement area .
includes all work associated with the construction of the concrete overlay with the exception of preoverlay repairs .
excludes cement concrete material used in transition areas .
g separation layer geotextile .
square yard the unit price includes all required materials and placementinstallation including sweeping .
h separation layer asphalt .
tons the unit price includes all required materials and placementinstallation including sweeping .
the cost of necessary joint fault reduction efforts will be considered incidental to this item of work .
i adjustment for deficiencies .
section numa j defective pavement left in place .
section numb k concrete overlay transition .
cubic yard .
the unit price includes all associated items of work within the limits of the transitions .
l evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and payment of incentive .
section num. m test for depth .
section numc num num num num initial edition section numcrack cleaning and sealing num descriptionthis work is cleaning and sealing of cracks in existing cement concrete pavements having an opening of num inch and wider .
num material a joint sealing material .
section numb or c num constructionsaw or grind cracks to a width of num inch wide by num inch depth .
immediately after sawing and grinding flush with water .
do not seal the same day as sawing or grinding .
if original crack is between num inch and num inch wide saw or grind to a width of num inch and a depth of num num inches .
immediately before placing the sealant clean the crack by using a compressed air stream of at least num pounds per square inch measured at the source .
seal cracks as specified in the applicable requirements in section numn and as specified here .
do not place joint sealant unless the ambient air temperature is numf or greater and the pavement temperature is numf or greater .
fill the sealant reservoir to a level of num inch to num inch below the pavement surface .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num num num num initial edition section nummilling of cement concrete pavement surface num description this work is milling of an existing cement concrete pavement surface to the indicated depth .
num construction a equipment .
provide a milling machine designed and built for milling existing cement concrete pavements .
b milling operation .
mill to provide a finished surface that is free from gouges grooves and ridges and that conforms to the surface tolerance requirements of section numo .
immediately after milling remove milled material .
carefully remove the existing cement concrete material around utility facilities within work areas .
repair or replace utility facilities that are damaged by the milling operation to the satisfaction of the utility owner .
control the rate of milling to avoid tearing of the mat or chunky and nonuniformly milled material .
if directed separate oversized and chunky milled material .
maintain the milled pavement surface free of all loose materials and dust before placing a proposed bituminous overlay .
c disposition of milled material .
satisfactorily dispose of the milled material or dispose as indicated .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numa num num change no .
num section num incidental construction section numpipe culverts num descriptionthis work is construction or reconstruction inspection and cleaning of pipe culverts including subsurface utility facilities sewers and storm drains .
this work also includes the direct design manufacturing and testing of reinforced concrete pipes .
num material a pipes .
comply with the following num .
certification .
section numbnum num .
size and type of pipe .
as indicated .
num .
reinforced concrete rc pipe .
num.a round and elliptical reinforced concrete pipe .
publication num .
provide rc pipe conforming to bdnumm penndot design manual part num appendix h and the pennsylvania installation direct design paidd computer program .
manufacture and test according to publication num .
num.b plant acceptance .
num.b.num general .
do not begin fabrication before the structural materials engineers inspection and acceptance of the plant .
provide a permanent building offered for the departments acceptance .
material equipment test procedures methods of fabrication handling storage and transportation are subject to inspection .
through wall lift holes are permitted only if formed during the manufacturing process or cored after the pipe is cured .
punch through methods are prohibited .
register and certify the plant under either the american concrete pipe association acpa or national precast concrete association npca plant certification program .
submit an annual endorsed copy to the structural materials engineer for continued qualification .
num.c qc .
num.c.num general .
establish a level of qc based on uniform production practices .
submit the plants qc plan and mix designs to the structural materials engineer bdtd for review and approval .
include with the qc plan a company organizational chart indicating a separate chain of command from the qc manager to the ownerplant manager independent of the production manager .
resubmit the qc plan mix design andor organizational chart when required due to changes in processes materials or personnel .
num.c.num qc manager .
provide a qc manager who has the overall responsibility for the adequacy of production facilities qc sampling and testing and fabrication of the product and who will ensure that items are fabricated as designed and specified .
num.d testing and inspection .
num.d.num testing .
publication num .
num.d.num inspection .
publications num and num .
provide the necessary pipe inspection equipment .
before installation pipes may have nonthrough wall cracks of less than num inch in width .
any pipe having both an numa numa num num change no .
num unloaded surface crack width of num inch or greater and extending num inches or longer will be rejected .
to determine whether rejection or remediation is required measure crack widths with leaf gages as described in aashto t num .
use gages having a thickness of num inches to determine pipe acceptability before installation .
num .
metal pipes .
num.a ductile iron pipe .
astm anum num.b corrugated steel pipe metallic coated .
aashto m num types i and ir aashto m num aashto m num and aashto m num num.c corrugated aluminum alloy pipe .
aashto m num types i and ir num.d coated corrugated galvanized steel pipe .
aashto m num type i aashto m num and aashto m num .
fabricate pipes with coatings as follows grade num num mil coating on all surfaces .
num .
halfcircle pipe .
conforming to the requirements of the type indicated except modified to meet the halfcircle configuration .
num .
thermoplastic pipes .
provide cell class of material actual and minimum minimum pipe stiffness and the dimension ratio when applicable if not included in pipe markings .
thermoplastic connection for tyk sections that meet the requirements of this section are allowed on pipe runs .
num.a group i .
numfoot maximum fillnumfoot minimum fill height .
num.a.num polyethylene .
astm fnum type s sdr astm fnum type s sdrnum cell class numc numinch diameternuminch diameter only astm fnum type s rscnum cell class numc numinch maximum diameter astm fnum type s rscnum cell class numc numinch diameternuminch diameter only num.a.num polyvinyl chloride .
astm fnum type s psnum cell class numc or numc numinch diameter maximum aashto m num type s cell class numc numinch maximum diameter aashto m num type s cell class numc numinch to numinch diameter astm fnum types s tnum or tnum psnum cell class numc or numc numinch maximum diameter aashto m num type s cell class numb numinch diameter and numinch diameter only num.b group ii .
numfoot maximum fillnumfoot minimum cover .
section numanum.a and as follows num.b.num polyethylene .
astm fnum type s rscnum cell class numc numinch diameter numa numa num num change no .
num num.c group iii .
numfoot maximum fillnumfoot minimum cover .
section numanum.a and as follows num.c.num polyethylene .
aashto m num types d and s cell class numc numinch maximum diameter penndot design manual parts num and num and num aashto lrfd bridge design specifications chapter num .
num.c.num polyvinyl chloride .
aashto m num cell class numc numinch diameter and numinch diameter num.d group iv .
numfoot maximum fillnumfoot minimum cover .
num.d.num polyethylene .
aashto m num types d and s cell class numc numinch numinch numinch penndot design manual parts num and num and num aashto lrfd bridge design specifications chapter num .
aashto m num type s cell class numc numinch and numinch diameters penndot design manual parts num and num and num aashto lrfd bridge design specification chapter num .
num.e group v. numfoot maximum fillnumfoot minimum cover num.e.num polyethylene .
aashto m num type c cell class numc numinch maximum diameter num.f group vi .
numfoot maximum fillnumfoot minimum cover num.f.num polyethylene .
aashto m num types d and s cell class numc penndot design manual parts num and num and num aashto lrfd bridge design specifications chapter num .
num.f.num polypropylene .
aashto m num types d and s numinch to numinch diameter penndot design manual parts num and num and num aashto lrfd bridge design specifications chapter num .
num.g group vii .
numfoot maximum fillnumfoot minimum cover num.g.num polyethylene high density polyethylene hdpe numyear pipe .
aashto m num type s cell class numc numinch numinch numinch numinch numinch numinch numinch and numinch diameters penndot design manual parts num and num and num aashto lrfd bridge design specifications chapter num with fu min num ksi e min num ksi comply with the requirements of table num for initial product approval testing .
comply with the requirements of table num for production quality control sampling and testing in addition to the requirements of aashto m num .
provide watertight joints according to aashto numa numa num num change no .
num m num using a bell and spigot design .
except as noted below in bulletin num product approval and approved product changes resubmittal and approval .
table num num.g.numa stress or crack resistance scr of pipes pipe location test method test conditions test requirements num .
pipe liner fm num procedure a num igepal solution at numf and num psi applied stress num replicates average failure time of the pipe liner num hours no signal value num hours num .
pipe corugationnum molded plaque astm fnum num igepal solution at numf and num psi applied stress num replicates average failure time num hours no signal value num hours num.b junction fm num procedure b and fm num full testnum test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi and num psi .
also test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi num replicates at each of three test conditions .
determine failure time at num psi at numf num years num lower confidence using num failure time valuesnum .
the tests for each condition can be terminated at duration equal to or greater than the following criteria num hours at numf num psi num hours at numf num psi num hours at numf num psi num.b junction single testnum test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi num replicates .
average failure time num hours num.a longitudinal profilesnum fm num procedure c and fm num full testnum test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi and num psi .
also test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi num replicates at each of three test conditions .
determine failure time at num psi at numf num years num lower confidence using num failure time valuesnum .
the tests for each condition can be terminated at duration equal to or greater than the following criteria num hours at numf num psi num hours at numf num psi num hours at numf num psi num.b longitudinal profilesnum single testnum test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi num replicates .
average failure time num hours num.g.numb oxidation resistance of pipes numa numa num num change no .
num pipe location test method test conditions test requirements num .
liner andor crownnum oit test astm dnum num replicates to determine initial oit value on the as manufactured not incubated pipe num minutes minimum num .
liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num num and oit test astm dnum three samples for incubation of num days at numfnum and applied stress of num psi .
one oit test per each sample .
average of num minutesnum num no values num minutes num .
liner andor crownnum mi test astm dnum at numfnum lb num replicates on the as manufactured not incubated pipe num gnum minutes num .
liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num num and mi test astm dnum at numfnum lb num replicates total on the three aged samples after incubation of num days at numfnum and applied stress of num psi mi retained valuenum num num num and num num.g.numc long term tensile properties pipe location test method test conditions test requirements num .
liner fm num num replicates at applied stress of num psi determine creep modulus at numyear at numf num psi num lower confidence .
num .
junctionnum fm num procedure b test at num temperaturestress combinations numf at num psi numf at num psi numf at num psi num replicates at each test condition .
determine tensile strength at numyear at numf num psi num lower confidence using num failure time valuesnum .
the tests for each condition can be terminated at duration equal to or greater than the following criteria num hours at numf num psi num hours at numf num psi num hours at numf num psi num.g.numd antioxidant index pipe location test method test requirements liner crown junction corrugation astm dnum qa index all pipe sizes note fm florida method of test mi melt index oit oxidative induction time num .
required only when the resin used in the corrugation is different than that of the liner .
num .
perform full test on alternative redesign pipe diameter of pipe based on wall profile design raw material cell classification and manufacturing process .
full test must be performed on maximum and minimum pipe diameters within a manufacturing process .
num .
provide documentation to predict the numyear stress crack resistance with a num lower confidence .
numa numa num num change no .
num num .
single test for the junction and longitudinal profile may be used on alternate redesign pipe sizes within a manufacturing process .
single point tests may not be used on maximum and minimum pipe sizes within a manufacturing process except by approval of lts engineer of tests .
single point tests may be used for quality assurance testing purposes .
num .
longitudinal profiles include vent holes molded lines and circumferential weld seam .
num .
oit and mi tests on the crown are required when resin used in the corrugation is different than that of the liner .
num .
the incubation duration and temperature can also be num days at numf .
num .
within each replicate set of tests the discrepancy range is to be within num .
if an outof range discrepancy occurs repeat the three oit tests .
num .
perform the tests for incubated and asmanufactured pipe samples by the same lab same operator the same testing device and in the same day .
num .
within each replicate set of tests the discrepancy range is to be within num .
if an outofrange discrepancy occurs repeat the two mi tests on the same pipe sample .
if insufficient material is available a repeat of one test is acceptable .
num .
the mi retained value is determined using the average mi value of incubated sample divided by the average mi value of asmanufactured pipe sample .
num .
the junction test results from the scr test may be used to establish the minimum numyear tensile strength of num psi .
florida department of transportation fdot method of test fm num determining stress crack resistance of hdpe corrugated pipes fm num predicting the crack free service life of hdpe corrugated pipes fm num predicting the oxidation resistance of hdpe corrugated pipes fm num predicting longterm modulus of hdpe corrugated pipes .
the laboratory performing these tests must be certified by the geosynthetic accreditation institute gai .
provisional approval can be granted for all current bulletin num approved products as well as products currently pending approval .
final approval will only be granted to systems which meet all requirements as currently outlined .
bulletin num product approval initial bulletin num listing initial testing of all num year hdpe pipes will include third party independent testing of all sizes profiles and manufacturing locations for all num .
aashto m num requirements except astm dnumtesting for joint integrity num .
all table num testing requirements note only footnotes num and num apply num .
fingerprint of antioxidant package by astm dnum determination of antioxidants and erucamide slip additives in polyethylene using liquid chromatography to be used to index the antioxidant package for future confirmatory testing .
the capability to provide watertight joints as per astm dnum can be demonstrated by testing representative samples in the presence of the representative in lieu of providing third party data .
num .
manufacturers must submit to bopd information pertaining to materials identity antioxidant variation carbon black variation and qcqa plans for review and approval before use .
any change in resin or antioxidant raw materials from the initial product approval must be resubmitted to the department for reevaluation and approval .
bulletin num approved product changes resubmittal and approval the following instanceschanges trigger resubmittal numa numa num num change no .
num design antioxidant package additional sizes manufacturing location full retest includes num .
aashto m num requirements except astm dnumtesting for joint integrity num .
all table num testing requirements note all footnotes apply num .
astm dnum antioxidant fingerprint the capability to provide watertight joints as per astm dnum can be demonstrated by testing representative samples in the presence of the representative in lieu of providing third party data .
exceptions include num .
if no change in antioxidant package can be confirmed to be the same by astm dnum antioxidant fingerprint then the table num oxidation resistance tests num.g.numbnum and num.g.numbnum can be omitted .
num .
if solely a design longitudinal profile change than the table num single point testing of scr num.g.numanum.b full testing can be omitted .
take sample on the circumferential weld seam .
table num pipe location test method test requirements minimum test frequency pipe liner fm num procedure a greater than or equal to the value of the initial approval test within the statistical precision and bias of the test method .
monthlynum liner andor crownnum oit test astm dnum num minutes minimum quarterlynum num .
oit test on the crown is required when resin used in the corrugation is different than that of the liner .
num .
the test is applicable for each pipe diameter manufactured within the stated time period .
num.g.num polypropylene .
aashto m num types d and s numinch to numinch diameter penndot design manual parts num and num and num aashto lrfd bridge design specifications chapter num with fu min numksi e min num ksi comply with the requirements of table num for initial product approval testing .
table num stress crack resistance scr of pipes pipe location test method test conditions test requirements pipe liner fm num procedure a num igepal solution at numf and num psi applied stress num replicates average failure time of the pipe liner num hours no single value num hoursnum oxidation resistance of pipes numa numb num num change no .
num pipe location test method test conditions test requirements liner andor crownnum oit test astm dnum num replicates to determine initial oit value on the as manufactured not incubated pipe num minutes minimum liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num and oit test astm dnum three samples for incubation of num days at numfnum .
one oit test per each sample .
average of num minutesnum no values num minutes liner andor crownnum mi test astm dnum at numfnum lb num replicates on the as manufactured not incubated pipe num gnum minutes liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num and mi test astm dnum at numfnum lb num replicates total on the three aged samples after incubation of num days at numfnum mi retained valuenum num num num and num antioxidant index pipe location test method test requirements liner crown junction corrugation astm dnum qa index all pipe sizes note fm florida method of test mi melt index oit oxidative induction time num .
if due to sample size this test can not be completed on the liner then conduct testing on a molded plaque sample .
samples can be removed if test time exceeds num hours without failure .
num .
oit and mi tests on the crown are required when resin used in the corrugation is different than that of the liner .
num .
the incubation duration and temperature can also be num days at numf or num days at numf .
num .
perform the tests for incubated and asmanufactured pipe samples by the same lab same operator the same testing device and in the same day .
num .
within each replicate set of tests the discrepancy range is to be within num .
if an outofrange discrepancy occurs repeat the two mi tests on the same pipe sample .
if insufficient material is available a repeat of one test is acceptable .
num .
the mi retained value is determined using the average mi value of incubated sample divided by the average mi value of asmanufactured pipe sample .
b other material .
premolded expansion joint fillersection num mortarsection numa caulking compoundsection numa preformed pipe joint gasketssection numb cement concrete for miscellaneous drainagesection num reinforcement steelsection num coarse aggregatetype c or better section num curing compoundsection num numb numc num num change no .
num curing and protecting coverssection num bituminous paintfederal specification ttvnumf .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
zinc chromate primerfederal specification ttpnum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
flowable backfillsection numa geotextile class num type asection num geotextile class num type b section num watertight joint gasket .
astm fnum c grout .
mix one part cement and two parts fine aggregate with the minimum amount of water necessary to obtain grout of the required consistency containing num to num entrained air .
air entraining cement may be used in place of the plain cement and air entraining admixture .
use materials conforming to the following requirements cementsection num fine aggregatetype a or c section num watersection num admixturessection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
provide numinch minimum cover from the bottom of base course to the top of pipe barrel .
construct the embankment to num feet above the top of pipe elevation or to subgrade whichever is less before excavating for the pipe .
do not haul over pipe with less than num feet of cover over the top of pipe barrel .
maintain a minimum pipe slope of num on drainage pipes unless otherwise specified .
if running water is encountered and can not be diverted provide an acceptable temporary pipe or other structure before placing embankment or as otherwise directed .
before placing pipe inspect pipe for any defects such as cracks dents spalls andor coating as specified in publication num .
in advance of installation submit to the representative a detailed list of lifting equipment and hardware including their rated capacity from the manufacturers for each size of pipe being installed .
in addition perform a visual review of the lifting equipment and hardware each day before installation for signs of damage or wear .
replace damaged or worn lifting equipment and hardware before use .
b trench and bedding .
excavate trench and construct bedding as shown on the standard drawings .
compact and proof roll the bottom of the trench as specified in section numfnum before placement of bedding material .
place appropriate bedding material for the type of pipe being placed .
do not compact pipe bedding materials .
if following compaction the trench bottom is unable to withstand the force of the compaction equipment and provide adequate bearing for the bedding and pipe discontinue work and immediately notify the representative .
provide a proposed means to remediate the condition to provide adequate bearing to the representative for review and acceptance before starting construction .
document the insufficient bearing location and the remediation technique on form csnum for future reference .
if flowable backfill material is used provide support for pipe as specified in section numbnum .
c laying pipe .
lay pipe as shown on the standard drawings before constructing base course or pavement .
lay pipe with bells or grooves up grade in shaped recesses when required spigot ends fully entered into the hubs .
begin placement of the pipe at the outlet end with a full length of pipe and continue towards the inlet end unless otherwise directed .
fill lift holes with a manufactured lift hole plug that is soiltight .
control the pipe alignment and grade with suitable string lines with an electronic laser beam system or by other numc numf num num change no .
num acceptable methods .
camber the grade line to offset anticipated settlement due to the height of embankment and bedding used if directed .
on straightline pipe placements join pipe sections according to the joint requirements specified in section numn .
verify joint gaps during progressive pipe installation .
if joint gaps can not be maintained within the tolerance listed in section numn stop work and investigate the cause .
commence construction after resolving any joint fitup problem .
join pipes placed on a radius to within these tolerances as measured at a point halfway up the pipe springline along the interior of the curve .
for pipe runs placed on curves with a radius less than num yards greater than num degrees num minutes use shorter lengths of precast pipe to minimize the joint gap .
if pipes are protected by endwalls or connected with drainage structures place exposed pipe end within castin place wall or cut off flush with precast structure face and finish with mortar as directed .
provide satisfactory connections to existing drainage structures .
coat all aluminum surfaces that will be embedded into concrete with one coat of zinc chromate primer or a coat of bituminous paint .
allow coating to dry completely before placement of concrete .
if an existing utility facility or other obstruction is encountered which will prohibit the proper installation and backfill of the pipe cease installation and notify the representative immediately .
carefully excavate by hand if necessary to determine the nature and extent of conflict .
submit to the representative a sketch or plan sheet showing the extent and nature of conflict .
the representative will provide direction to arrange for relocation of the utility facility remove the obstructions or complete the installation in a modified manner .
document the location of the obstruction and the remediation technique on form csnum for future reference .
d joints .
lay pipe except interlocking style and pipe joined with bands with pipe joint caulk or preformed pipe joint gaskets or elliptical concrete pipe as follows num .
pipe joint caulk .
before placing succeeding pipe sections place the caulk on the inside of the bell end of the pipe such that a sufficient layer of material is placed around the entire circumference of the pipe .
after the joint is assembled remove excess caulk on the inside of the pipe such that the flow of water is not obstructed and seal the outside circumference of the joint .
num .
preformed pipe joint gaskets .
before placing succeeding pipe sections place preformed pipe joint gaskets according to manufacturers recommendation .
num .
elliptical concrete pipe .
wrap the joint of the pipes with two layers of geotextile class num as shown on standard drawings rcnumm .
num .
metal pipe .
minimum metal pipe connecting band width of num inches .
use two layers of geotextile class num as shown on standard drawings rcnumm if the connecting partial and fully corrugated band dimples do not properly index into each corrugation valley at the pipe end .
verify the corrugation indexing as part of joint inspection .
e elongation of metal pipes .
when indicated elongate metal pipe vertically num using acceptable shop methods .
elongate coated pipe by acceptable shop methods only .
satisfactorily repair coating damaged by elongation procedures .
f backfilling trench .
after the pipe is laid backfill the trench as shown on the standard drawings with suitable material above the course aggregate layer as approved by the representative .
place material in accordance with the standard drawings and as specified for the portion of the trench where the backfill is being placed and the placement condition .
compact backfill material for the full trench width as specified in section numb for the specific material type placed .
use equipment with a consistent application force that will not damage the pipe .
test as specified in section numa .
if flowable backfill material is used backfill the trench as shown in the flowable backfill detail on the standard drawings and as specified in section num .
num .
bottom of trench .
compact and proof roll the bottom of the trench with the equipment as specified in sections numcnum.d num.g num.i or numcnum that will be used to compact the backfill before placing the pipe bedding material .
the use of an excavatormounted hydraulic plate compactor hoe pac for proof rolling is not allowed .
compact trench bottom as specified in section numb for the specific material type present .
perform proof rolling only in the presence of the representative who will assess and approve or disapprove the stability of the area being investigated .
in wet areas or unstable areas the representative may waive this requirement if other stabilization or numf numh num num change no .
num treatment measures are indicated andor required .
any areas displaying permanent deformation greater than num inch are considered unstable .
treat unstable areas by excavating material in the area to a depth of num foot .
dry the material and recompact or replace with compacted suitable material of the same type or other material including soil type num granular material and type num granular material as specified in section numanum except having particles no greater than num inches in size as approved by the representative or as indicated .
num .
sides of trench .
place no .
numa coarse aggregate backfill in compacted numinch layers to the height shown on the standard drawings .
compact with equipment as specified in section numcnum .
do not compact the backfill directly over the crown of the pipe as shown on the standard drawings .
num .
above pipe or conduit .
backfill from the top of the required no .
numa coarse aggregate as shown on the standard drawings to the finished grade elevation with suitable material or other material including soil type num granular material and type num granular material as specified in section numanum except having particles no greater than num inches in size when the trench is located beyond the roadway footprint including the shoulders .
for pipes constructed in new embankments backfill to the pavement subgrade elevation bottom of the pavement subbase layer with no .
numa coarse aggregate when the trench is located within the roadway footprint including the shoulders and the distance from the top of pipe elevation to the pavement subgrade elevation is less than or equal to num feet .
when the distance is greater than num feet suitable material or other material including soil type num granular material and type num granular material as specified in section numanum except having particles no greater than num inches in size may be placed from the top of the required no .
numa coarse aggregate to the pavement subgrade elevation .
for reconstruction or replacement of pipesutilities under existing pavements backfill the entire trench with no .
numa coarse aggregate regardless of the distance from the top of pipe to the pavement subgrade elevation .
place in compacted numinch layers when using equipment as specified in sections numcnum.d and numcnum .
up to compacted numinch layers are acceptable if using a vibratory roller as specified in section numcnum.i .
if using a backhoemounted hydraulic plate compactor up to compacted numinch layers are acceptable .
g shored or trench box installation .
construct shored or trench box installation where indicated and as specified in section num .
construct shored or trench box installation as required for reinforced concrete pipe .
construct shored or trench box installations for thermoplastic or metal pipe as follows leave trench sheeting in place to prevent loss of foundation support and backfill materials unless otherwise directed by the chief bridge engineer .
when the top of trench sheeting is to be cut off make the cut num inches or more above the crown of the pipe .
leave rangers walers and braces in place as required to support the cut off sheeting and trench wall in the vicinity of the pipe zone .
leave timber sheeting in place .
treat timber sheeting against biological degradation and decay if placed above the ground water table .
do not disturb the installed pipe and its embedment when using movable trench boxes and shields .
do not use movable supports below the top of the pipe backfill pay limit zone unless methods for maintaining the integrity and level of compaction of the backfill material are submitted to and approved by the chief bridge engineer .
before moving supports place and compact embedment to sufficient depths to ensure protection of the pipe .
finish placing and compacting the backfill material as supports are moved .
if the use of sheeting or other trench wall supports is permitted below the pipe backfill pay limit zone ensure that pipe bedding and backfill materials are not disturbed by support removal .
fill voids left upon removal of supports and compact all material to required densities .
h jacked pipe .
jack pipe by means of conventional tunneling or boring methods when indicated .
before commencement of this work submit a complete plan and schedule for pipe installation .
include complete details of sheeting shoring and bracing for the protection of facilities above the pipe as well as materials and equipment pertinent to the jacking operation .
do not proceed with pipe installation until the plan and schedule are accepted .
do not disturb facilities or cause settlement of the ground above the pipe .
provide free and unobstructed use of facilities above the pipe without delay or danger to life equipment or property .
install pipe immediately following the heading or tunneling excavation .
after completion of the jacking operation fill voids around the pipe with grout placed under pressure .
properly protect the grout for at least num days .
numh numn num num change no .
num place joint sealant material on concrete pipe in front of the jacking frame .
replace or repair pipe damaged during the jacking operations as directed .
if steel casing pipe is used buttweld the joints as installation progresses .
make joints watertight .
where numyear service life pipe is installed using a steel pipe casing the joint gap tolerances do not apply provided the annular space between the liner pipe and the jacked pipe is filled with grout and where no visible grout leakage is observed during the post installation inspection .
if it is determined that the pipe installation is being conducted in an unsatisfactory manner stop this work and place a bulkhead at the heading until an alternate procedure is proposed and accepted .
i extension of existing pipe .
if extensions of pipe culverts or drains are indicated or required remove the existing endwalls as directed .
cut the existing pipe to a true edge as required to make a satisfactory joint .
join the new pipe to the existing pipe or endwalls using acceptable collars constructed of class a concrete or acceptable metal connecting bands .
clean the existing pipe as specified in section numj .
repair or replace existing pipe damaged during construction .
as an alternate to removing the endwall if permitted extend the pipe using a concrete collar for pipe extension as specified in section num. j cleaning existing pipes .
clean existing pipe culverts as indicated and as directed before the start of roadway paving operations .
clean inlets bridge scuppers and piping manholes endwalls and other drainage appurtenances connected to the pipes as directed .
clean in an acceptable manner and repair damage resulting from the cleaning operation .
remove any material deposited in inlets during paving operations .
prevent material cleaned from the drainage system from entering streams or other bodies of water and dispose of this material in a satisfactory manner .
k relaid pipe .
remove and clean existing pipes as indicated and have them inspected by the representative .
transport and relay accepted existing pipes at the indicated locations in the same manner specified for new pipes .
m removal and replacement .
remove and replace pipe that is not true to alignment shows settlement after installation or is broken or damaged .
n final inspection of pipes except num year design life pipes .
before final acceptance inspect all of the following types of installed pipe with total backfillembankment load applied .
perform inspection on pipes at least num days after backfillembankment is completed .
if the final wearing course is placed more than num days after the pipe backfillembankment is completed the inspection must be performed before placing final wearing course .
provide pipe inspection equipment and inspect all pipes over num inches in diameter from inside the pipe .
inspect numinch to numinch diameter pipes from access points .
provide written documentation on form csnum of all inspections to the representative following each inspection .
locations of pipe installation documented as having been modified due to obstructions or insufficient bearing will be excluded from the acceptance criteria of this section .
num .
concrete pipes .
provide pipe gages as specified in section numanum.d.num .
and inspect concrete pipes for signs of damage .
inspection criteria for the pipe are as follows num.a joints .
if joint separation is greater than the joint gap installation allowance but less than the maximum joint gap allowance noted in tables a or b and soil tight then the pipe joint will be accepted with reduced payment .
note all joint gaps that are greater than the installation allowance in the inspection report .
if joint separation is greater than the maximum joint gap allowance noted in tables a or b and soil tight then submit a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
note all joint gaps that are greater than the installation allowance in the inspection report .
if any soil infiltration is identified at the pipe joint during inspection a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump is required .
note all joints with soil infiltration in the inspection report .
table a round pipe diameter inches joint gap installation maximum joint gap numn numn num num change no .
num allowance inches allowance inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table b elliptical pipe equivalent diameter inches joint gap installation allowance inches maximum joint gap allowance inches num num num num num num num num num num num num special design joints will be subject to manufacturer submittal and individual review and approval .
if the bell depth is greater than the tongue depth include the difference between these depths to the joint gap table allowances .
these joint tolerances are not applicable to open joint applications .
num.b cracks .
cracks with a width less than or equal to num inches are considered hairline and minor .
note these cracks in the inspection report however no remedial action is necessary .
cracks identified during inspection having a width greater than num inches and a length greater than num inches require a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
note these cracks in the inspection report .
numc spallschips .
check spalling area for exposed reinforcement .
if spalling area has no exposed reinforcement then repair according to publication num part num appendices nonstructural repair section .
note these spalls in the inspection report .
if spalling area has exposed reinforcement with a single spall area less than or equal to num square inch then repair according to publication num part num appendices structural repair section .
note these spalls in the inspection report .
if spalling area has exposed reinforcement with a single spall area greater than num square inch prepare and submit a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
note these spalls in the inspection report .
num .
metal pipes .
inspect metal pipes for damage .
perform deflection testing using either electronic deflectometers calibrated television or video cameras properly sized numleg minimum go nogo mandrel direct measurement by extension rulers or tape measures in pipes that allow safe entry or other acceptable devices .
at a minimum perform deflection testing if pipe can not be physically inspected .
inspection criteria for the pipe are as follows num.a joints .
if joint separation is greater than the joint gap installation allowance but less than the maximum joint allowance noted in table c and soil tight then the pipe joint will be accepted with reduced payment .
note all joint gaps that are greater than the installation allowance in the inspection report .
if joint separation is greater than the maximum joint allowance noted in table c and soil tight then submit a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
note all joint gaps that are greater than the installation allowance in the inspection report .
if any soil infiltration is identified at the pipe joint during inspection a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump is required .
note all joint with soil infiltration in the inspection report .
numn numn num num change no .
num table c metal pipe and plate culvert material joint gap installation allowance inches maximum joint gap allowance inches corrugated metal pipe type i round num num corrugated metal pipe type ii pipe arch num num metal plate culvert nanum nanum iron ductile pipe all diameters num num note num .
structural plates have lap joints .
num.b coating .
repair damaged coatings according to aashto m num and aashto m num where the original coating has pinholes blisters cracks in the coating lack of coating bond to surface or loss of galvanizing .
note coating damage in the inspection report .
perform repairs at no expense to the department .
num.c deflectionbuckle .
note all deflections in the inspection report .
prepare and submit a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump if deflection is greater than num of a round pipe nominal diameter plus a manufacturing tolerance of num or numinch undersize whichever is greater .
for pipe arch prepare and submit a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump if the deflection limits of num decrease in rise and a num increase in span from the nominal dimension with no allowance for manufacturing tolerance are exceeded .
note all deflections in the inspection report .
num.d dents .
note all dents in the inspection report .
if any of the following criteria are identified in the report then prepare and submit a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
dents greater than num deflection of diameter dents with an area greater than num square feet dents with a length or width greater than num of the circumference num.e holes .
note all holes in the inspection report .
holes with a diameter less than num inch without water leakage or soil infiltration will be accepted .
pipes with diameters greater than num inches having holes with a diameter less than num inch which exhibit either water leakage or soil infiltration require an internal repair patch as shown in project office manual pom c.num .
pipes num inches and less in diameter having holes with a diameter less than num inch which exhibit either water leakage or soil infiltration require a remediation plan for repair as specified in section nump .
pipes with diameters greater than num inches having holes with a diameter greater than or equal to num inch but less than the width of num of corrugation require an internal repair patch as shown in pom c.num .
pipes num inches and less in diameter having holes with a diameter greater than or equal to num inch but less than the width of num of corrugation require a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
holes with a diameter greater than or equal to num inch but greater than the width of num of corrugation require a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
num .
thermoplastic pipes .
inspect thermoplastic pipes for damage .
if the pipe run is num feet or less in length not numn numo num num change no .
num under the roadway and the initial visual inspection does not indicate any deflection or other deficiencies additional testing will be waived .
in all other cases perform the deflection testing using either electronic deflectometers calibrated television or video cameras properly sized go nogo mandrel direct measurement by extension rulers or tape measures in pipes that allow safe entry or other acceptable devices .
perform deflection testing at a minimum if pipe can not be physically inspected .
provide the unloaded inside diameter pipe size from the manufacturer for each pipe type and size delivered to the project .
inspection criteria for the pipe are as follows num.a joints .
if joint separation is greater than the joint gap installation allowance of num inch but less than the maximum joint gap allowance of num inch without water leakage or soil infiltration then the pipe joint will be accepted with reduced payment .
note all joint gaps that are greater than the installation allowance in the inspection report .
if joint separation is greater than the maximum joint gap allowance of num inch without water leakage or soil infiltration then submit a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
note all joint gaps that are greater than the installation allowance in the inspection report .
if any water leakage or soil infiltration is identified at the pipe joint during inspection a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump is required .
note all joints with soil or water infiltration in the inspection report .
num.b cracks .
note all cracks identified during inspection of the interior wall of the pipe in the inspection report cracks less than num inch in width and less than num inches in length without water leakage or soil infiltration will be accepted .
cracks less than num inch in width and less than num inches in length with water leakage or soil infiltration require a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
cracks greater than or equal to num inch in width and greater than or equal to num inches in length require a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
num.c holes .
note all holes in the inspection report .
holes with a diameter less than num inch without water leakage or soil infiltration will be accepted .
pipes with diameters greater than num inches having holes with a diameter less than num inch which exhibit either water leakage or soil infiltration require an internal repair patch as shown in pom c.num .
pipes num inches and less in diameter having holes with a diameter less than num inch which exhibit either water leakage or soil infiltration require a remediation plan for repair as specified in section nump .
pipes with diameters greater than num inches having holes with a diameter greater than or equal to num inch but less than the width of num of corrugation require an internal repair patch as shown in pom c.num .
pipes num inches and less in diameter having holes with a diameter greater than or equal to num inch but less than the width of num of corrugation require a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
holes with a diameter greater than or equal to num inch but greater than the width of num of corrugation require a pipe analysis and a remediation plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump .
num.d deflectionbuckling .
note all deflections in the inspection report .
prepare and submit a pipe analysis and a plan for repair or replacement as specified in section nump if deflection is greater than num of the unloaded inside diameter of the pipe .
if the pipe analysis provides a remediation method that will provide a structurally adequate pipe then the pipe may remain at the elevated deflection otherwise remove and replace .
o final inspection of num year design life pipes .
for num year design life pipe installations num feet in length numo numo num num change no .
num at each location perform final inspection as specified in section numn .
for all other num year design life pipe installations perform final inspection as follows before final acceptance inspect the entire length of all installed pipe types listed in table d with total backfillembankment load applied .
perform inspection on pipes at least num days after backfillembankment is completed .
if the final wearing course is placed more than num days after the pipe backfillembankment is completed the inspection must be performed before placing the final wearing course .
provide the measurement equipment listed in table d to document the required items .
provide the required documentation including the form csnum of all inspections directly from the inspection service provider andor data processor to the representative following each inspection .
locations of pipe installation documented as having been modified due to obstructions or insufficient bearing will be excluded from the acceptance criteria of this section .
deficiencies of the pipe that remain inplace which do not meet specification will be noted on form csnum .
table d requirements for pipe culvert inspection by type of pipe pipe type measurement equipment items required for documentation ductile iron pipe crawlermounted camera with laser profiler joint separation crack widths and lengths deflection evidence of soil intrusion vertical alignment i.e .
ponded water reinforced concrete pipe crawlermounted camera joint separation crack widths and lengths spalls offset joints bellspigot shear failure evidence of soil intrusion vertical alignment i.e .
ponded water corrugated steel pipe aluminized galvanized or polymer coated crawlermounted camera with laser profiler joint separation crackgouge widths and lengths dents buckling seam separations deflection and ovality evidence of soil intrusion loss of aluminized coating oxidation vertical alignment i.e .
ponded water corrugated aluminum alloy pipe crawlermounted camera with laser profiler joint separation crackgouge widths and lengths dents buckling seam separations deflection and ovality evidence of soil intrusion oxidation vertical alignment i.e .
ponded water thermoplastic pipe crawlermounted camera with laser profiler joint separation crack widths and lengths buckling deflection and ovality evidence of leakage or soil intrusion vertical alignment i.e .
ponded water manual tools as measurement equipment for pipes with manual inspection procedures as specified in section numonum .
leakage or soil intrusion will be in conformance with aashto pp num .
num .
remote inspection .
perform a remote inspection according to ptm no .
num section num in the presence of the representative for all num year design life pipe installations num inch in diameter and smaller .
when defects or irregularities are observed with closed circuit television but can not be measured within acceptable tolerances on pipes greater than numinch inspect and report in accordance with manual inspection procedures including manentry as indicated in ptm no .
num section num .
develop a remediation plan as specified in section nump to address all joint separation cracks deflections and other irregularities exceeding the specification limits established in section numc and sections numnnum num or num .
num .
manual inspection .
perform a manual inspection according to ptm no .
num section num in the presence of the representative for all num year design life pipe installations larger than num inch in diameter .
develop a remediation plan as specified in section nump to address all joint separation cracks deflections and other irregularities numo numi num num change no .
num exceeding the specification limited established in section numc and sections numnnum num or num. p remediation .
remedial action may include but is not limited to removal and replacement or an accepted repair procedure with a reduced payment .
reference pom c.num for pipe remediation and reduced payment rebate guidance .
submit all pipe remediation plans to the representative for approval .
all pipe remediation plans that require pipe analysis must be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state .
include in the pipe analysis the structural integrity hydraulic capacity and service life .
q inspection during installation .
for pipe installations under the roadway sidewalk or shoulder perform trench backfill work only in the presence of an authorized inspector .
the inspector will complete form csnum for each run of the conduit or pipe .
certify the work by signing the completed form and submit the signed form to the representative .
num measurement and payment a pipe culverts and relaid pipe culverts .
linear foot measured to the point of centerline intersection of t y k and other branches .
the unit price includes the pipe the bedding material and the backfill as shown on the standard drawings .
furnishing personnel and equipment for dewatering operations inspection of pipes and all remedial measures are incidental to the pipe items .
if the pipe item for shoretrench box is indicated or required the unit price includes placement and removal or keeping in place of shoring supports shield systems and trench boxes as specified in section numg .
payment for remediation of the trench bottom including changes to or the addition of trench support methods when directed by the representative will be made in accordance with section numc .
payment for obstructions encountered including changes to or the addition of trench support methods when directed by the representative will be made in accordance with section numc .
b halfcircle pipe .
linear foot c cement concrete for miscellaneous drainage .
cubic yard as indicated for the class specified for the item indicated .
the unit price includes reinforcement when required .
d class num excavation .
cubic yard pay limits as shown on the standard drawings .
e class num excavation .
cubic yard for halfcircle pipe including bedding and anchors .
f class num excavation .
cubic yard pay limits as shown on the standard drawing for pipe culverts and relaid pipe culverts .
where inlets are installed measurement terminates num foot from the outside face of the inlet wall .
g cleaning existing pipe culverts .
linear foot measured from inlets manholes endwalls and other drainage appurtenances along the pipe centerline .
pay items will establish a break point based on the sizes of pipes to be cleaned .
the department will pay for cleaning of pipe culverts having diameters up to and including num inches under one pay item and cleaning of pipe culverts having diameters over num inches under a separate pay item .
h jacked pipe .
linear foot the unit price includes excavation .
i flowable backfill material .
as indicated for all pipe installations flowable backfill and geotextile are incidental to linear foot of pipe payment .
num num num num initial edition section numcorrugated metal pipearch culverts num descriptionthis work is construction or reconstruction of pipearch culverts .
num materialsections numanum and num numb and c and as follows a corrugated steel pipearch metallic coated .
aashto m num types ii and iir aashto m num aashto m num and aashto m num. b corrugated aluminum alloy pipearch .
aashto m num types ii and iir .
c coated corrugated galvanized steel pipearch .
aashto m num type ii aashto m num and aashto m num .
fabricate pipearch with coating as follows grade num mil coating on all surfaces .
num constructionas specified in section num according to the requirements applicable to metal pipes .
num measurement and paymentas specified in sections numa c d and h. num numa num num initial edition section nummetal plate culverts num descriptionthis work is construction of metal plate pipes metal plate pipearches and metal plate arch culverts .
num material a metal plate pipes metal plate pipearches and metal plate arches .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
comply with the requirements of aashto m numm numm steel and aashto m numm numm aluminum alloy except modify as follows num .
aashto m numm numm .
modified as follows num.a section num fabrication .
except space bolt holes num inches apart along plate edges that are to form circumferential seams .
for bolt hole diameters do not exceed the bolt diameter by more than num inch for longitudinal bolt holes or num inch for circumferential bolt holes .
form corrugations at right angles to the structures longitudinal axis having a depth of not less than num num inches but not greater than num num inches unless otherwise accepted .
where necessary to secure additional seam strength for pipe assembled with lap joints increase the number of bolts per foot of longitudinal seam to six or eight .
in addition furnish plates in sizes that will allow length increments of num feet for squareended structures .
provide a lap joint capable of transmitting the design thrust through the joint .
fabricate plates so not more than three plates come together at a point .
in the two bottom segments of an arch plates may be punched with one row of holes adjacent to the longitudinal plate edge that is to rest on the pier or abutment .
num.b section num dimensions and tolerances .
determine the thickness of plates by weight of flat plates before corrugating .
comply with the following theoretical weights and tolerances .
numa numb num num initial edition theoretical weights and tolerances theoretical weight before galvanizing lbs .
per sq .
ft .
theoretical weight after galvanizing lbs .
per sq .
ft .
permissible variation of average weight of lots percent gage over under num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the term lot means all the plates of one gage in the shipment for thicknesses gage num and heavier and not less than num pounds for thicknesses gage num and lighter with all individual plates not below the theoretical weights by more than num .
num.c section num inspection .
inspect mill and factory base metal when required according to aashto m num .
test the weight of the spelter coating according to aashto t num .
num .
aashto m numm numm .
include fabrication details on the shop drawings .
num .
field inspection and acceptance of plates .
a field inspection will be made at the job site .
furnish an itemized statement showing the number size and certified chemical analysis of the plates in each shipment .
a plate will be rejected if it fails to meet specifications shows defective workmanship or has a bruised or broken spelter coat .
b other materials .
class a cement concretesection num cement concrete for miscellaneous drainagesection num reinforcementsection num coarse aggregatesection num selected borrow excavationstructure backfill .
as shown on the standard drawings .
structural steelsection numanum emulsified asphalt class rsnumenuma or crsnumenumc mop coat on concrete pavingsection num bituminous coatingaashto m num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
bituminous materialfor sealing the groove metal bearing channel or angle or arches as required .
class bfnum asphalt cement section num .
numb numb num num initial edition hook boltssection numd .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
metal bearing materialsaashto m numm numm galvanized as specified in section nums aashto m num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
curing and protective coverssection num num construction a general .
provide shop drawings for review and acceptance .
show physical properties of plates and the proposed joint design on the drawings .
inspect metal plate culverts as specified in section numn and provide remediation as specified in section numo .
b placing and erecting .
excavate as shown on the standard drawings .
place and erect as follows unless an alternate method from the manufacturer is accepted num .
metal plate pipes and pipearches .
form the bed and trench as shown on the standard drawings .
place plates shinglewise to allow water to flow over not against the edges of plates except for haunch plates for pipearches .
haunch plates may require placement inside or outside of adjacent haunch plates .
when indicated place washers under nuts .
use sufficient bolts to hold plates of the pipe or pipearch in position until the structure is completed .
place the bottom two rows of bolts with the threaded end inside the structure to facilitate tightening .
place bolts on other seams alternately so nuts are always on the crests of corrugations first inside then outside the culvert .
do not draw bolts and nuts tight until the structure is finished .
draw bolts and nuts tight before backfilling .
num.a elongation .
elongate round pipes vertically num using acceptable shop methods or num using timber strutting in the field unless otherwise indicated .
submit a plan for review before placing timber strutting showing strut sizes spacing and jacking methods .
a tolerance of num of the specified amount of elongation will be permitted .
complete the field strut before backfilling around the pipe .
place struts for pipearches when directed to retain the size .
uniformly strut from end to end of pipes and pipearches without endwalls .
if endwalls are used do not elongate the ends of pipes or pipearches .
leave struts in place until the roadway embankment is complete and compacted unless otherwise directed .
num.b bituminous coating .
clean and dry plates and field apply a bituminous coating if indicated at the proper temperature .
provide a coating with a minimum thickness of num inch measured on the crest of corrugations to the lower inside onehalf of the pipe or pipearch .
num.c concrete paving .
if indicated pave inverts of pipes and pipe arches with class a cement concrete reinforced with num inches by num inches num gage steel wire fabric wwr num x num mwnum x mwnum andor wwf num x num w num x w num .
anchor reinforcement to the structure .
cover num of the periphery of pipes and num of the periphery of pipearches to a thickness of num inches above the crests of corrugations .
if bituminous coating and concrete paving are both indicated pave with concrete first .
do not apply bituminous coating on the paved portion .
tamp the concrete to the required thickness and contour .
after initial set cover concrete with a heavy spray or mop coat of emulsified asphalt class enum .
num .
metal plate arches .
construct the concrete foundation as indicated and as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
place the metal channels or angles in the concrete foundation as indicated .
erect metal plates one course at a time and hold in place temporarily beginning at the sides with lower plates fitted into their channels .
progress to the top or center of the arch .
portions of the arch may be assembled and lifted into place if directed .
place downstream plates outside adjoining upstream plates with each rise plate outside the adjoining lower plate and all placed shinglewise or as recommended by the manufacturer .
when indicated place washers under numb nume num num initial edition each nut .
use enough bolts to hold arch plates in position until the structure is formed .
then place and tighten the remaining bolts .
place nuts on the crests of corrugations alternately inside and outside of the arch .
draw all bolts tight before backfilling .
after the arch has been completely placed but before backfilling fill the groove or channel used for the bearing area of the arch with bituminous material .
if an angle is used for the bearing area seal the intersection of the arch and angle with bituminous material .
c backfilling .
num .
metal plate pipes and pipearches .
after plates are satisfactorily erected place fill material around the pipe or pipearch as specified in section numf .
num .
metal plate arches .
carefully place selected borrow excavationstructure backfill as shown on the standard drawings and as specified in section numqnum.b when the substructure concrete has attained the required strength and plates have been erected unless otherwise directed .
place backfill in layers not exceeding num inches in depth alternately on each side of the arch or on each side of each arch in the case of a multiple installation .
compact with mechanical tampers until a power roller may be used then place the remainder of the embankment as specified in section num .
when filling around and over arches before endwalls are constructed place the first fill material midway between the arch ends forming as narrow a ramp as possible until the top is reached .
build the ramp evenly from both sides compacting fill material while placing it .
after the ramps have been built to the arch top deposit the remainder of fill material from the top in both directions from the center to the ends as evenly as possible on both sides .
if endwalls are built before any fill material is placed around and over the arch place fill material adjacent to one endwall until the arch top is reached then dump fill material from the top toward the other endwall using care to deposit material evenly on both sides of the arch .
for a multiple installation follow the procedure specified above but bring material up evenly on each side of each arch avoiding unequal pressure .
tamp the fill material thoroughly but not excessively .
do not puddle the material with water .
remove fill material causing excessive distortion of plates .
brace plates into correct position then replace fill material .
remove bracing as directed .
conform to additional requirements from the manufacturers .
num measurement and payment a metal plate pipes and pipe arches .
linear foot measured along the centerline of culverts with square or skewed vertical ends the average length along the centerline of culvert with square or skewed beveled ends .
bedding backfill concrete paving if indicated and inspection of culverts including personnel and equipment is incidental .
b metal plate arches .
linear foot measured along the centerline of culverts with square or skewed vertical end the average length along the centerline of culverts with square or skewed beveled ends .
c excavation .
cubic yard for the class indicated .
d cement concrete for miscellaneous drainage .
section numc the unit price does not include concrete paving if indicated .
e selected borrow excavationstructure backfill .
section numg num numa num num change no .
num section numcombination storm sewer and underdrain num descriptionthis work is construction of combination storm sewer and underdrain .
num material a pipes .
section numanum and anum and as follows num .
nonmetal pipes .
num.a general .
when indicated provide a minimum water inlet area of num square inches per linear foot of pipe .
num.b reinforced concrete rc pipe .
section numanum .
where specified provide rc pipe with specified water inlet area according to pennsylvania installation direct design paidd computer program and publication num .
num.c group ip .
section numanum.a num.d group iip .
section numanum.b num.e group iiip .
section numanum.c and as follows num.e.num polyethylene .
add the following aashto m num type s class num perforations provide specified water inlet area .
num.e.num polyvinyl chloride .
add the following aashto m num class num perforations provide specified water inlet area .
num.f group ivp .
section numanum.d and as follows num.f.num polyethylene .
add the following aashto m num type s class num perforations provide specified water inlet area .
num.g group vp .
section numanum.e and as follows num.g.num polyethylene .
add the following aashto m num class num perforations provide specified water inlet area .
num.h group vip .
section numanum.f and as follows num.h.num polyethylene .
add the following aashto m num class num perforations provide specified water inlet area .
num.h.num polypropylene .
add the following aashto m num class num perforations provide specified water inlet area .
num .
metal pipes .
numa nume num num change no .
num num.a general .
perforate pipe with class num perforations according to aashto m num m num or m num except provide a minimum water inlet area of num square inches per linear foot of pipe .
num.b corrugated steel pipe metallic coated .
aashto m num types i and ir aashto m num aashto m num and aashto m num num.c corrugated steel pipearch metallic coated .
section numa num.d corrugated aluminum alloy pipe .
aashto m num types i and ir num.e corrugated aluminum alloy pipearch .
aashto m num types ii and iir num.f coated corrugated galvanized steel pipe .
section numanum.d num.g coated corrugated galvanized steel pipearch .
section numc b other material .
coarse aggregatetype c or better no .
num section num .
geotextileclass num section num .
geotextileclass num type a section num .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a laying pipe .
section numc except as follows lay pipe with perforations facing upwards .
place rigid nonmetal pipe keeping the portions of the joints in contact with the coarse aggregate clean and providing a minimum water inlet area of num square inches per linear foot by either blocking open furnishing pipe manufactured with the required water inlet area provided or by other acceptable means .
for numinch to numinch diameter pipes the maximum joint spacing for reinforce concrete open joint pipe should be less than num inch and num inches for pipes numinch diameter and greater .
wrap the joint of the elliptical pipes with two layers of geotextile class num type a as shown on standard drawing rcnumm .
fill the remainder of the joint as specified in section numd .
b geotextiles class num .
section numb c backfilling trench .
after the pipe is satisfactorily laid backfill as specified in section numf .
obtain suitable impervious material as required .
d pipe inspections .
inspect pipes as specified in section numn and section numo .
num measurement and payment a pipe .
linear foot measured to the point of centerline intersection of t y k and other branches .
furnishing personnel and equipment for dewatering operations inspection of pipes and all remedial measures are incidental to the pipe items .
b geotextiles class num .
section numa c no .
num coarse aggregate .
cubic yard d class num excavation .
section numd e class num excavation .
section numf num numd num num change no .
num section numendwalls inlets manholes and spring boxes num descriptionthis work is construction andor cleaning of endwall inlet manhole and spring box structures of the type indicated .
num material a inlet grates and frames .
as shown on the standard drawings rcnumm either structural steel section numanum.c or gray malleable or ductile iron as specified in section numh .
for type m frames provide either structural steel as specified in section numanum or gray malleable or ductile iron as specified in section numh .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
coat structural steel grates with bituminous paint in the shop or in the field before placement .
coat structural steel frames with bituminous paint when placing in the concrete inlet top .
cover frames and grates completely with no pin holes or voids .
as an alternative to bituminous paint hot dip galvanize structural steel grates and frames as specified in section nums .
b manhole frames and covers .
as shown on the standard drawings either gray malleable or ductile iron as specified in section numh .
machinegrind the metalbearing contact areas to fit in pairs .
matchmark each pair with notches to ensure satisfactory seating .
c manhole steps .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
as shown on the standard drawings conforming to the vertical design load and the horizontal pull out design load requirements of astm cnum and made of one of the following materials corrosionresistant steel alloy bars containing num to num nickel and num to num copper having a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch and a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch with a minimum elongation of num over a numinch gage length .
deformed wire astm anum epoxycoated according to astm anum encased in a copolymer polypropylene shell that conforms to astm dnum table pp group num class num table b designation bnum .
deformed reinforcement bars aashto m num grade num galvanized after bending according to astm anum .
deformed reinforcement bars astm anum grade num coated with copolymer polypropylene plastic that conforms to astm dnum table pp group num copolymer or impact modified class num num or num any of grades num through num .
gray malleable or ductile cast iron as specified in section numh .
aluminum alloy astm bnum numtnum numtnum or numtnum with a protective coat applied to the portion to be embedded in the concrete .
fiberglassreinforced polyester astm dnum and dnum .
fabricate manhole steps free from sharp edges burrs and hazardous projections .
d precast concrete top units for inlet boxes inlet boxes manholes grade adjustment rings top slabs and transition slabs .
class aa cement concrete modified provide cement concrete as specified in section num except with a minimum numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
nume numa num num change no .
num e concrete top units for inlet boxes .
structural steel angles and plates section numanum galvanized after fabrication as specified in section nums welded studs section numenum f other material .
no .
numa coarse aggregate section num class a cement concretesection num epoxy bonding compound section num reinforcementsection num gaskets section num mortarsection num caulking compound section numa precast concrete unitssection num concrete curing compoundssection numa curing and protecting coverssection num nonshrink grout section numc bituminous paintaashto mnum emulsified asphalt meeting the requirements listed in bulletin num and from a supplier listed in bulletin num section numem .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
zinc chromate primerfederal specification ttpnum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num constructionbefore construction or fabrication obtain acceptance of shop drawings if required .
a construction of drainage structures .
construct as indicated on the contract drawings as shown on the standard drawings as shown on the accepted shop drawings and as follows cement concrete structuresas specified in the applicable parts of section num .
excavate for the structure as required .
place no .
numa coarse aggregate and compact in accordance with section nume if specified .
place concrete foundations and walls monolithically except if otherwise allowed .
carefully remove existing castings that are to be reused .
clean and transport to the new location .
construct new inlet or manhole walls and bottoms to accommodate the dimensions of the existing castings .
set frames concrete top units and grade adjustment rings if required for inlets and manholes on a bed of non shrink grout to provide full bearing on the supporting surface .
set pipes in inlets and manholes flush with the inside structure face .
for pipes protected by endwalls set flush with the exposed structure face .
if constructing structures in conjunction with existing pipe culverts and drains provide for satisfactory connections as specified for new construction of a similar type .
backfill excavated spaces around the structure with acceptable embankment material as specified in section numa numm num num change no .
num numbnum .
satisfactorily dispose of unsuitable and surplus materials .
brick and brick and mortar are not allowed for grade adjustments .
coat all aluminum surfaces to be embedded in concrete with one coat of zinc chromate primer or a coat of bituminous paint .
allow to dry completely before placing concrete .
b cleaning of drainage structures .
clean drainage structures as indicated including inlets manholes endwalls spring boxes grates and scuppers .
repair any damage resulting from the cleaning operations .
prevent material cleaned from structures from entering streams or other bodies of waters and dispose of this material in a satisfactory manner .
num measurement and payment a manhole .
each the price for the manhole includes excavation compacted no .
numa coarse aggregate manhole concrete for channel transition slab if required top slab if required backfill and any other miscellaneous items required for the construction of the manhole .
the height is measured from the finished grade elevation to the bottom of the bottom slab elevation .
b manhole frame and cover .
set the price includes frame cover and grade adjustment rings if required .
c reuse existing manhole frame and cover .
set the price includes removing the existing frame and cover and installing the frame and cover on a new structure .
also includes grade adjustment rings if required .
d spring boxes .
each the price includes excavation spring box reinforcement if required backfill and any other miscellaneous items required for the construction of the spring box .
e endwalls .
each for the type indicated .
f endwall excavation .
cubic yard for the class of excavation as indicated .
g grates .
each h concrete top units and grates .
set the price includes top unit grate and grade adjustment rings if required .
i concrete top units using existing grates .
set the price includes top unit and grade adjustment rings if required .
j frames and grates .
set the price includes frame grate and grade adjustment rings if required .
k frames using existing grates .
set the price includes frames and grade adjustment rings if required .
l inlet boxes .
each the price for the inlet box includes excavation compacted no .
numa coarse aggregate inlet box concrete for channel transition slab if required top slab if required backfill and any other miscellaneous items required for the construction of the inlet box .
the height is measured from the finished grade elevation to the bottom of the bottom slab elevation .
m concrete for miscellaneous drainage .
section numc numn numn num num change no .
num n cleaning of drainage structures .
each for the type indicated .
num num num num initial edition section numgrade adjustment of existing miscellaneous structures num descriptionthis work is the grade adjustment of existing inlets manholes or utility boxes for a vertical height of num inches or less .
num material a manhole and inlet extensions .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num or have the type of extension accepted by the lts before use .
use extensions composed of gray malleable or ductile iron conforming to the requirements of section numh structural steel section numanum or merchant quality steel conforming to astm a num .
fabricate the extensions to conform to the shape of the original manhole or inlet castings .
they may be either welded in place or secured by a swedge fit .
weld according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide a locking device to ensure the swedge fit is permanent .
coat steel extensions with a bituminous paint as specified in section numa .
b additional material .
conforming to the requirements specified for new structures .
c certification .
section numbnum num construction a general .
excavate as necessary .
carefully remove and clean existing castings .
construct the structure walls to the required elevation as specified in section num conforming to the type of construction and dimensions of the existing structure .
replace castings on a full mortar bed as required .
remove existing walls if the existing structure elevation is higher than the proposed elevation or if directed because the walls are in an unsatisfactory condition .
rebuild as specified .
backfill as required .
repair or replace existing pavement curb and sidewalk damaged due to rebuilding .
satisfactorily dispose of unsuitable and surplus materials .
upon completion clean each structure of accumulations of debris mortar or foreign matter including existing material and keep clean until final acceptance .
b adjustable extensions .
before placing pavement material set the adjustable extension unit in the existing inlet or manhole frame with the section resting on the flange .
secure the unit in place according to the manufacturers recommendations .
set the manhole cover or inlet grate in the flange formed by the adjustable extension unit .
num measurement and paymentset num num num num initial edition section numrebuilt miscellaneous structures num descriptionthis work is rebuilding of existing inlets manholes or utility boxes of the types indicated for vertical heights in excess of num inches .
num materialsection num num constructionsection numa .
install necessary additional manhole steps as required .
num measurement and paymentvertical foot the department will measure and pay to the nearest num foot except that heights less than num foot will be paid for as num foot vertical .
num numb num num initial edition section nummobilization num descriptionthis work is the assembly and setup of the general plant required to comply with the contract and with local and state laws and regulations .
general plant includes contractors offices shops plants storage areas and sanitary or other facilities .
this work includes obtaining the required permits insurance bonds and any other initial items required for the start of the work .
num materialfurnish adequate material and furnishings required .
these material and furnishings will not be considered a part of the other completed contract items .
num constructionconstruct the required facilities .
num measurement and paymentlump sum the department will pay for mobilization as specified in section num and according to the following schedule a final payment calculation .
final payment will be based on num of the contract amount capped at a minimum of num and no greater than num .
in addition if the contract lump sum amount bid for mobilization exceeds num of the sum of the total amounts bid for all other items excluding mobilization in the bid proposal the excess will be paid on completion of the project .
b payment schedule .
the department will pay for mobilization as specified in section num and according to the following schedule .
num .
one half num of the contract lump sum amount bid for mobilization excluding the final payment amount will be released with the first estimate payable .
num .
an additional num of the contract lump sum amount bid for mobilization excluding the final payment amount will be released after num of the original total contract amount including payments for delivered materials but excluding mobilization is earned .
num .
when all physical work has been satisfactorily completed and the following certificates and documents as required have been properly furnished the final payment will be made according to section numa certified payroll records final dbedb payment amounts and if necessary shortfall justification material certifications form csnumh highway lighting inservice guarantee notification as built drawings for designbuild projects form rwnuma right to enter a property and release form from property owner if applicable form csnum borrow andor waste management contractor evaluations of the design of the project and work order information i.e .
force account documentation .
num numa num num change no .
num section numinspectors field office and inspection facilities num descriptionthis work is furnishing setting up maintaining and removing a field office of the type indicated and if indicated a field laboratory proportioning plant office andor equipment package for the exclusive use of department personnel .
num material a general .
provide offices and laboratories having the minimum floor space specified along with all required furnishings equipment and materials .
furnish office and laboratory facilities that conform to applicable occupational safety and health regulations including but not limited to those governing sanitation illumination ventilation means of egress medical services and first aid and fire protection .
ensure that offices and laboratories have at least numfoot ceilings locking windows adequate electric lighting an adequate number of storage cupboards and closets a mail slot or drop box and a private entrance secured with lock and key .
ensure that stairway systems installed for access to offices and laboratories include a handrail and nonskid treads .
provide systems to heat and cool interior spaces as necessary to maintain an ambient temperature between numf and numf .
maintain acceptable sanitary toilet facilities for exclusive use by department personnel near or within offices and laboratories .
ensure that the number of sanitary toilet facilities furnished is sufficient based on the size of the department inspection staff that will likely be stationed in the indicated office or laboratory .
maintain acceptable lavatory washup facilities near or within sanitary toilet facilities .
if the field office is located in an existing building ensure that lavatory facilities are equipped with hot and cold or tepid running water hand soap or similar cleansing agents and clean sanitary cloth or paper hand towels or warm air blowers .
if a construction trailer is used as a field office ensure that a sanitary toilet facility is located near the field office and ensure that it is equipped with waterless hand soap .
ensure that the electric supply service is of sufficient capacity to allow unrestricted operation of all indicated electronic systems appliances and equipment .
furnish documentation certifying that indicated equipment requiring calibration has been calibrated within the last num months and continue to have such equipment recalibrated annually for the duration of the project .
if required furnishings andor equipment being provided have been previously used ensure that such items are in satisfactory condition and fully functional as of the scheduled start of work .
whenever practical obtain maintenance agreements for communications electronic andor specialized equipment that provide for onsite repair service .
if malfunctioning equipment can not be repaired on site provide a replacement within a num hour time frame based on the relative importance of the piece to the timely performance of required project management functions as determined by the representative .
num .
inspectors field office .
set up the indicated field office in an acceptable weatherproof building or trailer .
situate the field office in an acceptable location on or in the immediate vicinity of the project separate from other construction offices .
for field offices where multiple individual partitioned rooms are indicated submit a floor plan showing the layout of the interior space for approval .
equip the field office as specified in table a .
num .
proportioning plant office .
if indicated provide an office at the proportioning plant .
set up the indicated plant office in an acceptable weatherproof building or trailer .
equip the office as specified in table a .
num .
field laboratory .
if indicated provide a laboratory for materials and soils testing .
set up the indicated field laboratory in an acceptable weatherproof building or trailer situated in an acceptable location .
supply a gravity or pressure potable water system having at least a numgallon capacity and connected to a service sink with a faucet and acceptable outside drain .
do not drain or discharge wastewater into the surrounding environment use a container of sufficient size to collect all drained or discharged wastewater and transport and dispose of wastewater at an approved site for handling such wastewater .
equip the field laboratory as specified in table a .
num .
nuclear gauge temporary storage .
if indicated provide a temporary storage location within the inspectors field office or field laboratory for temporary storage of moisture density nuclear gauges by a department representative .
provide a temporary storage location consisting of an enclosed closet with a minimum area of num square feet and secured with two independent locks and keys .
provide all keys to only the licensed department nuclear gauge operator .
do not provide keys to any other persons .
where possible locate the closet at least num feet from a permanent work station i.e .
desk area .
where a num feet minimum distance from a permanent work station is not numa numd num num change no .
num reasonably possible the department licensed nuclear gauge operator will temporarily store the nuclear gauge within the storage location following current department policy and procedures to prevent radiation exposure to the public .
b testing equipment .
on projects where a field laboratory is indicated furnish and maintain the following equipment for required testing of soil or aggregates number of each equipment num c.a .
mechanical sieve shaker with timer num f.a .
mechanical sieve shaker with timer num set standard sieves for c.a .
num set standard sieves for f.a .
and soils num unit mass weight metal container num cubic foot num unit mass weight metal container num cubic foot num platform scale numpound capacity sensitive to num pound num balance numounce capacity sensitive to numxnum ounce with one complete set of masses weights .
num exhaust fan for venting mechanical shakers num density sample extruder num proctor mold and rammer num numinch steel straightedge num mixingdrying pans num mixing spoon num broom dust pan in addition on projects where a field laboratory is indicated and cement concrete bituminous concrete andor construction aggregates are to be used furnish and maintain the equipment specified in section numa in the plant requirements of bulletin num andor in sections numb and numb respectively .
c communications equipment .
when indicated provide the communications equipment specified in the proposal .
furnish communications equipment in the quantity indicated and meeting the following requirements num .
high capacity multifunctional device mfd copier scanner fax and printer .
a network enabled digital color laser copier with automatic document feeder having reductionenlargement functions capable of accepting maximum numinch by numinch size originals and producing numinch by numinch size copies at a minimum rate of num letter size copies per minute .
device will have three paper drawers to accommodate letter legal and tabloid paper sizes .
include sufficient imaging cartridges tonerdrumdeveloper to yield a minimum of num copied pages as well as printer driver software to install on the computer devices .
device will have air print wireless capability .
num .
low capacity multifunctional device mfd copier scanner fax and printer .
a network enabled digital color inkjet copier with automatic document feeder having reductionenlargement functions capable of accepting maximum numinch by numinch size originals and producing numinch by numinch size copies at a minimum rate of num letter size copies per minute .
device will have two paper drawers to accommodate letter legal and tabloid paper sizes .
include sufficient imaging cartridges tonerdrumdeveloper to yield a minimum of num copied pages as well as printer driver software to install on the computer devices .
device will have air print wireless capability .
num .
cellular phone .
a portable handheld unit capable of providing wireless communications within a nummile radius of the project .
include a carrying case with belt loopclip cigarette lighter adapter and an ac charger .
arrange for a cellular service plan that includes a voice mail option call waiting and num peak minutes of unrestricted use per month for each device supplied for the duration of the project .
d specialized equipment .
when indicated provide the specialized equipment specified in the proposal .
furnish specialized equipment in the quantity indicated and meeting the following requirements numd numf num num change no .
num num .
surveyors level and measuring rod .
a standard waterproof surveyors leveling instrument having as a minimum numx magnification and a sighting range of up to num feet with a job accuracy range within num inch at num feet .
include a numfoot minimum fiberglass measuring rod folding leg tripod rain cover and carrying case .
num .
electronic digitizer .
a stationary or portable high performance digitizer system capable of electronically measuring the exact net area and perimeter of linear shapes on plan drawings at any scale and converting those measurements to areas and volumes .
furnish electronic digitizer having a tablet with a minimum numinch by numinch active area .
include necessary cabling carrying case and all other operating essentials .
num .
digital display level .
a durable level with automatic calibration function that reads angles with precision and digitally displays readings in degrees percent slope and pitch to within num degree accuracy .
include batteryies .
num .
infrared thermometer .
a handheld portable noncontact thermometer capable of measuring temperatures between numf and numf and with a field of view i.e .
spot ratio of at least num .
include protective case batteryies and all other operating essentials .
num .
laser range finder .
a selfcontained lightweight handheld instrument that measures and records distances in feet yards or meters having a maximum range of num feet to an uncooperative nonreflective target lcd display and shockwater resistant housing .
include batteryies cabling carrying case and all other operating essentials .
num .
paper shredder .
lightweight crosscut shredder capable of shredding num sheets at one time .
num .
digital camera .
a minimum nummegapixel image resolution digital camera having numx optical zoom capability and capable of producing pictures in jpgjpeg file format .
include two sets of rechargeable batteries and a compatible battery charger capable of recharging one set of batteries .
furnish a num gb minimum removable sd memory card having the appropriate format for use with the camera an external usb cable capable of connecting the camera to the computer to transfer the data from the memory card and any other operating essentials .
must be compatible with the microcomputer system specified in section num. e internet service .
for each type field office indicated purchase a subscription to a wired broadband internet service for exclusive use by department personnel for the duration of the project .
purchase a separate internet service subscription for the proportioning plant office if indicated .
choose a service that provides the fastest available high speed wired broadband internet access with a minimum connection of num mbps to the account by means of a cable or digital subscriber line dsl .
provide a wireless broadband router with a minimum security setting of wpanum to connect to the provided wired broadband .
based on the specific type of highspeed connection provided furnish a compatible modem with builtin hardware firewall protection .
if such highspeed wired broadband connection is not attainable within the area where the project office is located alternate internet connectivity options must be submitted to the district it administrator for review and acceptance .
demonstrate connectivity with the internet service provider at the time of or immediately following microcomputer system installation .
f miscellaneous materials .
for each microcomputer system that will be used on the project as indicated in the proposal at a minimum provide the following ten recordable cdr num mb minimum compact disks cds with individual protective cases ten rewritable cdrw num mb minimum compact disks cds with individual protective cases one cdrom drive cleaning kit two memory flash drives numgb minimum encrypted to meet numbit minimum .
all compact disks and flash drives become department property .
in addition at a minimum provide the following miscellaneous materials numf numa num num change no .
num eight numinch by numinch pressboard or plastic computer paper binders with plastic locking strips as required .
six numinch three dring binders with vinyl covers having dimensions of num num inches by num inches .
num num inch by numinch and num numinch by numinch and numinch by numinch num white bond paper for copiers and printers as specified sufficient for the life of the project .
providing only one ream of paper at a time is unacceptable .
all binders and paper become department property .
num constructioninstall the indicated facilities no later than num working days after the notice to proceed date or num days before the scheduled start of work whichever is sooner .
anchor the facilities to withstand high winds .
maintain the facilities from installation until num days after physical work including completion of punch list items identified during the final inspection has been satisfactorily completed unless released earlier by the representative .
satisfactorily clean or arrange for the indicated facilities to be cleaned at least once per week .
arrange for the weekly pick up and disposal of trash and recyclables including but not limited to paper plastic and inktoner cartridges .
provide an adequate number of accessible parking spaces immediately adjacent or in close proximity to the offices or laboratory for exclusive use by department personnel .
provide proper maintenance of parking areas .
ensure that there is sufficient lighting to illuminate the exterior of offices or laboratory and all parking areas .
designate a specific individual to serve as the contact person for servicerelated problems .
after physical work has been completed but before release by the representative arrange to meet with the inspectorincharge to examine and determine the condition of all specialized equipment that is contractorowned .
report any unresolved disputes over the condition of such equipment to the representative .
failure to meet with the inspectorincharge or to report problems with the condition of specialized equipment will create a presumption that except for expected wear resulting from normal usage the equipment is in good condition and remains fully functional .
specialized equipment that is lost or determined to be damaged beyond repair will be replaced or reimbursement will be made as specified in section num provided such loss or damage is not the result of carelessness or negligence on the part of the contractor or any other responsible third party .
the representative may direct that the office or laboratory facilities and equipment package be maintained for more than num days after the date of physical work completion due to the contractors failure to submit complete andor correct required certificates or documents as established during the final inspection .
num measurement and paymentlump sum the proposal will include separate pay items for the inspectors field office and inspection facilities field laboratory proportioning plant office and equipment package as applicable .
each contract item will be paid as specified in section num in two equal payments according to the following schedule when work is completed in an amount equivalent to at least num of the original contract amount excluding the bid price for the applicable item the first payment will be made .
when work is completed in an amount equivalent to at least num of the original contract amount excluding the bid price for the applicable item the second payment will be made .
a price adjustments .
adjustments to the lump sum prices bid for the indicated office or laboratory facilities and equipment package as applicable will be made as follows num .
time extensions and reductions .
in the event the time for completion of all work on the project is extended or reduced as specified in section num an appropriate adjustment payment to the contractor or rebate to the department will be made to the lump sum prices bid for the indicated office or laboratory facilities and equipment package as applicable for the days in excess of payment or less than rebate the original contract time at the following daily rate numa numa num num change no .
num daily price adjustment rate num x contract lump sum price original contract time in days num .
facilities maintained for more than num days after physical work completion .
in the event the representative directs that the office or laboratory facilities and equipment package be maintained for more than num days after the date of physical work completion as specified in section num an appropriate adjustment payment to the contractor will be made to the lump sum prices bid for the indicated office or laboratory facilities and equipment package as applicable for the days in excess of num until released by the representative at the daily price adjustment rate specified in section numanum .
no adjustment will be made if the representative directs that the office or laboratory facilities and equipment package be maintained for more than num days after the date of physical work completion due to the contractors failure to submit complete andor correct required certificates or documents as established during the final inspection .
table a officelaboratory and standard equipment type a field office type b field office type c field office proportioning plant office field laboratory floor space square foot out to out num num num num num individual partitioned rooms num num num num num conference table chairs num desks chairs num num num num num office chairs num num num plan racks num num num num work tables num num num num num num printer stands num num num num numdrawer file cabinetnum num num num num num numdrawer file cabinetnum num num num sample splitter num num range num num sanitary electric water cooler num num num num num individual access phone lines num num num num num surge protectors num num num num telephones w answering machines or voice mail num num num num num work table .
minimum size num num feet by num feet by num num feet high .
num printer stand .
specifically designed to accommodate laser and color printers with paper storagefeeder tray .
minimum size num inches by num inches by num num feet high .
num file cabinets .
fire resistant dlabel lockable metal file cabinet .
num sample splitter .
for coarse and fine aggregate with adjustable chute opening .
num range .
standard numinch range gas or electric new or used with oven capable of operating at numf numf .
num individual access phone lines .
the number indicated includes the phone lines needed for microcomputer system operation and internet service .
num surge protector .
a minimum of six ac outlets and one telephone outlet with a num foot minimum length cord having a line voltage regulatorconditioner that protects against chronic high voltage voltage spikes and radio frequency interference .
numa numa num num change no .
num appendix table a equipment package equipment quantity communications equipment high capacity mfdnum low capacity mfd num cellular phones specialized equipment surveyors level measuring rod electronic digitizer digital display level infrared thermometer laser range finder paper shredder digital camera internet service internet service provider yesno wireless internet broadband routernum yesno miscellaneous items computer media yesno high yield mfd inktoners cartridges yesno num .
unless otherwise approved furnish a multifunction device in lieu of a separate copier laser printer color printer scanner and fax .
num .
provide compatible powered internet hardware with firewall protection capable of wireless wpanum security internet service and eight hardwired network ports and preshared key .
all cabling needed to interconnect network hardware and all microcomputer systems are required .
microcomputer systems .
this information is being provided to assist bidders in meeting the requirements of section numc communications equipment section nume internet service and section numf miscellaneous materials .
the special provision in the proposal will indicate the total number of microcomputer systems that will be used on the project .
microcomputer systems may be furnished by the department .
if microcomputer systems are to be furnished by the contractor as part of the construction contract the bid will include applicable numxxxx bid items .
when indicated furnish microcomputer systems meeting the requirements of section num .
the special provision will be included in the proposal indicating the quantity of each type of communications electronic andor specialized equipment to be furnished .
num numa num num change no .
num section numpipe underdrain and pavement base drain num descriptionthis work is construction of pipe underdrains of the type and size indicated and pavement base drains .
num material a pipes .
section numanum and as follows num .
general .
num.a type .
use the type indicated .
if not indicated use any one of the types listed below .
num.b size .
for circular pipe unless otherwise indicated use pipe with a minimum inside diameter of num inches and sized in not less than numinch increments .
for semicircular pipe unless otherwise indicated use pipe with a smoothwalled bottom section and an average inside diameter of num num inches .
num.c perforations .
perforate a pipe to provide a minimum water inlet area of num square inches per linear foot of pipe and unless otherwise specified as follows cut perforations cleanly so as not to restrict the flow of water .
provide either circular or slotted perforations except do not use slotted perforations in smooth walled pipe .
for circular perforations provide holes with a nominal diameter not less than num inch or greater than num inch .
also provide similar rows of perforations on both sides of the pipes vertical centerline with the lower most rows separated by an arc of num degrees minimum .
for slotted perforations provide slots not exceeding num inch wide and a length not more than num of the average inside circumference for numinch to numinch diameter pipe and not exceeding num num inches for pipes larger than num inches .
additionally center the slots in the corrugation valleys and at maximum num degree intervals about the pipe circumference .
num.d strength test .
as specified except for plastic pipe test using the parallel plate load test according to astm dnum .
num.e infiltration rate .
for perforated or porous pipe provide a minimum infiltration rate of num gallons per minute per linear feet of pipe as determined according to aashto m numm .
num.f pipe length .
flexible plastic pipe num inches or less in diameter may be supplied in specified coiled lengths or standard increments agreeable to the department .
the use of long coils num feet to num feet in length is allowed provided placement is by equipment recommended by the manufacturer and the pipe is not stretched or damaged during handling or placement .
furnish flexible plastic pipe larger than num inches in diameter and all sizes of rigid pipe in maximum lengths of num feet .
furnish lengths not less than num of the stated quantity .
measure with any suitable device accurate to num inch in num feet num while the pipe is stressfree and at rest on a flat surface in a straight line .
num.g plastic pipe .
furnish extruded or molded plastic pipe made of high density flexible plastic .
furnish pipe that is permanently marked stenciled or labeled with manufacturers name pipe trade name or type average size the specification designates the plant designation code and the date of manufacture all at intervals of no more than num feet .
num .
porous concrete pipe .
aashto m numm num .
corrugated polyethylene pe pipe .
aashto m num pipes num inches through num inches and aashto m numa numa num num change no .
num num pipes num inches through num inches modified as follows the department will determine the lot size for acceptance .
minimum pipe stiffness for pipes num inches through num inches to be num pounds per square inch at num deflection when tested according to astm dnum .
minimum pipe stiffness for pipes num inches through num inches to be num pounds per square inch at num deflection and num pounds per square inch at num deflection when tested according to astm dnum .
num .
polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe .
astm dnum astm fnum type psnum or astm fnum modified as follows minimum pipe stiffness for pipes num inches through num inches num pounds per square inch at num deflection when tested according to astm dnum .
minimum pipe stiffness for pipes num inches through num inches num pounds per square inch at num deflection when tested according to astm dnum .
capable of being flattened to num of the original pipe o.d .
without splitting cracking or breaking .
num .
acrylonitrilebutadiene styrene abs pipe .
astm dnum modified as follows minimum pipe stiffness for pipes num inches through num inches num pounds per square inch at num deflection when tested according to astm dnum .
minimum pipe stiffness for num inch pipe num pounds per square inch at num deflection when tested according to astm dnum .
capable of being flattened to num of the original pipe o.d .
without splitting cracking or breaking .
num .
perforated plastic semicircular pipe .
aashto m num or astm dnum modified as follows smooth or corrugated top and a smooth semicircular bottom .
minimum pipe stiffness ps num pounds per square inch at num deflection when tested according to astm dnum .
capable of being flattened to num of the original pipe outsidetooutside height for pvc or num for abs without splitting cracking or breaking .
num .
corrugated steel pipe metallic coated .
aashto m num type iii with class num perforations or type iiia aashto m num aashto m num and aashto m num .
num .
corrugated aluminum alloy pipe .
aashto m num type iii with class num perforations or type iiia .
num .
prefabricated pavement base drains .
num.a general .
use prefabricated pavement base drains consisting of an inert plastic core designed to carry water flow wrapped in geotextile fabric for filtering purposes .
select from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
num.b backfill .
as indicated fine aggregate type a except limestone sand section num .
num.c core materials .
an inert plastic material resistant to commonly encountered chemicals and substances having the following properties tensile strength astm dnum pounds per square inch minimum numa numb num num change no .
num water absorption astm dnum after num hours fungus resistance astm gnumno growth crush strength grigcnum pounds per square inch minimum flow rate astm dnum gallons per minute feet minimum provide a minimum of num open core area on the pavement side face of the base drain and a minimum of num on the shoulder side face .
provide unobstructed inflow through a minimum of num of the geotextile area on the pavement side face of the base drain and num of the geotextile area on the shoulder side face when stretched across the face of the core .
geosynthetic research institute drexel university .
num.d geotextile fabric .
provide class num geotextile as specified in section num .
num.e approval .
approval will be based on certified test data submitted by the manufacturer or testing by lts or both before being listed in bulletin num .
num.f certification and shipment to project .
certify each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
clearly identify each roll of pavement base drain by affixing a tag or sticker containing the following information lot number manufacturers name and address product type and designation product identification including thickness height roll length and roll weight geotextile type and designation num.g wrapping of the core .
wrap the geotextile completely around the drainage core with the seam along the length of the drain on the shoulder side face and preferably near the midpoint .
fabricate the seam using a non watersoluble adhesive if adhesive is used .
firmly attach geotextile to the protrusions on the pavement side face of the drainage core and spotbond on the shoulder side face or submit results of flow tests on the drain under loading with the geotextile unattached to ensure that the geotextile will not deform under continuous loading to the point where flow capacity is diminished and the specified minimum flow rate is not achieved .
num.h splice connections and fittings .
provide standard fittings and splice connections along the pavement base drain as indicated or as directed of sufficient strength to withstand construction handling and permanent loading .
obtain approval for any nonstandard fittings and connections .
num.i outlets .
section num b aggregates .
num .
fine aggregate .
type ii backfill natural or manufactured type a sand section num rock gravel or blast furnace slag sand prepared from type c or better coarse aggregate as specified in section num except conform to the size and grading requirements for type a sand section num with a maximum loss in soundness test not exceeding num .
numb numc num num change no .
num num .
coarse aggregate .
type c or better section num except that the percentage of crushed fragments for gravel is not required .
use no .
num for type i backfill and no .
num for type ii backfill .
c mortar .
section numa d geotextiles class num .
section num e open graded subbase .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a pipe trench and backfill .
place pipe underdrain after fine grading is completed .
place pavement base drain after the adjacent roadway pavement is constructed except when it is placed under curb sections or other special locations .
excavate pavement base drain trench without disturbing subbase under the roadway pavement .
join underdrain or base drain to new or existing drainage structures with satisfactory connections .
use fittings with deflection angles of num degrees or less .
after completing the trench and the lower num inches of compacted backfill lay the pipe and make the joints according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for perforated pipe place the perforations down unless otherwise directed .
lay semicircular pipe with the smooth circular portion at the bottom .
do not leave trenches open during periods of precipitation or overnight .
seal the upgrade end of pipe underdrain or base drain to prevent entry of foreign material .
complete backfilling after having the pipe inspected by the inspectorincharge .
b geotextiles class num .
use class num geotextile as specified in section numb for all pavement base drain construction and if indicated for pipe underdrain construction .
c prefabricated pavement base drains .
num .
general .
at least num weeks before beginning installation submit the proposed installation method to the representative in writing and note any deviation from the plans or from the manufacturers approved drawings .
upon request by the representative have a technical representative from the manufacturer present during installation .
num .
shipping and storage .
ship drainage materials with protective covering and store in a manner so as not to damage or contaminate them .
visually inspect all materials before placement to ensure they are free from damage .
damaged drainage material will not be accepted .
store drainage material on an elevated platform and protect from weather and ultraviolet exposure .
do not remove material from the manufacturers protective covering until ready to be installed .
if material is rerolled and stored use an approved protective covering equivalent to the manufacturers original wrapping .
num .
excavation .
place prefabricated pavement base drain in a trench constructed adjacent to the roadway pavement edge as shown on the standard drawings .
construct trench without disturbing the pavement structure or subbase .
unless otherwise indicated or directed provide trench having a width as shown on the standard drawings and a depth extending at least num inches into the subgrade .
num .
placement and backfilling .
place prefabricated pavement base drain vertically in the trench as shown on the standard drawings .
place the first lift of backfill material simultaneously with drain install to ensure complete contact with the geotextile and the trench wall .
repair any tears in the geotextile according to the manufacturers recommendation .
if raised core projections protrude from only one side of the drain place the projections toward the pavement side of the trench .
backfill the trench with fine aggregate type a using numinch maximum hydraulically compacted lifts .
spray each lift with water at num gallon per linear foot .
ensure that excavation drain placement and backfill operations are performed in sequence with a minimum amount of trench open at all times .
do not leave trenches greater than num inches in depth open overnight .
barricade trenches at all times according to the requirements of num pa code chapter num .
numc numk num num change no .
num if shoulder restoration is indicated follow applicable specifications and standards to reconstruct the existing shoulder as specified in the contract documents .
num .
connections fittings and outlets .
fit splice connectors into the drainage core so that they do not restrict flow .
follow the manufacturers approved connection details .
do not allow backfill material to enter the connector at any point .
for drainage cores that splice using maletofemale overlapping roll back the geotextile onto the inplace drainage core make the splice and rewrap the geotextile over the completed joint .
provide a minimum of num inches of geotextile overlap from one section to the next .
install subsurface drain outlet pipe and fittings as specified in section num concurrently with the pavement base drain to establish positive drainage within num hours of the beginning of trenching for the installation of a given section of base drain .
the representative may restrict installation of additional sections of base drain until acceptable outlet installations are completed .
ensure transitions are smooth and nonrestricting to flow .
do not use homemade connections .
install all fittings and connections to preclude soil intrusion into the drainage core or outlet piping and to provide continuity of drainage flow .
install fittings for positive gravity flow and outlet the drainage system as indicated or as directed .
furnish outlet pipes with galvanized wire mesh shields as shown on the standard drawings .
if the drain is terminated without an outlet provide a fitting to prevent soil intrusion into the end of the drainage core .
protect all joints and fittings from damage during construction .
num measurement and payment a pipe underdrain types i and ii backfill .
linear foot b pipe underdrain types i and ii backfill including shoulder restoration .
linear foot .
c pavement base drain .
linear foot d pavement base drain including shoulder restoration .
linear foot e class num excavation .
cubic yard for extradepth pipe underdrain and extradepth pavement base drain excavation in excess of that shown on the standard drawings .
f fine aggregate for extradepth pipe underdrain .
cubic yard g additional coarse aggregate for extradepth pipe underdrain .
cubic yard h additional coarse aggregate for extradepth pavement base drain .
cubic yard i geotextiles class num .
section numa j prefabricated pavement base drains .
linear foot k subsurface drain outlets .
section num num numc num num change no .
num section numsubgrade drains num descriptionthis work is construction of subgrade drains .
num material bituminous papersection num coarse aggregate type c or better no steel slag no .
numsection num except that the soundness test is not required and the percentage of crushed fragments for gravel does not apply .
geotextiles class numsection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a trench and backfill .
excavate the trench backfill and adequately tamp the backfill .
keep outlet ends of subgrade drains open during construction and until final acceptance of shoulders .
extend subgrade drains a length sufficient to adequately drain the wet area .
construct subgrade drains under subbase after the subgrade has been completed but before the subbase is placed .
construct subgrade drains at right angles to the roadway centerline or skew as directed .
extend subgrade drains along the roadway if necessary to achieve a suitable outlet .
maintain a minimum slope of num inch per foot on the trench bottom through pavement and shoulder areas .
b geotextiles class num .
section numb if indicated .
c shoulder restoration .
if shoulder restoration is indicated follow applicable specifications and standards to reconstruct the existing shoulder as specified in the contract documents .
num measurement and payment a subgrade drains .
linear foot b subgrade drains including shoulder restoration .
linear foot c geotextiles class num .
section numa num num num num initial edition section numstone backfill for miscellaneous drainage num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and placing of stone backfill for miscellaneous drainage .
num material coarse aggregate type c or better no steel slag no .
num and no .
numsection num local stoneif allowed acceptable clean sound hard and durable slabs of stone sharply broken if required and not more than num inches in any dimension .
geotextiles class numsection num num constructionplace no .
num coarse aggregate or local stone backfill for miscellaneous drainage in sumps springs wells sink holes and other places where indicated or directed .
place geotextiles class num as specified in section numb .
if local stone is used place a numinch layer of no .
num coarse aggregate as the stone backfill top layer .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard num numd num num initial edition section numsubsurface drain outlets num descriptionthis work is construction of subsurface drain outlets .
num material pipesection numa except without perforations .
unless otherwise directed use outlet pipe of the same materials as the underdrain or pavement base drain .
provide smooth walled pe or pvc outlet pipe for use with pe pvc or abs underdrain or pavement base drain conforming to the above requirements and having a minimum stiffness of num pounds per square inch at num deflection at all pipe diameters .
class a cement concretesection num red subsurface drain outlet markerfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
reflective sheeting material is not required .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows excavate the trench leaving the bottom uniformly firm and smooth ensuring positive gravity flow in outlet .
lay pipe on top of num inches of satisfactorily tamped embankment material .
join pipe with connecting bands or with split couplings .
after the outlet pipe has been laid and accepted backfill the trench in numinch layers using satisfactory embankment material then thoroughly tamp .
compact the portion of the outlet under pavement or shoulder as specified in section numf .
provide outlet opening protection as shown on the standard drawings .
connect to the pipe underdrain or pavement base drain using suitable couplings and fittings or special connectors connect with a maximum numdegree bend or series of numdegree bends .
if indicated or directed provide satisfactory connections to join outlets to existing drainage structures .
if indicated construct concrete endwalls to protect outlets not connected to new or existing drainage structures .
if plastic pipe is used protect ends from exposure to the deteriorating effects of sunlight using satisfactory endwalls and trench backfill material .
mark subsurface drain outlet using a red subsurface drain outlet marker on the side of opening facing approaching traffic .
embed the markers a minimum of num inches or as recommended by the manufacturer .
num measurement and payment a subsurface drain outlets .
linear foot b class num excavation .
cubic yard for subsurface drain outlet excavation in excess of that shown on the standard drawings .
c subsurface drain outlet endwall .
each d red subsurface drain outlet marker .
each num numb num num change no .
num section numend sections and slope pipe fittings num descriptionthis work is construction of end sections and slope pipe fittings .
num materialmanufactured or fabricated as specified in applicable portions of section num as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a concrete end sections .
section numanum except as follows provide reinforcement per linear foot of end section equal to the minimum steel requirements for circular reinforcement in a type a standard installation concrete pipe having the internal diameter of the end section portion withstanding a fill height greater than or equal to num inches and less than num inches .
b steel end sections metallic coated .
section numanum.b c aluminum alloy end sections .
section numanum.c d steel slope pipe fittings .
fabricated from sheet steel of the thickness indicated as specified in section numanum.b for steel sheets except that minor variations may be acceptable to allow use of the manufacturers standard methods of fabrication .
e coarse aggregate .
section num f thermoplastic end sectionsoutlet ends only .
section numanum num constructioninstall end sections as specified in the applicable requirements of section num and as indicated .
only use thermoplastic end sections on the outlet end of any thermoplastic pipe run .
install slope pipe fittings as shown on the standard drawings .
num measurement and payment a end sections .
each the price includes excavation and all backfill as indicated .
b slope pipe fittings .
each the price includes excavation and all backfill as indicated .
num num num num initial edition section numslotted drains num descriptionthis work is construction of drains with continuous slotted openings .
num material slotted drainfabricated from metalliccoated steel pipes specified in section numanum.b and structural steel conforming to the requirements specified in section numanum or precast polymer concrete troughs as listed in bulletin num and certified as specified in section numbnum .
coarse aggregatesection num num constructionexcavate the trench as shown on the standard drawings for pipe and for precast polymer concrete sections according to the manufacturers recommendations .
install the drains according to the manufacturers instructions or by another accepted method .
place the drain to the line and grade indicated adequately supported until adjacent construction is completed .
provide temporary covers as required to prevent foreign material from entering the drain during construction .
before placing cement concrete or bituminous concrete adjacent to the drain place adequate covers in or over the slot or grate to prevent entry of the paving material .
if directed remove and dispose of the temporary covers .
backfill metal pipe as specified in section numf and precast polymer concrete sections according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num num num num initial edition section numconcrete collar for pipe extension num descriptionthis work is construction of a concrete pipe collar for extending existing pipes from an endwall or other structure .
num material class a cement concretesection num mortarsection nume reinforcement barssection numanum num constructionas shown on the standard drawings for pipe diameters up to num inches as indicated for larger diameter pipe and as follows a general .
remove a portion of the endwall footer if required to obtain proper pipe alignment using acceptable equipment and methods .
obtain acceptance for drilling equipment and methods before drilling .
drill numinch holes in the existing structure with equipment that does not damage the existing structure .
clean material from the full depth of the holes before placing the reinforcement and grout .
grout the reinforcement in place using nonshrinking mortar placed to ensure complete bonding of the reinforcement to the grout and the existing structure .
completely fill all holes with mortar and after placing the reinforcement remove excess mortar protruding from the structure .
obtain acceptance for adjustments required to obtain final horizontal and concentric alignment .
b cement concrete .
construct the collar as specified in the applicable parts of section num after placing the pipe extension as specified in section numi .
c excavation and backfill .
excavate as required .
backfill excavated spaces around the collar as specified in section numbnum using acceptable embankment material .
satisfactorily dispose of unsuitable and surplus material .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section numpermanent impact attenuating devices num descriptionthis work is furnishing and installing of permanent impact attenuating devices including all appurtenances and hardware as indicated .
num material permanent impact attenuating devices from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num construction a general .
submit shop drawings as specified in section numd .
b installation .
install according to the manufacturers specifications and installation instructions for full depth embedment only and as follows drive posts mechanically unless otherwise directed by the representative .
do not cut batter burr separate galvanizing from steel or distort the post .
driven post must be plumb .
as directed remove and replace posts bent or otherwise damaged .
in areas where random boulders hardpan or bedrock are encountered and the specified post can not be driven to full depth embedment remove the post then drill a numinch minimum diameter hole to the required depth as per manufacturers recommendation for full depth embedment .
reset the post in the hole to the proper elevation and backfill to the ground line using an acceptable embankment material thoroughly compacted in maximum numinch layers .
if the placed material around the post can not be satisfactorily compacted backfill the hole in maximum numinch layers thoroughly compacted to ground line and then redrive the post to proper elevation .
type b flowable backfill as specified in section num table a can be used to backfill the hole after resetting the post in place .
num measurement and paymenteach the price includes tail end treatment when required .
num numa num num change no .
num section numguide rail num descriptionthis work is construction of new guide rail of the type indicated resetting of existing guide rail removal of a concrete end anchor and removal of existing guide rail including all appurtenances and hardware .
num material a guide rail .
section num and section num b other material .
class a cement concretesection num reinforcement barssection num delineators section numb c certification .
section numbnum num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a new guide rail .
num .
general .
set posts plumb at the spacing shown .
minor adjustments in spacing may be allowed to clear objects or to fit between fixed ends .
use bolts that are long enough to extend at least num inch beyond the nuts .
draw bolts tight except if required for expansion .
before installation apply acceptable galvanizing paint to repair portions of posts to be placed underground .
after installation apply two coats of the galvanizing paint to guide rail or related appurtenances including threaded portions of fittings fasteners and the cut end of bolts that have been abraded or cut exposing the base metal .
if guide rail is installed under traffic conditions conform to the following requirements perform work only within those areas protected by temporary traffic control devices .
attach guide rail on posts driven during the day before the end of that day .
provide satisfactory protection at exposed unfinished ends of guide rail .
join new and existing guide rail if required as indicated or directed .
construct concrete parts of guide rail if required as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
num .
posts and offset brackets .
drill or punch holes suitable to the type of guide rail indicated .
drive posts mechanically unless otherwise directed .
do not batter burr separate galvanizing from steel or distort the post .
as directed remove and replace posts bent or otherwise damaged .
install offset brackets if required .
in areas where random boulders are encountered and the post can not be driven to grade remove the post then drill or excavate a hole of suitable dimensions and depth to place the post at grade .
reset the post and backfill to the ground line using no .
num coarse aggregate and an acceptable embankment material thoroughly compacted in numinch layers as shown on standard drawing rcnumm .
in areas where bedrock is encountered and the post can not be driven to grade remove the post then drill or excavate a hole of suitable dimensions to the required depth .
reset the post and backfill to the ground line using no .
num coarse aggregate and an acceptable embankment material thoroughly compacted in numinch layers as shown on standard drawing rcnumm .
if an underground feature such as a lowfill culvert or underground utility line prevents posts from being driven posts may be skipped up to a numfoot span as shown in rcnumm long spans .
numa numd num num change no .
num num .
rail elements .
do not allow the free end of types numw and numwc rail elements to swing free and cantilever from the numinch mounting bolt .
rest the free end on temporary numinch support bolts and nuts or temporary drift pins until the numinch mounting bolts are torqued .
splice by lapping in the direction of traffic .
provide full contact between the rail elements in the overlap between the center and both edges of the element and between the bracket or post as the case may be .
use suitable shopformed guide rail or rubbing rails on curves having a radius of less than num feet .
num .
delineators .
install as specified in section numa and numc for all wbean guide rail and transition types .
num .
terminal sections strong post anchor terminals strong post inline anchors and end treatments .
install where indicated .
num .
over underground structures .
install where indicated using class a cement concrete reinforcement bars anchor bolts nuts and washers .
b guide rail to bridge barrier transition .
num .
typical and alternate concrete bridge barrier transition .
install approach end guide rail transition at structure barrier with or without inlet placement as indicated as shown on the standard drawings .
num .
thriebeam to pa type numm bridge barrier transition .
install approach end guide rail transition at structure barrier with or without inlet placement as indicated as shown on the standard drawings .
num .
thriebeam to vertical wall bridge barrier transition .
install approach end guide rail transition at structure barrier as shown on the standard drawings .
num .
thriebeam to pa bridge barrier transition .
install approach end guide rail transition at structure barrier as shown on the standard drawings .
c reset guide rail .
carefully remove existing guide rail and reset at locations indicated as shown on the standard drawings .
do not reset posts in same locations .
the department must approve the condition of the insitu barrier components to determine if they are able to be reused .
ensure guide rail conforms to the standard drawings including guide rail height and splice locations .
replace steel offset brackets and backing plates with routed wood plastic or composite offset brackets from a supplier listed in bulletin num .
properly dispose of steel offset brackets and backing plates .
repair or replace rail element posts hardware or other materials damaged during this operation .
when resetting posts for type num weak post guide rail replace posts that are less than num inches in length .
d remove existing guide rail .
dispose of all excess material created by the removal reset or repair work except for the material that the representative determines salvageable for department use .
satisfactorily backfill holes in preparation of driving new posts as required .
num .
remove existing guide rail contractor property .
remove existing guide rail from locations indicated and then dispose of the material outside the right of way .
num .
remove existing guide rail department property .
when indicated the guide rail will be retained by the department .
carefully remove the existing guide rail from locations indicated .
completely dismantle unbolt and remove guide rail in a manner that permits reuse of the components from locations indicated .
do not disassemble by burning or cutting .
neatly bundle the galvanized steel posts offset brackets and galvanized rail elements .
separate the individual elements rail elements posts offset blocks as directed .
bundle and deliver to designated stockpile .
the proposalcontract will include a special provision that identifies where the guide rail is to be stockpiled as well as the approximate distance miles from project site to designated stockpile location .
advance notification of a scheduled delivery of guide rail to designated stockpile is to be provided to the individual whose name and telephone number are listed in the special provision .
nume numq num num change no .
num e structuremounted guide rail .
install as indicated .
f remove concrete anchorage .
remove and satisfactorily dispose of concrete end anchor from the locations indicated .
backfill anchorage area with suitable material .
num measurement and payment a guide rail .
linear foot for the type indicated .
includes nested guide rail as indicated .
b terminal section .
each for the type indicated .
c type num strong post anchor terminal .
each the price includes steel foundation tubes short breakaway timber posts ground strut terminal rail element soil plate anchor cable bearing plate post sleeve anchor plate swaged cable assemblage hex bolts washers and nuts .
d type num strong post end treatment .
each e type num weak post end treatment .
each f type num weak post driveways and openings .
each g reset guide rail .
linear foot the price includes height adjustment wbeam splice location adjustments new offset brackets and backing plates .
h structure mounted guide rail .
linear foot i delineators .
section num .
for the type and color indicated j remove existing guide rail .
linear foot when guiderail is retained by the department the unit price includes the cost of delivering guiderail material to the designated stockpile .
k guide rail to bridge barrier transition .
each for the type indicated .
l inlet .
section num m remove concrete anchorage .
each n guide rail post .
each o offset bracket .
each p type num strong post inline anchor .
each the price includes steel foundation tubes short breakaway timber posts ground strut soil plate anchor cable bearing plate post sleeve anchor plate swaged cable assemblage hex bolts washers and nuts .
q curved wbeam guide rail at intersections .
linear foot the price includes wbeam rail elements long breakaway timber posts hex bolts washers and nuts .
num numc num num initial edition section nummetal median barrier num descriptionthis work is construction of new metal median barrier of the type indicated resetting of existing metal median barrier and removal of existing metal median barrier .
num material a metal median barrier .
section num b other material .
class a cement concretesection num joint sealing materialsection numb or c bituminous wearing course section num or section num not rps reinforcement barssection num asphalt cementclass pg num or pg num c certification .
section numbnum .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a metal median barrier .
num .
general .
section numanum except substitute median barrier for guide rail .
num .
posts .
drill or punch holes .
drive posts as specified in section numanum or set manually .
as directed either form holes before placing concrete or cut or drill holes in existing or newly placed concrete to accommodate the installation .
do not make holes any larger than necessary to install the post .
drive the post to grade after the hole is cut or drilled backfill the hole with either hot or cold bituminous wearing course material and fill the void around the post with asphalt cement class pg num or pg num .
in areas where random boulders are encountered and the post can not be driven to grade remove the post then drill or excavate a hole of suitable dimensions and depth to place the post at grade .
reset the post and backfill to the ground line using an acceptable material thoroughly compacted in numinch layers .
if a hole has been cut or drilled in paved areas backfill the hole for the full paved depth using hot or cold bituminous wearing course material finish to a flush elevation then seal the top with joint sealing material .
in areas where bedrock is encountered and the post can not be driven to grade remove the post then drill or excavate a hole of sufficient dimensions to the required depth .
fill the hole with class a cement concrete set the post to grade then plumb and secure until the concrete has set .
num .
rail elements .
support rail elements and splice as specified in section numanum .
use suitable shopformed rail on curves having a radius of less than num feet .
do not punch drill cut or weld in the field except if directed for special conditions .
num .
cement concrete anchor blocks .
section numanum b reset metal median barrier .
section numc except substitute median barrier for guide rail .
c remove existing median barrier .
section numd except substitute median barrier for guide rail .
num numf num num initial edition num measurement and payment a metal median barrier .
linear foot b metal median barrier end treatment .
each c metal median barrier end treatment driveways and openings .
each d metal median barrier structure mounted .
linear foot e reset metal median barrier .
linear foot f remove existing metal median barrier .
lump sum or linear foot num num num num initial edition section numconcrete glare screen num descriptionthis work is construction of cement concrete glare screen of the type indicated .
num material class aa cement concretesection num except use class aaa cement concrete as specified in section num for precast barrier .
class aa cement concrete slipforming section num except the slump criteria for acceptance specified in table a section num does not apply .
establish a target slump value to control the consistency of the concrete and action points and rejection points and include in the qc plan .
perform slump testing at the frequency established in the qc plan .
premolded expansion joint fillersection num reinforcementsection num num or num curing and protecting coverssections num and numa joint sealing material longitudinal jointssection numb or c mortarsection numd coarse aggregatesection num precast concrete barriersection num protective coating for concretesection num dowel holessection num nonshrink mortarsection nume subbase materialsection num structural steel plates for jointssection numanum .
galvanized as specified in section nums or coated as specified in section numa .
intermediate curing compoundsection numc caulking compound vertical jointssection numb num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as specified in the applicable parts of sections num and num .
num numc num num initial edition num measurement and payment a concrete glare screen .
linear foot b end transition .
each c concrete glare screen structure mounted .
linear foot num numb num num initial edition section numconcrete median barrier num descriptionthis work is construction of cement concrete median barrier .
num material a preformed fabric filter drain .
num .
general .
use prefabricated pavement base drains consisting of an inert plastic core designed to carry water flow wrapped in geotextile fabric for filtering purposes .
num .
geotextile fabric .
nonwoven clog resistant geotextile that does not reduce core flow capacity by creeping or deforming .
has the equivalent life of the core material .
num .
approval .
approval will be based on certified test data submitted by the manufacturer or testing by lts or both .
num .
certification and shipment to project .
certify each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
b other material .
class aa cement concretesection num except use class aaa cement concrete as specified in section num for precast barrier .
class aa cement concrete slipformingsection num except the slump criteria for acceptance specified in table a section num does not apply .
establish a target slump value to control the consistency of the concrete and action points and rejection points and include in the qc plan .
perform slump testing at the frequency established in the qc plan .
premolded expansion joint fillersection num reinforcement epoxy coated or galvanizedsection num num or num curing and protecting coverssections num and numa joint sealing material longitudinal jointssection numb or c mortarsection numd coarse aggregatesection num subbase materialsection num precast concrete barriersection num structural steel plates for jointssection numanum .
galvanized as specified in section nums .
protective coating for concretesection num intermediate curing compoundsection numc caulking compound vertical jointssection numb num numd num num initial edition num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as specified in the applicable parts of section num as follows a general .
submit proposed standard design modifications to the district executive for review and acceptance before starting work .
fill surface blemishes larger than num inch with mortar as directed .
install barrier mount delineation devices as directed or according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for sections of barrier indicated as removable sections install a bond breaker such as bituminous paper or polyethylene to facilitate removal .
provide suitable lifting methods for handling installing and removing the barrier units .
if not in use plug lifting devices with removable plastic or other acceptable plugs .
join new concrete median barrier and existing barrier where indicated and as directed .
if required construct structure mounted median barrier as indicated .
precast concrete median barrier used in temporary installations as specified in section num may later be placed in a permanent installation as specified here provided barrier sections are not identified as being for temporary use only are free from damage and are otherwise acceptable .
construct castinplace barrier and slipform barrier according to the weather restrictions specified in section numb .
cure castinplace barrier and slipform barrier as specified in section numpnum.a or section numl except white membrane curing compound may be used to cure barrier subject to the application of protective coatings and the first paragraph specified in section numlnum.c does not apply .
apply a protective coating to barriers a minimum of num days after concrete placement as specified in section numb .
before application thoroughly dry and clean concrete surfaces of dirt debris oil grease and foreign matter that would prevent protective coating penetration adhesion or drying .
do not apply protective coating to precast barrier units produced specified in section num. b slipform method .
if the barrier is cured by a method other than a liquid membrane curing compound apply an intermediate monomolecular film curing agent as specified in section numj immediately after the extruded concrete surface leaves the slip form machine or immediately after necessary offsets and fins are removed by light troweling .
do not touch the barrier extruded concrete surface as it leaves the slipform machine except to immediately remove offsets and fins by light troweling .
make adjustments in the operation to correct any condition causing surface blemishes larger than num inch .
if the adjustments do not correct the condition within num linear feet halt the operation until the condition is corrected either by adjustments to the operation or by adjustments to the concrete mix .
do not use an intermediate curing compound or water on the completed barrier to correct imperfections .
c joints .
form contraction joints by hand or saw num inch wide and num inches deep at numfoot intervals .
saw as soon as possible after the concrete sets sufficiently to preclude raveling during the sawing before any shrinkage cracking occurs in the concrete .
the depth of saw cut may be decreased at the edge adjacent to the pavement to obtain a maximum depth without pavement damage .
tool the construction joint edges .
place numinch premolded expansionjoint material cut to conform to the cross sectional area at structures and at the end of the workday .
construct longitudinal joints a maximum of num inch wide on both sides of the barrier as indicated .
for precast units on curved sections the representative will allow a maximum numinch longitudinal joint .
for curves with radii less than num yards for curves greater than num degrees num minutes use shorter precast barrier lengths to maintain longitudinal joint tolerances .
seal the longitudinal joint as specified in section numn .
seal all vertical contraction and construction joints with an approved caulking compound .
trim numinch premolded expansionjoint material at construction joints to create a notch for caulking compound .
do not seal the joints between precast barrier sections .
place precast barrier sections so that transverse joints are reasonably tight but do not result in damage to barrier edges during placement .
d removal of forms .
do not remove forms until at least num hours after placing the concrete .
do not rub to correct irregularities until the full curing period has elapsed .
correct any irregular surface by rubbing with a carborundum stone .
do not brush finish or plaster .
after removing the forms fill minor defects with mortar .
promptly remove and replace rejected barrier .
nume nume num num initial edition e testing and acceptance .
have the finished barrier conform to the dimensions of the design template within num inch in all directions and across the joints .
test the top and side surfaces using a numfoot straightedge .
hold the straightedge in successive positions for the entire length of the barrier and advance in stages of not more than num feet .
remove and replace barrier with deviations in excess of num inch as measured from the testing edge of the straightedge .
f single face concrete barrier .
if single face concrete barrier is specified for use as a retaining wall and drainage treatment is necessary construct a preformed fabric filter drain as indicated .
num measurement and payment a concrete median barrier .
linear foot b end transition .
each c concrete median barrier structure mounted .
linear foot d single face concrete barrier .
linear foot e flared end transition .
each num numd num num initial edition section numrightofway fence num descriptionthis work is construction of rightofway fence of the type indicated .
num material a rightofway fence .
section num b packaged dry concrete .
astm c num normal strength concrete type ia iia or iiia cement numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
c other material .
class a cement concretesection num mortarsection nume ground rodacceptable numinch by numfoot copper clad rod with suitable clamps ground wireno .
num awg solid copper d certification .
section numbnum num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
clear and grub to construct the rightofway fence and to provide a reasonably smooth ground profile at the fence line unless otherwise directed .
cut trim and remove vegetation as specified in section num as required for rightofway fence installation .
excavate or construct compacted embankment a maximum depth of num inches and a minimum width of num inches with num side slopes unless otherwise directed to obtain the desired elevations .
fill minor ground depressions that are not water courses .
restore areas disturbed by grading operations as specified in section num .
join new and existing rightofway fence as indicated or directed .
complete the fence true to line plumb taut rigid and erected in conformance with established practices for the type specified .
b posts .
orient posts with sections that have a major and a minor bending axis with the major axis parallel to the fence line .
place corner posts with the major axis parallel to one of the lines of the fence .
drive line posts except when concrete footings are required .
obtain acceptance for the method of driving and of protecting the post .
remove and replace posts with battered heads bent or otherwise damaged posts as directed .
furnish and place longer line posts where indicated to suit field conditions .
if rock is encountered drill a hole with a diameter that is num inch larger than the posts maximum dimension at least num inches into the rock and then grout the post in place with mortar .
c anchorages .
construct concrete footings or install acceptable drive anchors .
construct concrete footings using class a concrete or packaged dry concrete .
concrete footings do not require forming .
finish the footing tops to drain water away from the posts .
do not place the fabric until the concrete has cured for a minimum of num hours .
d fabric .
firmly fasten wire fabric to the posts using aluminum or galvanized bands or clamps or by other acceptable methods .
splice fabric using an acceptable method that develops the full fabric strength .
numd nume num num initial edition place fabric on the side of the fence toward the highway unless otherwise indicated or directed .
at corner posts and on curves place the fabric so it pulls against the post .
if supplied with both knuckled and barbed selvages install fabric with the barbed selvage on the fence top edge .
e gates .
install gates where indicated or directed .
f electrical grounds .
install an electrical ground directly under areas where electrical transmission distribution or secondary lines cross over the rightofway fence .
drive a numfoot copper clad rod a minimum of num inch in diameter vertically until the top is approximately num inches below the ground elevation .
bronze clamp a no .
num awg solidcopper conductor to the rod and to the fence so each fence element is grounded .
num measurement and payment a rightofway fence .
linear foot b end post corner post pull post and line post .
each c gate .
each d class num excavation .
cubic yard excavation and embankment within the specified depth of num inches is incidental to this work .
if the representative directs additional excavation andor embankment beyond the numinch depth indicated the department will pay for additional quantities as class num excavation .
e fabric .
linear foot num numa num num initial edition section numcribbing num descriptionthis work is constructing precast reinforced concrete or metal cribbing as indicated .
num material a reinforced concrete cribbing .
num .
material .
class a cement concretesection num reinforcement barssection num steel welded wire fabricsection num premolded expansion joint fillersection num bituminous materialasphalt cement rcnum section num drift boltsnuminch diameter galvanized steel of the required length .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
casings for drift boltsnum num inch inside diameter galvanized steel pipe .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
rockrock or rock spalls not exceeding num inches in their greatest dimension or stone backfill as specified in section num .
obtain backfill from available excavation if possible otherwise provide foreign borrow material .
provide backfill of acceptable quality sound free from structural defects and foreign substances .
unless backfill is from an approved type a source submit samples to the lts .
num .
fabrication .
submit a concrete design based upon compressive strengths and shop drawings of the cribbing members to the department for review and acceptance .
use a concrete design mix which when molded cured and tested in accordance with department procedures has a minimum numday compression cylinder strength of num psi .
fabricate and cure sufficient test cylinders for design verification and for production control of members in the same manner as the cribbing members .
do not ship cribbing until it has attained the minimum numday compressive strength .
one days production will represent a lot .
lot acceptance will be based upon average strength of at least one set of cylinders .
mix concrete with an air content of num num a minimum cement factor of num bags per cubic yard of concrete and a slump between num num inches and num num inches .
use a minimum quantity of water per bag of cement to obtain workable concrete of the specified minimum strength .
do not exceed num gallon of water per bag of cement .
mix and proportion concrete as specified in section num .
place concrete and cure in accordance with aashto m num .
embed the casings for drift bolts and lift hooks in the members where required .
do not place more than two handling lift hooks in each member .
use members true to form free from depressions spalls patched or plastered surface edges .
cracked or otherwise defective crib members will be rejected .
fully enclose the equipment and facilities for manufacture of the members in a building available for department inspection .
crib members will be inspected for acceptance before being placed in the work .
mark each member with the following information date of manufacture .
name or trademark of the manufacturer .
letter f on face of each stretcher .
numa numb num num initial edition certify each project shipment of concrete cribbing as specified in section numbnum .
b metal cribbing .
num .
material .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
galvanized metal sheets and base plates .
aashto m num u.s. standard or thicknesses gages as required but not thinner than no.num gage except for base plates do not use thinner than no .
num gage .
galvanized bolts and nuts .
numinch diameter and num num inch minimum length bolts furnished by the manufacturer .
num .
fabrication .
units of the same nominal size are to be fully interchangeable .
replace units with improper holes or otherwise defective .
maintain a minimum forming radius of numinch .
however for units formed with less than numinch radius galvanize after forming .
completely fabricate individual members before shipment .
c other types of cribbing .
submit shop drawings and methods to the department for review .
do not start work until written acceptance is received .
d footings .
class a cement concrete section num num construction a reinforced concrete cribbing .
cushion bearing surfaces between crib members and their supports with num inch expansion joint filler over the full bearing area .
satisfactorily and firmly compact the cribbing foundation .
do not place the cribbing members until the foundation is accepted .
handle and place crib members carefully .
remove and replace cracked or damaged members .
fill the interior of the bins and the space behind the cribbing with rock .
thoroughly compact the rock in layers having a maximum depth of num inches .
erect the units and place and compact the backfill simultaneously .
b metal cribbing .
excavate the foundation area to the finished ground line elevation at the cribbing face .
below this elevation excavate trenches num inches in width to the depth required for all bin sides .
provide acceptable bearings at the bin corners firm and to grade before the crib erection .
place metal base plates if required and erect the units .
do not drill punch or use drift pins to correct manufacturing defects .
handle members carefully .
hold members securely in place using bolts and nuts provided .
remove and replace members that become deformed or damaged .
field coat metal cribbing with bituminous material when indicated .
satisfactorily backfill the bins and the space behind the cribbing .
c other types .
in accordance with the reviewed shop drawings and methods .
d footings .
provide concrete footings as required .
mix place and cure the concrete as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
num measurement and payment a reinforced concrete cribbing .
square foot measured on the completed cribbing face .
b metal cribbing .
square foot measured on the completed cribbing face .
numc nume num num initial edition c class a concrete .
cubic yard d excavation .
cubic yard for the class indicated .
e borrow excavation .
cubic yard for the type indicated and if required for backfilling .
num num num num change no .
num section numgabions num descriptionthis work is the furnishing assembling filling and placing of open mesh wire baskets with aggregate forming gabions of the type indicated .
num material a aggregate .
type a section num and as follows gabion height minimum aggregate size maximum aggregate size less than num foot num inches num inches num foot or over num inches num inches measure longest side .
b geotextiles .
class num type a .
section num c gabion baskets .
provide materials as shown on the standard drawings and fabricated from one of the following num .
galvanized .
use galvanized gabions and gabion revet mattresses conforming to the following astm anum standard specification for welded wire mesh fabric gabions and gabion mattresses metalliccoated or polyvinyl chloride pvc coated zinc coated or astm anum standard specification for doubletwisted hexagonal mesh gabions and revet mattresses metalliccoated steel wire or metalliccoated steel wire with polyvinyl chloride pvc coating zinc coated num .
corrosion resistant .
use corrosion resistant gabions and gabion revet mattresses conforming to the following astm anum standard specification for welded wire mesh fabric gabions and gabion mattresses metalliccoated or polyvinyl chloride pvc coated zinc coated and overcoated with pvc or astm anum standard specification for doubletwisted hexagonal mesh gabions and revet mattresses metalliccoated steel wire or metalliccoated steel wire with polyvinyl chloride pvc coating zinc coated and overcoated with pvc .
num .
certification .
section numbnum .
certify each shipment delivered to the job site .
a shipment consists of material arriving at the job site at approximately the same time .
d hardwood stakes .
section numinum e steel pins .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows numa num num num change no .
num a excavation .
excavate as required to place gabion baskets .
undercut areas of unsuitable material and replace with acceptable material .
scarify depressions and add acceptable material .
thoroughly compact entire gabion area and finish to a firm even surface free of vegetation large stones and other debris .
dispose of unsuitable or excess material .
b geotextile .
for channel lining or slope wall place class num type a geotextile as specified in section num .
for retaining walls drape class num type a geotextile over surface of gabions to receive backfill without stretching as indicated .
c gabions .
num .
assembly .
num.a woven wire gabion .
unfold and assemble woven wire gabion basket using interlocking fasteners or continuous tie wire lacing .
overlap ends of tie wire lacing equal to two loop coils to start next length of tie wire .
num.b welded wire gabion .
unfold and assemble welded wire gabion basket using temporary or spiral fasteners .
place spiral fasteners and secure as indicated .
num .
placement of gabions .
place assembled gabion baskets to the line and grade as indicated .
join assembled gabion baskets using the type and number of fasteners or tie wire lacing indicated .
maintain shape and alignment of gabion baskets using standard fence stretcher chain fall or iron bar .
place cross ties as shown on standard drawings .
do not damage corrosion resistant wire mesh or fixtures .
fill type a gabions by hand with coarse aggregate along all exposed faces for a uniform appearance .
fill type b gabions by hand placement or use small power equipment to place coarse aggregate .
overfill gabion baskets approximately num num inches and fasten lid to diaphragms sides and ends of gabion basket using tie wire lacing .
when stacking of gabions is indicated offset ends of individual gabion baskets from ends of gabion baskets on underlying course .
adjust size of gabion basket to provide offset .
num .
backfill .
backfill excavated areas around gabions with acceptable backfill material to the limits shown on the plans .
place backfill material for each course of gabion baskets and compact before starting succeeding course .
in areas inaccessible to selfpropelled compaction equipment place material in uniform loose layers of num inches maximum depth and compact using mechanical vibration tampers .
num .
acceptance .
correct any damage to gabions during construction at no cost to the department as directed by the representative .
this includes broken wires missing or damaged coatings broken or cracked welds or other damage resulting from installation of the gabions .
construct gabions so that faces have a smooth uniform appearance and are positioned at the proper lines grades and batter .
remove and replace gabions deemed unacceptable by the representative .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard num numc num num initial edition section numtemporary barrier num descriptionthis work is the furnishing placing maintaining and removing of temporary barrier or glare screen as indicated for maintenance and protection of traffic during construction .
num material precast concrete barrier or glare screenbarrier fabricated as shown in the standard drawings and section num or certify each shipment with a copy of fhwas eligibility letters indicating the barrier has passed the nchrp num or mash test .
mortarsection numd structural steelsection numanum steel barrieras listed in bulletin num waterfilled barrieras listed on bulletin num warning lightsnum pa code chapter num and from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
barrier mount delineation devicessection numa num construction a .
general .
place clean barriers on a stable base then properly join and align the barriers at the required locations .
install delineators and warning lights as directed and according to the manufacturers recommendations .
maintain alignment delineation warning lights and condition of the barriers as necessary for the duration of the project .
remove the barriers from the project upon project completion or when directed .
immediately replace or repair barriers showing signs of damage that would hinder its performance as determined by the representative .
num measurement and payment a temporary barrier .
linear foot b temporary end transition .
each c incidental work .
the following work is incidental to the temporary barrier item burying approach blunt ends of the temporary barrier into an existing backslope num or steeper cleaning and removal of conflicting markings num numb num num initial edition section numreset temporary barrier num descriptionthis work is the resetting of a temporary barrier from one construction area to another within the project limits .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num reset barrier if construction operations require a change in protection or traffic or as directed .
store or transport the barrier as required .
num measurement and payment a reset temporary barrier .
linear foot b reset temporary end transition .
each num nume num num initial edition section numplain cement concrete curb num descriptionthis work is construction of plain cement concrete curb plain cement concrete depressed curb for curb ramps and reinforced cement concrete depressed curb for driveways .
num material class a cement concretesection num class a cement concrete slipforming section num except with a maximum slump of num num inches .
premolded expansion joint fillersection num covers for curing and protectionsection num curing compoundsection numa mortarsection numd caulking compoundsection num reinforcement barssection numa num constructionas shown on the standard drawing rc numm as specified in section num and as follows a excavation .
excavate as required .
remove existing curb pavement and sidewalk to neat lines when indicated then compact the material upon which the curb is to be constructed to a firm even surface .
b forms .
use acceptable metal forms specified in section numd use wood forms on sharp curves and short tangent sections .
use forms that will not discolor the concrete .
c placing finishing and curing concrete .
conform to weather restrictions for concrete placement specified in section numb .
place the concrete in the forms in layers not exceeding num inches in depth when spading or layers not exceeding num inches in depth when using a vibrator to eliminate voids .
provide drainage openings through the curb at the elevation and of the size required where indicated or directed .
smoothly and evenly finish the top surface of the curb using a wood float .
round the edges of the face and back of the curb top while the concrete is still plastic .
place depressed curbs for drives or curb ramps where indicated or directed .
place bars as indicated for depressed curb at drives as specified in section num .
cure concrete as specified in section numl d curb machine .
the concrete curb may be placed with an acceptable selfpropelled machine .
uniformly feed the concrete to the machine so that it maintains the shape of the section without slumping after extrusion .
the representative will not allow voids or honeycomb on the surface of the finished curb .
immediately after extrusion perform any additional surface finishing .
e joints .
form or saw contraction joints to dimensions shown on standard drawing rc numm and as specified in section numinum .
place numinch premolded expansion joint material conforming to the crosssectional area of the curb where indicated and at the end of the workday .
prepare and caulk joints according to caulking manufacturers recommendations .
numf numc num num initial edition f removal of forms .
do not remove forms until such time that it will not be detrimental to the concrete .
correct irregular surfaces by rubbing with a carborundum stone .
do not brush finish or plaster .
fill minor defects with mortar .
g backfilling and embankment .
as soon as possible after the removal of forms backfill the voids in front and back of the curb using acceptable embankment material as specified in section numbnum .
complete embankments in back of raised curbs as indicated and as specified in section num except carefully compact the embankment by means of mechanical tampers or rollers if allowed not exceeding num tons .
replace existing pavement and sidewalk damaged or removed during construction .
dispose of unsuitable and surplus material .
h curb modification .
modify curb construction within existing pavement limits and existing structures where indicated or directed .
drill holes and insert dowel bars with nonshrink mortar as required .
i depressed curb .
construct depressed curb with sloped sides as detailed on standard drawings rc numm and rc numm .
num .
driveways .
construct reinforced cement concrete depressed curb where indicated or directed .
place reinforcement bars to extend the entire length of the depressed curb and sloped sides .
num .
curb ramps .
construct plain cement concrete depressed curb with a level surface that extends across the curb width where indicated or directed .
construct the depressed curb flush with the adjacent roadway surface elevation .
install depressed curb for all curb ramps and at median or traffic refuge island access openings where the opening meets adjacent roadway pavement .
num measurement and paymentdepressed curb will be measured and paid for as full depth curb of the type indicated .
a plain cement concrete curb .
linear foot b plain cement concrete curb including removal of existing curb .
linear foot c class i excavation .
section num num numb num num initial edition section numplain concrete mountable curb num descriptionthis work is construction of plain concrete mountable curb of the type indicated .
num materialas specified in section num and as follows subbasesection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawing rc numm as specified in section num and as follows a excavation .
excavate if necessary as specified in section numa .
b forms .
use forms as specified in section numb .
c placing finishing and curing concrete .
place finish and cure concrete as specified in section numc .
d curb machine .
use a curb machine as specified in section numd .
e joints .
form or saw contraction joints as specified in section nume .
f removal of forms .
as specified in section numf .
g backfilling and embankment .
as specified in section numg .
h curb modification .
modify curb construction within existing pavement limits and existing structures where indicated or directed .
drill holes and insert dowel bars with nonshrink mortar as required .
num measurement and payment a plain concrete mountable curb .
linear foot b class num excavation .
section num num numb num num initial edition section numbituminous concrete curb num descriptionthis work is construction of a hotmixed hotlaid bituminous concrete curb on a completed bituminous surface .
num material section num except that the mixture design controls do not apply .
a bituminous material .
asphalt cement class pg num or num. b aggregate .
fine aggregate section num. c filler drawn polyester fibers .
provide a supplier certification with each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
the supplier shall certify that the filler conforms to the following requirements average length num inch num inch average diameter num inch minimum specific gravity num to num melting temperature numf minimum tensile strength num pounds per square inch minimum d composition of mixture .
combine fine aggregate bitumen and fiber in proportions that produce a mixture conforming to composition by weight percentages within the limits of table a and as directed .
add approximately num asphalt cement per num by weight of polyester fibers .
table a bituminous concrete curb percentages by weight passing square opening sieves passing sieve required composition of mixture numinch num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num asphalt cement by weight num num drawn polyester fiber by weight of total mix num num e bituminous tack coat .
section num num construction a bituminous mixing plant .
obtain the bituminous mixture from a plant conforming to chapter num bulletin num except that three bins are not required .
b hauling equipment .
section numd numc num num num initial edition c bituminous paver .
use an acceptable selfpropelled extruding curbpaver .
d preparation of surface .
before placing curb clean the bituminous surface and apply a tack coat as specified in section num. e placing and compacting .
place the curb in a continuous operation .
the representative will determine the mixture temperature from within the range of numf to numf based on weather conditions and workability requirements at the time of placement .
maintain the mixture temperature within a tolerance of numf of the mixture temperature .
place the hot bituminous mixture in the hopper of the curbpaver without segregation and then extrude the mixture through the mold to provide the proper compaction and surface texture .
properly support and massload the curbpaver during operation along the edge of pavement .
guide the paver along string or chalk lines to maintain proper alignment and grade of the completed curb .
where indicated or directed make drainage openings through the curb .
remove and replace completed curbs that show signs of sagging cracking or distortion do not conform to lines grades or cross sections and that can not be satisfactorily repaired .
f joints .
if placing of curb is interrupted and the mixture cools below numf cut a vertical joint in the curb .
just before placing the curb resumes paint the joint with a thin uniform coat of hot asphalt cement class pg num or pg num. g curing .
protect newly completed curb from traffic or any other disturbance for at least num hours .
h backfilling .
immediately after the curing period and where necessary backfill and compact acceptable material behind the curb up to the required elevation and cross section .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num numb num num initial edition section numplain cement concrete gutter num descriptionthis work is construction of plain cement concrete gutter .
num material class aa cement concretesection num asphalt cementclass pg num or pg num joint sealing materialsections numb or c caulking compoundsection num covers for curing and protectionsection num curing compoundsection numa num constructionas shown on the standard drawing rc numm as specified in the applicable parts of section num and as follows a foundation .
form the foundation for the gutter bottom at the required depth below the finished surface as indicated .
remove unsuitable materials replace with acceptable embankment material as specified in section numa and then compact thoroughly to a firm even surface .
b forms .
use acceptable forms of wood or metal .
c placing and finishing concrete .
place the concrete on a moist foundation between the forms consolidate and then strike off to the required shape .
finish smoothly and evenly with a wood float .
where the gutter joins other structures seal the adjacent edges with an approved asphalt cement .
tool the gutter edge to the radius indicated .
d joints .
form or saw contraction joints to dimensions shown on the standard drawing rc numm and as specified in section numi .
place numinch premolded expansion joint material that is cut to the cross section of the gutter at structures and where gutter placement ends each work day .
prepare and seal or caulk joints according to manufacturers recommendations .
e backfilling .
after the concrete has hardened sufficiently backfill the spaces adjacent to the gutter with acceptable embankment material as specified in section numbnum .
num measurement and payment a plain cement concrete gutter .
square yard b class num excavation .
cubic yard num num num num initial edition section numplain cement concrete curb gutter num descriptionthis work is construction of plain cement concrete curb gutter .
num material mortarsection numd class aa cement concretesection num asphalt cementclass pg num or pg num joint sealing materialsections numb or c caulking compoundsection num covers for curing and protectionsection num curing compoundsection numa num constructionas specified in section num and as follows do not rub forms to correct irregularities until they have been removed and the full curing period has elapsed .
correct irregular surfaces by rubbing with a carborundum stone .
do not brush finish or plaster .
fill minor defects with mortar .
place depressed curb gutter where indicated or directed .
prepare and seal or caulk joints according to manufacturers recommendations .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard the department will not adjust the area for depressing the curb portion .
num numc num num change no .
num section numtemporary concrete barrier structure mounted num descriptionthis work is the furnishing placing maintaining and removing of precast temporary concrete barrier structure mounted temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted or temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted as indicated for maintenance and protection of traffic during construction using bolt through anchors adhesive anchors or pin connected droppin anchors in accordance with bc numm to attach the barrier to existing hardened concrete structures .
temporary concrete barrier applies to bridge construction projects that extend continuously for a maximum of three construction seasons .
num material a barrier .
section num b bolt through anchor .
num .
anchor .
astm fnum grade num num kips per square inch or astm anumanumm numb grade bnum num kips per square inch anchor bolt num inch diameter hotdipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of class c of astm anum .
additional requirements for both astm fnum and astm anumanumm includes astm fnum supplement snum grade num num kips per square inch charpy impact requirements at numf .
num .
nuts .
heavy hex nuts as specified in section numcnum.a or astm anumanum grade num supplement snum at numf hotdipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of class c of astm anum .
provide zinc coating overtapping of the nut and lubrication requirements in accordance with astm anum .
num .
washers .
num inch diameter by num inch thick grade num grade num plate washer with a num num inch diameter hole in the middle .
all other washers are in accordance with astm fnumfnumm type num .
washers are to be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of class c of astm anum .
num .
structural steel .
section numanum num .
grout .
section numc c adhesive anchor .
num .
anchor .
provide the results of testing performed by an independent testing facility for review and approval of a bolt equivalent to an astm anumanumm numb grade bnum num kips per square inch anchor bolt num inch diameter hot dipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of class c of astm anum .
additional requirement for astm anumanumm includes astm fnum supplement snum gradenum num kips per square inch charpy impact requirements at numf .
when using bolts treated for future removal provide manufacturer recommendation to the representative and include manufacturers test data to ensure that this operation will not affect the physical properties of the anchoradhesive combination .
num .
nuts .
heavy hex nuts as specified in section numcnum.a or astm anumanum grade num supplement snum at numf hotdipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of class c of astm anum .
provide zinc coating overtapping of the nut and lubrication requirements in accordance with astm anum .
num .
washers .
num inch diameter by num inch thick grade num plate washer with a num num inch diameter hole in the middle .
all other washers are in accordance with astm fnumfnumm type num .
washers are to be hotdipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of class c of astm anum .
num .
structural steel .
section numanum num .
grout .
section numc num .
adhesive .
use adhesive bonding material systems specified herein and as listed in bulletin num specifically numc numc num num change no .
num for this application .
use material designed for installation type spacing and minimum temperature considerations .
provide a bonding material that is either a glasssoftskin capsule or twocomponent system contained in prepacked injection coaxial or side by side cartridges and that is inserted into the hole using a manufacturer approved dispensing gun and replaceable mixing nozzle .
num.a performance requirements .
provide independent test results from the adhesive bolt manufacturer of the following properties for review and approval by lts .
num.b physical properties .
determine physical properties in num num pounds per square inch concrete cured for num days minimum at a maximum depth of num inches with a num inch diameter anchor bolt of equal or greater tensile strength to an astm anumanumm numb grade bnum anchor bolt .
meet the minimum acceptance criterion of one or more of the following categories shown in bcnumm table num .
num.b.num tension .
astm enum procedure static tests modified for testing at the following temperatures numfnumf numfnumf and numfnumf and to meet and be classified as per the tension minimums in bcnumm table num .
apply test loads to confined specimens to preclude concrete failure but allow bond failure .
concrete specimen size may be modified if necessary .
num.b.num shear continuous load application .
astm enum shear test to meet and be classified as per the shear minimums in bcnumm table num .
num.b.num shock .
astm enum modified for testing as follows number of samples nnum number of shocks of test sample num shock duration num seconds conduct the shock test at the following temperatures numfnumf numfnumf and numfnumf to meet and be classified as per the tension minimums in bcnumm table num .
apply test loads to confined specimens to preclude concrete failure but allow bond failure .
num.b.num short term cure .
perform static tension testing num hours after installation as per the procedure for tension testing in astm enum modified for testing at the following temperatures numfnumf numfnumf and numfnumf and to meet and be classified as per the tension minimums in bcnumm table num .
apply test loads to confined specimens to preclude concrete failure but allow bond failure .
num.b.num freeze thaw .
astm enum to meet and be classified as per the tension minimums in bcnumm table num .
apply test loads to confined specimens to preclude concrete failure but allow bond failure .
num.b.num damp hole installation .
astm enum to meet and be classified as per the tension minimums in bcnumm table num .
before testing blow out the hole with dry compressed air for num to num num minutes .
apply test loads to confined specimens to preclude concrete failure but allow bond failure .
num.b.num test on effect of reduced temperature on curing .
astm enum modified as follows conduct installationapplication at the lowest temperature of use specified to meet and be classified as per the tension minimums in bcnumm table num .
perform test loads at numfnumf before application of the loading and at the specified minimum installationapplication temperature .
apply test loads to confined specimens to preclude concrete failure but allow bond failure .
num.c chemicalcompositional properties .
provide manufacturers data indicating that adhesive system is resistant to gasoline diesel oil acids and caustics .
perform testing in accordance with astm dnum .
the following materials requirements are concrete temperature at time of installation numc numc num num change no .
num minimum numf maximum numf adhesives designed for installation below numf may be submitted and evaluated for approval if the lowest temperature of use specified is the installationapplication temperature for physical properties testing .
installation time at numfnumf minimum set time of num hrs maximum set time of num hrs maximum cure time of num hrs provide the following testing information for the tests listed below to the lts .
the information requested will be used to identify characterize and classify the material for proper use and to verify composition astm dnum standard test method for gel time and peak exothermic temperature of thermosetting resins .
provide gel time after conditioning the components before testing at the following temperatures numfnumf numfnumf and numfnumf .
astm dnum standard test method for density for adhesives in fluid form provide production ranges for each component of the system in terms of weight per gallon or specific gravity .
astm dnum standard practice for general techniques for qualitative infrared analysis provide an infrared analysis of each of the components and of representative specimen of the cured final product of the adhesive system .
astm dnum ash filler content provide a value in terms of percent .
astm dnum water absorption provide a value in terms of percent .
astm dnum linear coefficient of shrinkage on cure astm dnum viscosity of adhesives the lts must approve this information before the product is used .
num.d storage of materials .
store materials delivered to the jobsite in the original unopened containers within a facility capable of maintaining storage conditions consistent with the manufacturers recommendations .
num.e certification shipment to project packaging and marking .
certify each shipment in accordance with section numb num .
deliver the adhesive bonding material system to the project site in original unopened containers with the manufacturers label identifying the product .
clearly mark each package with the following information manufacturers name and address product name manufacturer expiration date lot identification number storage and handling requirements include in each package a copy of the manufacturers instructions for anchor and installation .
provide instructions that include at least the following information diameters of drilled holes for applicable anchor and anchor sizes .
cleaning procedure for drilled holes including a description of permitted and prohibited equipment and techniques .
allowable temperature ranges for storage installation curing and inplace performance .
identification of acceptable mixingdispensing nozzles .
fabrication requirements for anchors .
description of tools permitted or required for installation .
method of identifying properly proportioned and mixed adhesive materials .
time and temperature schedule for initial and set and fullstrength cure .
special requirements for special installation conditions such as damp holes or low temperatures etc .
numc numb num num change no .
num release agents if used .
d pin connected droppin anchor .
num .
droppin anchor .
astm anumanumm grade num num kips per square inch num num inch diameter rod head plate num inch thick hotdipped or mechanically galvanize as specified in section nums after head plate is welded to droppin anchor .
num .
connection pin .
astm anumb type num unthreaded rod straight num inch diameter hotdipped or mechanically galvanize as specified in section nums after plate washer is welded to rod .
num .
plate washers .
astm anumanumm grade num num kips per square inch plate num inch thick hotdipped or mechanically galvanize as specified in section nums after plate washer is welded to connection pin rod .
num construction a bolt through anchor .
prepare and install bolt through anchors in hardened concrete as indicated in bcnumm and as directed by the representative .
num .
placement of temporary concrete barrier .
ensure that the concrete deck receiving bolt through anchors is structurally sound and free of cracks in the vicinity of the anchor to be installed .
during the initial barrier layout use a metal detector specifically designed for locating steel in concrete to minimize conflicts with existing steel reinforcement .
move the barrier parallel to the direction of traffic up to num inch and perpendicular to traffic up to num inch when conflicts with the existing steel reinforcement occur .
maintain a smooth barrier face to traffic along the entire barrier length use a rotary drill and bit for drilling the hole for a num inch diameter bolt .
drill into the deck using the holes in the temporary barrier as a template .
the drill may be located anywhere within the num inch slot but must be maintained vertically num and at a num cant num to the vertical from the front face to rear face of the barrier .
drill into the deck using methods that will not shatterdamage the concrete surface adjacent to the holes or result in concrete spalling at the underside of the deck .
notify the representative if spalling occurs .
patch areas of spalling immediately .
if reinforcement is encountered during drilling before the specified depth is attained notify the representative immediately .
the hole may be repositioned within the slot in the barrier to avoid damaging the deck reinforcement during drilling however the hole must remain vertical .
patch unused or partially drilled holes as specified in section numbnum .
num .
installing anchors .
install the anchors in the hole with plate washers and channels if required .
snug tighten heavy hex nuts .
b adhesive anchor .
prepare and install adhesive anchors in hardened concrete as indicated in bcnumm and as directed by the representative in accordance with manufacturers instructions and as specified herein .
num .
equipment .
use equipment meeting the manufacturers recommendation for installation of adhesive anchors .
num .
placement of temporary concrete barrier .
ensure that concrete deck receiving adhesive anchors is structurally sound and free of cracks in the vicinity of the anchor to be installed .
during the initial barrier layout use a metal detector specifically designed for locating steel in concrete to minimize conflicts with existing steel reinforcement whenever placement tolerances and edge clearances allow .
move the barrier parallel to the direction of traffic up to num inch and perpendicular to traffic up to num inch when conflicts with the existing steel reinforcement occur .
maintain a smooth barrier face to traffic along the entire barrier length .
unless otherwise specified use the depth of hole and the installation procedure recommended by the manufacturer to conform to bcnumm and the depth of the deck .
provide a copy of the manufacturers recommended installation procedure including depth to the representative at least num days before the start of work .
use rotary drill and bit as recommended by the adhesive manufacturer .
drill holes to the manufacturers recommendation for a num inch diameter bolt .
drill into the deck using the holes in the temporary barrier as a template .
the drill may be located anywhere within the num inch slot but must be maintained vertically num and at a num cant num to the vertical from the front face to rear face of the barrier .
numb numb num num change no .
num drill into the deck using methods that will not shatterdamage the concrete surface adjacent to the holes or penetrate the bottom of the bridge deck resulting in concrete spalling at the underside of the deck .
notify the representative if spalling occurs .
patch areas of spalling immediately use a bolt through connection for that hole location .
if reinforcement is encountered during drilling before the specified depth is attained notify the representative immediately .
the hole may be repositioned within the slot in the barrier to avoid damaging the deck reinforcement during drilling however the hole must remain vertical .
patch unused or partially drilled holes as specified in section numbnum .
dry the drilled holes completely by blowing out the hole with dry compressed air before cleaning and installing the anchors .
assure that drilled holes are cleaned in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and are completely dry at the time of placing the adhesive bonding material and anchors .
as a minimum use oilfree compressed air to remove loose particles from drilling brush inside surface to free loose particles trapped in pores then use compressed air again to remove the remaining loose particles to avoid contamination of the adhesive bonding material .
use a nonmetallic bristle brush and avoid overbrushing to prevent polishing the inside surface of the drilled hole .
protect holes from contamination and moisture .
num .
installing of anchors .
immediately before installation of anchors dry the drilled holes completely by blowing out the drilled hole with dry compressed air .
assure the drilled holes are cleaned in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and are completely dry at the time of placing the adhesive bonding materials and anchors .
install anchors in accordance with bcnumm the structure drawings and the manufacturers instructions with particular attention to requirements andor limitations due to anchor position dampness ambient temperature and curing .
do not install anchors below numf or above numf unless manufacturer data can be provided and lts has approved and listed the material in bulletin num in advance .
use adequate quantities of the adhesive bonding material to fill the drilled hole to within num inch of the concrete surface measured after placement of the anchor .
for encapsulated systems mix materials inside the drilled hole as the capsule and its contents are crushed by the anchor rod driven by a rotating drill as directed by manufacturers technicalapplication data sheets .
for prepacked injection cartridge systems fill hole completely without gaps air bubbles etc .
from bottom as directed by manufacturers technicalapplication data sheets .
insert anchor by hand turning clockwise to coat threads and remove air bubbles .
support the anchor as necessary to maintain alignmentorientation and prevent movement during curing .
maintain undisturbed until the adhesive has cured the minimum time specified by the manufacturer .
anchors that are improperly bonded as determined by the representative will be rejected .
if removal of adhesive anchors is required perform under the direction of the representative and provide manufacturer test data to support that this operation will not damage the surrounding concrete .
when possible num foot anchor spacing drill new anchor holes in both adjacent barrier anchor locations to account for rejected anchors .
otherwise redrill holes to remove adhesive bonding material residue and clean as specified in section numbnum .
do not reuse failed anchors .
perform all work necessary to correct improperly bonded anchors at no additional cost to the department .
if adhesive anchors can not be used use bolt through anchors as specified in section numa .
num .
field testing of anchors .
perform field testing of the installed anchors in accordance with the applicable sections of astm enum and astm enum in the presence of the representative .
in addition orient the field test load equipment to provide a field load at the same angle and orientation as the anchor being tested .
if electing to use another type of field testing equipment submit details to the bopd for review and conceptual approval with field verification by the contractor .
provide documentation that all field test equipment has been calibrated to the requirements of astm enum and e num .
perform restrained static tension tests to prevent damage to the surrounding concrete .
test individual anchors to the values shown in bcnumm table num values in table num are based on num of the adhesive anchor tensile capacity .
the anchors will be divided into lots for testing and acceptance .
each lot will contain a maximum of num anchors of the same embedment length and adhesive bonding material system .
ten percent of the anchors in each lot will be randomly selected for testing in accordance with ptm no.num with a minimum of five tests per lot unless otherwise directed by the representative .
submit test results to the representative for each lot .
acceptability of the field tests will be determined in accordance with astm enum and the tension requirements of table num .
for every failed field test perform two additional field tests on adjacent untested anchors within the lot .
continue additional field tests until no additional test failures occur or all anchors within the lot are tested .
remove and replace failed anchors as specified in section numbnum .
provisionally approved adhesive anchor systems will be evaluated randomly for specification compliance at job completion by secondary field proof load testing immediately before barrier removal .
numb numc num num change no .
num num .
removal and replacement of failed test specimens .
remove all anchors that fail the field test without damage to the surrounding concrete .
when possible installing new replacement anchors use adjacent barrier anchor slots in accordance with section numbnum .
otherwise redrill holes to remove adhesive bonding material residue and clean in accordance with section numb num .
reinstall new anchors as specified in section numbnum .
do not reuse the failed anchors .
install anchors utilizing a new lot of adhesive bonding material at the same embedment and field test in accordance with section numbnum .
if adhesive anchors can not be used use bolt through anchors in accordance with section numa .
num .
opening of work zone to traffic .
if removal operations of the structure have commenced or safety barriers have been removed on the inactive side of the newly placed temporary concrete barrier do not open the work zone to traffic until all adhesive anchors have been successfully tested .
otherwise the opening of the work zone to traffic will be allowed by the representative before fieldtesting of the adhesive bonded anchors .
note that cure time will be significantly modified by environmental conditions such as surface temperature humidity etc .
in these cases conduct fieldtesting after the required cure time of the adhesive .
num .
removal replacement and repair of temporary concrete barrier structure mounted .
immediately replace or repair barriers showing the following signs of damage fractures or cracks that in the opinion of the representative will hinder the adhesivebarrier performance or broken or cracked ends where such damage would in the opinion of the representative prevent making a satisfactory joint .
provisionally approved adhesive anchor systems will be evaluated randomly for specification compliance at job completion by secondary field proof load testing immediately before barrier removal .
when removal repair andor replacement of anchors is required provide the manufacturers recommendation to the representative and include manufacturers data to support that this operation will not damage the surrounding concrete .
following anchor bolt removal before sealing of anchor bolt holes clean out the interior of the bolt holes in such a manner to remove all adhesiveremoval materials that would reduce the performance of the sealing operation .
maintain alignment delineation warning lights and condition of the barriers throughout the life of the project .
upon project completion or when directed remove the barriers from the project .
following barrier removal treat anchors and anchor bolt holes in accordance with bcnumm .
c pin connected droppin anchor .
prepare and install droppin anchor in hardened concrete as indicated in bcnumm and as directed by the representative .
num .
placement of temporary concrete barrier .
ensure that the concrete deck receiving droppin anchor is structurally sound and free of cracks in the vicinity of the anchor to be installed .
during the initial barrier layout use a metal detector specifically designed for locating steel in concrete to minimize conflicts with existing steel reinforcement .
maintain a smooth barrier face to traffic along the entire barrier length .
use a rotary drill and bit for drilling a num num inch hole for a num num inch diameter droppin anchor .
drill into the deck using the num num inch slot in the temporary barrier as a template .
the drill may be located anywhere within the slot but must be maintained num degrees num from the bridge deck .
in addition the drill is to be positioned at num from vertical in a plane parallel to the longitudinal axis of the barrier .
drill into the deck using methods that will not shatterdamage the concrete surface adjacent to the holes or result in concrete spalling at the underside of the deck .
notify the representative if spalling occurs .
patch areas of spalling immediately .
the hole may be repositioned within the slot in the barrier to avoid damaging the deck reinforcement during drilling .
patch unused or partially drilled holes as specified in section numbnum .
num .
installing droppin anchors .
immediately before installation of droppin anchor clean the drilled holes completely by blowing out the drilled hole with compressed air .
assure that the drilled holes are cleaned and completely dry at the time of installing the droppin anchors .
install droppin anchor in accordance with bcnumm and verify the head plate is resting flush on the face of barrier .
numc numd num num change no .
num num .
opening of work zone to traffic .
if removal operations of the structure have commenced or safety barriers have been removed on the inactive side of the newly placed temporary concrete barrier do not open work zone to traffic until all droppin anchors have been successfully installed .
num .
removal replacement and repair of temporary concrete barrier structure mounted .
immediately replace or repair barriers showing the following signs of damage fractures or cracks that in the opinion of the representative will hinder the pin connected drop pin anchor barrier performance or broken or cracked ends where such damage would in the opinion of the representative prevent making a satisfactory joint .
provisionally approved pin connected droppin anchor barrier systems will be evaluated randomly for specification compliance .
when removal repair andor replacement of droppin anchor is required reinstall in accordance with the procedure listed in section numcnum and num .
do not damage the surrounding concrete during this operation .
following droppin anchor removal before sealing of droppin anchor hole clean out the interior of the holes in such a manner to remove all removal materials that would reduce the performance of the sealing operation .
maintain alignment delineation warning lights and condition of the barriers throughout the life of the project .
upon project completion or when directed remove the barriers from the project .
following barrier removal treat droppin anchor holes in accordance with bcnumm .
num measurement and payment a temporary concrete barrier structure mounted .
linear foot b temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted .
linear foot c temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted .
linear foot d incidental work .
adhesive anchor systems will be measured and paid for incidental to the temporary concrete barrier structure mounted temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted and temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted .
labor materials tools equipment and incidentals all work involved in drilling holes bonding anchors and coring through concrete andor reinforcement and removal of barrier and subsequent repair of deck are included in contract unit price .
removal of unacceptable or failed field tested anchors as well as all patchingrepair of crackeddamaged concrete will be at the contractors expense with no additional cost to the department .
pin connected droppin anchor systems will be measured and paid for incidental to the temporary concrete barrier structure mounted temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted and temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted .
labor materials tools equipment and incidentals all work involved in drilling holes and coring through concrete andor reinforcement and removal of barrier and subsequent repair of deck are included in contract unit price .
num numd num initial edition section num temporary concrete barrier structure mounted reset num description this work is the resetting of a temporary concrete barrier structure mounted temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted or temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted from one construction area to another within the project limits .
temporary concrete barrier applies to bridge construction projects that extend continuously for a maximum of three construction seasons .
num material section numb section numc and section numd num construction section num reset barrier when the construction operations require a change in protection of traffic or as directed .
store or transport the barrier as required .
num measurement and payment a temporary concrete barrier structure mounted reset .
linear foot b temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted reset .
linear foot c temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted reset .
linear foot d incidental work .
adhesive anchor systems will be measured and paid for incidental to the temporary concrete barrier structure mounted reset temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted reset and temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted reset .
labor materials tools equipment and incidentals all work involved in drilling holes bonding anchors and coring through concrete andor reinforcement and removal of barrier and subsequent repair of deck are included in contract unit price .
removal of unacceptable or failed field tested anchors as well as all patchingrepair of crackeddamaged concrete will be at the contractors expense with no additional cost to the department .
pin connected droppin anchor systems will be measured and paid for incidental to the temporary concrete barrier structure mounted reset temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted reset and temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted reset .
labor materials tools equipment and incidentals all work involved in drilling holes and coring through concrete andor reinforcement and removal of barrier and subsequent repair of deck are included in contract unit price .
num num num num change no .
num section numpaved shoulders type num type numf type nums and type numsp num descriptionthis work is construction of paved shoulders of the type indicated on a prepared surface .
num material aggregate basesection num bituminous surface treatmentsection num slurry sealsection num superpave asphalt mixture design hma base coursesection num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design wma base coursesection num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design hma wearing course srllsection num section num or section num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design wma wearing course srllsection num section num or section num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a combination base course .
num .
aggregate base .
section num num .
superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma base course for type numsp .
section num or section num b bituminous surface treatment for type num .
section num c double slurry seal for type nums .
apply a seal as specified in section num. d superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma wearing course for type numsp .
section num or section num e superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma wearing course for type numf .
section num or section num num measurement and paymentsquare yard num num num num initial edition section numpaved shoulders type num num descriptionthis work is construction of paved shoulders on a prepared surface .
num material aggregate basesection num bituminous prime coatsection num bituminous surface treatmentsection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a aggregate base .
section num except if granulated steel slag is used as a base material construct the top num inches of the aggregate base using either stone gravel or aircooled blast furnace slag aggregate .
b prime coat .
section num c bituminous surface treatment .
section num num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numh num num initial edition section numpaved shoulders type num num descriptionthis work is construction of paved shoulders type num and preparation of the underlying surface .
num material aggregate base section num bituminous prime coatsection num bituminous surface treatmentsection num shoulder backfill materialsection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
remove surplus material on existing shoulders to the bottom of the proposed base course or to a directed depth .
if the existing guide rail is to remain in place excavate the shoulder without disturbing the existing guide rail .
remove and shape material under and in back of existing guide rail to the elevation and slopes indicated or as directed .
the contractor is not required to compact behind the existing rail .
satisfactorily repair existing guide rail damaged or destroyed by the construction operations as directed .
satisfactorily dispose of excess or unsuitable material as directed .
b scarifying .
after removing surplus material and at directed locations scarify existing shoulder areas to a maximum depth of num inches below existing grade or to the directed depth .
c shaping and compacting .
shape and compact existing shoulder areas and low areas filled with graded material from the shaping operation to the bottom elevation of the proposed base course .
if there is insufficient graded material provide aggregate base course material to fill low areas to the bottom elevation of the proposed base course .
compact graded material or aggregate base course material as specified in section numf .
d aggregate base .
construct as specified in section num to the depth indicated .
e excavation .
where indicated excavate the shoulder area below the bottom of the proposed base course to the depth indicated or directed .
f shoulder backfill .
where the shoulder area was excavated below the bottom elevation of the proposed base course backfill shape and compact aggregate base course material to the bottom elevation of the proposed base course .
compact using rollers conforming to section numcnum.a num.b num.e or num .
the material is satisfactorily compacted when it does not move under the compaction equipment .
g prime coat .
section num h bituminous surface treatment .
section num num numb num num initial edition num measurement and payment a paved shoulders type num .
square yard b shoulder backfill .
cubic yard or ton the unit price includes excavation below the bottom of the proposed base course .
num numb num num change no .
num section numpaved shoulders type num type numf type nums and type numsp num descriptionthis work is construction of paved shoulders of the type indicated and preparation of the underlying surface .
num material bituminous surface treatmentsection num shoulder backfill if requiredsection num slurry sealsection num superpave asphalt mixture design hma base coursesection num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design wma base coursesection num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design hma wearing course srllsection num section num or section num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design wma wearing course srllsection num section num or section num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as specified in sections numa b c e and f and as follows a bituminous surface treatment for type num .
section num b double slurry seal for type nums .
apply a seal as specified in section num. c superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma base course for type numsp .
section num or section num d superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma wearing course for type numsp .
section num or section num e superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma wearing course for type numf .
section num section num or section num num measurement and payment a paved shoulders .
square yard b shoulder backfill .
cubic yard or ton the unit price includes excavation below the bottom of the proposed base course .
num num num num initial edition section numpaved shoulders type num num descriptionthis work is construction of paved shoulders .
num materialsame type as the material used to resurface the roadway except use srll .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numi num num change no .
num section numconcrete shoulders num descriptionthis work is construction of plain cement concrete pcc shoulders of the type indicated and roller compacted concrete rcc shoulders on a prepared surface .
num material a plain cement concrete shoulders .
class aa cement concretesection num joint sealing materialsection numa b or d covers for curing and protectionsection num concrete curing compoundsection numa concrete admixtures section num base coursessections num num and num deformed and plain bar dowelssection numa premolded expansion joint fillersection num longitudinal joint materialsection num b roller compacted concrete shoulders .
section num num construction a plain cement concrete shoulders .
construct pcc shoulders as shown on the standard drawing rc numm and as specified in section num except as follows f placement and initial strikeoff of concrete .
revise the third paragraph of section numf as follows do not damage the prepared surface while transporting or depositing concrete ahead of the paver .
if the prepared surface is an asphaltic leveling course on rubblized concrete treated base course of cement or asphalt or a no .
ogs subbase travel on the prepared surface only in the immediate area of the paving operation for the purpose of depositing concrete ahead of the paver .
do not use the prepared surface for hauling .
repair or replace any damaged areas to the satisfaction of the representative at no additional cost to the department .
g slipform paving method .
revise section numgnum as follows num .
joints .
saw cure and protect transverse and longitudinal contraction joints as specified in sections numi and j. i transverse joints .
revise sections numi as follows delete the second paragraph .
revise section numinum first paragraph as follows num .
contraction joints .
accurately mark using tacks or other approved methods the location for the center of the sawed transverse contraction joints .
saw joints with equipment having guides a blade guard watercooling system and cutdepth control .
provide adequate extra equipment and parts at the site before placing concrete and during sawing operations .
numb numb num num change no .
num b roller compacted concrete shoulders .
construct rcc shoulders as shown on the plans and as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a plain cement concrete shoulders .
square yard b roller compacted concrete shoulders .
square yard num numb num num initial edition section numhigh friction surface treatment hfst num descriptionthis work consists of furnishing and applying a high friction surface treatment hfst on asphalt and concrete pavements .
num materials a binder resin system binder .
use a polymeric or methyl methacrylate resin binder meeting the requirements in table num and listed in bulletin num or listed as an approved experimental evaluation resin by the departments new products and innovative section npi .
table num binder requirements property requirement test method polymeric resin mma resin viscosity poises class c num num class c num num astm d num mix for num to num minutes before testing .
use xnum for spindle selection .
perform testing at a temperature of num numf .
gel time minutes num minimum num minimum aashto m num prepare a num g sample test at num numf .
ultimate tensile strength psi num num aashto m num prepare type i specimen in accordance with astm d num durometer hardness shore d num to num num to num astm d num use the type num precisiontype d durometer method .
cure specimens for num days at num numf and relative humidity at num num .
test specimens at num numf without delay .
compressive strength psi num min .
at num hours num min .
at num days num min .
at num hours num min .
at num days astm c num prepare specimen according to method b num inch x num inch cube using num parts of sand to one part of mixed binder by volume .
use sand meeting astm c num num sand .
cure specimens for num days at num numf and relative humidity at num num .
test specimens at num numf without delay .
cure rate hours num max .
num max .
astm d num prepare a specimen of num wet mil thickness .
cure specimens for num hours max at num numf and relative humidity at num num .
test specimens at num numf without delay .
water absorption num max .
num max .
aashto m num cure specimens for num days at num numf and relative humidity at num num .
test specimens at num numf without delay after immersion .
adhesive strength psi num hours num min .
or num substrate failure num min .
or num substrate failure astm c num cure specimens for num hours at num numf and relative humidity at num num .
test specimens at num numf without delay .
prepare the samples in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b aggregate surface topping aggregate .
use clean dry highfriction bauxite aggregate that is free from foreign matter and meets the physical and chemical requirements of table num .
numb numb num num initial edition table num bauxite aggregate requirements properties test methods specifications polish stone value aashto t num num min .
resistance to degradation aashto t num num max .
la abrasion test aashto t num c grading on parent aggregate num max .
moisture content aashto t num num max .
aluminum oxide astm c num num min .
aggregate gradation aashto t num sieve designation total percent passing no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num c certification .
certify binder resin as specified in section numbnum .
for aggregate provide independent testing to verify table num requirements are met .
independent testing must be less than num months old at the time aggregate is furnished to the project .
submit for project specific local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section numanum.c .
num construction a qualification of the installer .
submit to the representative a minimum of three projects including the installers contact information .
the three projects must have a cumulative minimum of num square yards of hfst and must have been placed within the past three years .
all submitted projects must have a friction reading of at least num snnums within num days of the installation when tested in accordance with astm e num aashto t num .
an installer who does not meet these minimum requirements will be allowed to perform the installation operation if approved in writing by the binder manufacturer .
b quality control qc plan .
as specified in section numanum.a submit a project specific qc plan for approval to the assistant construction engineermanager before any material placement .
discuss the qc plan at the pre construction meeting .
the qc plan must include key personnel equipment materials proposed methods of installation and operation and the following requirements num .
a designated qc plan administrator who has full authority to institute any action necessary for the successful operation of the qc plan and is responsible for the following identify and provide to the representative contractor procedures for documenting quantities used for binder and aggregate at each hfst site so that application rates may be confirmed to be in accordance with the specification .
moisture control methods of aggregate .
cleaning and maintenance schedule for machinery and equipment .
corrective actions for unsatisfactory construction practices and deviations from the specifications .
any deviation from the approved qc plan will be cause for immediate suspension of operations .
contractor performance of required field qc sampling testing and record keeping in conformance with the approved qc plan and contract documents .
maintain and make available upon request complete records of sampling testing corrective actions and qc inspection results .
num .
a manufacturers technical person who is responsible for the following train and provide recommendations to construction personnel in the safe handling and proper application of materials before placing the hfst .
numb numf num num initial edition must be present at each site if the installer does not meet the minimum requirements specified in section numa .
must be present for the first num days of installation for installers that do meet the minimum requirements specified in section numa .
must be present at any job site that requires corrective work due to unacceptable skid number sn values as specified in table num .
or must be present as otherwise approved by the representative in the qc plan .
c delivery and storage of materials .
store materials in a clean dry environment and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
do not expose the aggregate to rain or moisture .
obtain and post at the storage areas the material safety data sheet msds product data sheet and other information from the manufacturer pertaining to the safe practices for the storage handling and disposal of the materials and to their health hazards .
provide a copy of such information to the representative .
storage containers must have the manufacturers name date of manufacture batchlot number trade name quantity and mixing ratio printed on the label .
d application conditions .
do not apply the binder on a wet surface when the temperature is below manufacturers recommendation or when the anticipated weather conditions would prevent the proper application of the surface treatment .
e surface preparation .
num .
general .
cover and protect all existing pavement markings and utilities manholesinlets that are adjacent to the hfst site as directed by the representative before performing surface preparation .
remove pavement markings that conflict with the hfst installation in accordance with section num .
prepare all pavement surfaces immediately before the installation of hfst .
wash pavement surfaces with a mild detergent solution to remove oils greases or other deleterious materials that remained after the surface preparation rinse with clean potable water and dry using a hot compressed air lance .
where cracks are present remove loose material with compressed air and pretreat cracks num inch or greater in width with the mixed binder .
do not overfill cracks if cracks are overfilled scarify the material to make it flush with the adjacent pavement after the binder material is cured .
install hfst after the binder in the pretreated cracks has gelled .
num .
asphalt pavement .
clean asphalt pavement surfaces using mechanical sweepers and high pressure air wash with sufficient oil traps .
mechanically sweep all surfaces to remove dirt loose aggregate debris and deleterious material .
vacuum sweep or air wash using a minimum of num cubic feet per minute and num pounds per square inch of clean and dry compressed air all surfaces to remove all dust debris and deleterious material .
do not apply hfst applications on new asphalt pavements until after a mandatory numday cure period .
num .
concrete pavement .
clean concrete pavement surfaces by shot blasting and vacuum sweeping .
shot blast all surfaces to remove all curing compounds loosely bonded mortar surface carbonation and deleterious material .
comply with the international concrete repair institute icri standard for surface roughness csp num .
provide the necessary concrete surface profile chips to visually verify the surface preparation .
after shot blasting vacuum sweep or air wash using a minimum of num cubic feet per minute and num pounds per square inch of clean and dry compressed air all surfaces to remove all dust debris and deleterious material .
do not apply hfst on concrete surfaces or repairs that are less than num days of age .
f application method .
table num and table num show the permissible main application methods depending on the size and average daily traffic adt of each individual hfst installation sites .
manual application is permissible at sites as a secondary method where for reasons of access or geometry the mechanized or semimechanized equipment can not physically be used as approved by the representative .
do not allow the mixed binder material to be exposed separate cure dry or otherwise harden in such a way as to impair retention and bonding of aggregate .
remove and replace any binder that becomes contaminated at no additional expense to the department .
immediately remove loose aggregate that falls onto any part of an active adjacent travel lane after the traffic is temporarily held .
contractor equipment and traffic is not allowed on the hfst during the curing period .
numf numf num num initial edition table num permissible methods of application for roads under num adt site size square yards main application method less than num section numfnum hand mixing and manual application section numfnum semi mechanized application or section numfnum automated continuous application num and above section numfnum semi mechanized application or section numfnum automated continuous application table num permissible methods of application for roads of num adt and above site size square yards main application method less than num section numfnum hand mixing and manual application section numfnum semi mechanized application or section numfnum automated continuous application num tonum section numfnum semi mechanized application or section numfnum automated continuous application larger than num section numfnum automated continuous application num .
hand mixing and manual application .
provide calibrated containers for proper proportioning of the binder components .
provide a clean dry container large enough to blend and mix the proper proportions of the binder .
uniformly mix the binder components to within num of the manufacturers specifications by volume using a lowspeed hightorque drill fitted with a helical stirrer moving the stirrer around to all the edges of the mixing container or as approved by the manufacturers technical person .
do not use wheel mixers or paddle mixers .
hand squeegee the mixed components onto the prepared pavement surface using a serrated edge squeegee at a uniform application thickness of num mils num square foot per gallon .
immediately after the binder application mechanically or manually spread the aggregate onto the wet uncured binder at a uniform rate of num pounds per square yard .
completely cover the wet uncured binder with aggregate to achieve a uniform surface with no exposed binder remaining visible on the surface .
spread the aggregate without displacing the wet binder film during placement .
minimize walking or standing on the binder .
do not allow loose aggregate onto any part of the adjacent active travel lanes .
num .
semi mechanized application .
machine mixing of binder machine application of aggregate hand squeegee work to apply mixed binder .
use equipment to continuously mix meter and monitor the binder .
if recommended by the binder manufacturer use a heated metering pump .
mix the binder in accordance with the manufacturers specifications num by volume .
hand squeegee the mixed binder onto the prepared pavement surface using a serrated edge squeegee at a uniform application thickness of num mils num square foot per gallon .
immediately after the binder application mechanically spread the aggregate onto the wet uncured binder at a uniform rate of num pounds per square yard .
do not allow loose aggregate onto any part of the adjacent active travel lanes .
hand spread aggregate is allowed as a secondary method where for reasons of access or geometry the mechanized equipment can not physically be used as approved by the representative .
completely cover the wet uncured binder with aggregate to achieve a uniform surface with no exposed binder remaining visible on the surface .
spread the aggregate without displacing the wet binder film during placement .
minimize walking or standing on the binder .
num .
automated continuous application .
machine mixing and application of binder machine application of aggregate no hand squeegee work allowed .
perform automated application using equipment that mixes meters monitors and applies the binder followed by application of the aggregate by use of equipment capable of placing binder and aggregate in one continuous pass up to a num foot width .
if recommended by the binder manufacturer use a heated metering pump .
blend and mix the binder in accordance with the manufacturers specification num by volume and place a uniform binder thickness of num mils num square foot per gallon .
apply the aggregate mechanically at a rate of numf num num num initial edition num pounds per square yard achieving saturation by vertical drop onto the wet uncured binder .
do not allow loose aggregate onto any part of the adjacent active travel lanes .
use equipment capable of continuously monitoring binder and aggregate application rates and capable of placing hfst at a minimum rate of num square yards per hour .
no walking or standing on the binder is permitted .
g aggregate cleanup .
after the binder treatment has cured and before opening to traffic reclaim the surplus aggregate by a vacuum sweeper .
collected aggregate can be reused if it is clean uncontaminated and dry .
if contaminated aggregate is mixed with virgin aggregate all the aggregate in the container will be considered contaminated and not acceptable for use in the hfst .
between num to num days after placing the hfst reclaim any loose aggregate using a vacuum sweeper .
this reclaimed aggregate can not be reused unless it is cleaned of all contamination dry and meets the requirements for virgin aggregate .
h performance testingacceptance .
after second aggregate sweeping as specified in section numg at localized areas with poor aggregate retention where binder material is visible reapply the hfst as directed by the representative at no additional cost to the department .
the department will conduct a calibrated skid test between num and num days after the hfst is completed .
the engineering district will request the skid testing from the departments pavement testing asset management section .
skid testing for each hfst site will be performed in accordance with astm e num aashto t num using a smooth tire lockwheel apparatus and table num .
table num number of snnums skid tests per hfst site per lane hfst site length number of runs per lane skid tests to obtain per run num feet to num feet num run num num skid tests run num num skid test greater than num feet num num for sites less than num feet skid testing is not required .
acceptance payment will be determined utilizing the factors in table num .
table num acceptance and payment factor per hfst site average snnums per hfst site hfst acceptance item pay factor sn num yes num sn num num yes num sn num no remove and replace or reapply at no additional cost to the department to obtain acceptable sns .
manufacturers technical person must approve any proposed reapplication treatments and be present during all corrective work .
representative must approve all corrective work plans before implementation .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard num numb num num initial edition section numshoulder rumble strips num descriptionthis work is the construction of rumble strips on the shoulder .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawing rc numm and as follows a equipment .
use a machine capable of providing a smooth cut without tearing or snagging and producing rumble strips as shown on the standard drawing rc numm .
equip machine with guides to provide uniformity and consistency in alignment of each cut with respect to the roadway .
b milling operation .
construct shoulder rumble strips to have finished dimensions and tolerances as shown on the standard drawing rcnumm .
check and verify the alignment of pattern edge during the milling operation .
construct shoulder rumble strips on new concrete shoulders only after curing as specified in section numl .
discontinue milling operations if satisfactory results are not being obtained and submit an alternate construction plan for approval .
at the end of each working day move all equipment to a location designated by the representative .
when constructing for ramps extend the mainline shoulder rumble strip pattern to the nose of the gore .
provide shoulder rumble strips on the right and left sides of the ramps to tie into the mainline shoulder rumble strip pattern at the nose of the gore .
c disposal of removed material .
remove and dispose of removed material in compliance with the dep residual waste regulations .
remove debris from areas disturbed by the milling operation before opening roadway to traffic .
num measurement and paymentmeasured longitudinally along edge of pavement .
the unit prices include removal and disposal of removed material .
a concrete shoulder rumble strips .
linear foot b bituminous shoulder rumble strips .
linear foot num numc num num initial edition section numbrick masonry num descriptionthis work is construction of brick masonry .
num material bricksection num mortarsection numb num construction a excavation .
excavate for masonry structure footer as required to form a compacted firm even foundation surface as specified in section num for class num excavation .
remove unsuitable material as specified in section numb .
b footing .
construct masonry structure footer as detailed and as specified in section num using class a cement concrete as specified in section num. c sample panel .
construct an onsite sample masonry panel approximately num feet square indicating the color range texture bonding pattern mortar color tooling and workmanship of the proposed brick masonry structure .
obtain approval of the sample panel before erecting the brick masonry .
d placing brick .
lay brick with exposed surfaces true to line in courses in a full bed and head of mortar and with joints not exceeding num inch in width .
do not furrow beds .
stagger head joints on adjoining courses onehalf brick as nearly as practicable .
make courses level except as otherwise indicated or directed .
construct at least one course in every six entirely of headers common bond unless otherwise directed .
saturate bricks with water and ensure that bricks are surface dry before placement .
do not use broken or chipped brick in exposed faces .
when making closures do not use less than the width of a brick and lay whole brick with the long side at right angle to the face .
e pointing .
finish mortar joints with a concave pointing tool to a depth not exceeding num inch and to an approved appearance .
f curing and protection .
do not place mortar and bricks or point in freezing weather unless otherwise authorized in writing .
protect brickwork and other masonry from freezing until cured .
provide adequate protection from frost and remove and replace work damaged by frost .
protect completed brickwork from the elements .
cure brickwork with water moisture for at least num days .
wet and clean the exposed brick faces with a num by volume solution of muriatic acid applied with stiff fiber brushes .
g select borrow excavation structural backfill .
backfill as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a brick masonry .
cubic yard b class a cement concrete .
cubic yard c excavation .
cubic yard for the class indicated .
num num num num change no .
num section nummodular architectural block system num descriptionthis work is construction of a modular architectural block system .
modular architectural block systems may be used for nonstructural landscape architecture applications according to the manufacturer drawings and recommendations .
an acceptable landscape architectural site can not have structures with foundations above the aggregate base within num feet of the back of the block system .
system construction is restricted to a height of num feet above grade .
num material a modular architectural blocks .
certify as specified in section numbnum section num and as follows machinemade blocks uniform in color with a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch and an absorption of num or less when tested according to astm c num and a minimum durability factor of num when tested according to astm c num procedure a. b geotextile .
class num type a nonwovenheatbonded as specified in section num. c coarse aggregate .
aashto num and section numcnum .
d mortar .
section numb e topsoil .
section num f seeding and soil supplements .
section num g rejection .
blocks exhibiting any of the following conditions are not accepted defects that indicate imperfect proportioning mixing and molding nonuniform or contrasting coloration as determined by the representative or surface defects such as honeycombing or open texture or areas damaged beyond satisfactory repair .
num constructionas indicated on the shop drawings and as follows excavate and place geotextile class num type a nonwovenheat bonded to the limits specified in section numa and c. after placing the geotextile construct a level num inches thick aggregate base according to the shop drawings .
ensure that each block course placed is level and aligned correctly with uniform staggered butt joints .
provide a block layout so as not to use any block smaller than half of a block in size .
clean the foreign material from the lower block course to ensure alignment and stability of the subsequent block course .
place the coarse aggregate backfill in numinch maximum lifts behind each block course against the geotextile before placing subsequent block courses .
use a vibratory plate to compact the course aggregate backfill before placing subsequent block courses .
wrap the geotextile material over the top of the coarse aggregate as indicated .
place the cap block course on a bed of mortar .
ensure butt joints in cap block course do not align with butt joints in preceding block course .
place topsoil and apply seeding and mulching using material and formula at rates typical for the project .
the contractor must be familiar with the placement of these block systems and certified by the block manufacturer .
if not familiar with the block systems and certified by the manufacturer provide an onsite trained technician from the block manufacturer at no expense to the department during installation until the representative is satisfied with workmanship .
num measurement and paymentsquare foot measured to equal the area of the vertical face of the blocks including vertical face concealed by finished grade .
excavation is incidental to this item .
num numb num num initial edition section numcement concrete paving for stream beds num descriptionthis work is construction of reinforced cement concrete paving for stream beds .
num material class a cement concretesection num joint sealing materialsection numb or c premolded expansion joint fillersection num reinforcementsections num and num curing and protecting coverssection num concrete curing compoundsection numa num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as specified in the applicable parts of section num and as follows a general .
excavate the streambed to the required dimensions .
remove unsuitable material below the paving bottom and replace with acceptable material .
compact the entire foundation and finish to a firm even surface .
protect paving portions under construction from the elements flowing water or other disturbances until curing is completed .
b reinforcement .
place reinforcement as indicated and then hold firmly in position during the placing of concrete .
c joints .
form or saw contraction joints num inch wide and num inches deep .
saw as soon as possible after the concrete sets sufficiently to preclude raveling during sawing and before any shrinkage cracking occurs in the concrete .
the depth of the saw cut may be decreased at the edge adjacent to the pavement if required to obtain a maximum depth without pavement damage .
tool the edges of construction joints to a numinch radius .
place numinch premolded expansion joint filler cut to conform to the crosssectional area at not more than num foot intervals at the end of curve sections at structures and at the end of a days work .
make the filler num inch less than the pavement depth .
seal joints as specified in section numn .
num measurement and payment a cement concrete paving for stream beds .
cubic yard b excavation .
cubic yard for removal of unsuitable material of the same class of excavation for the ditch or channel above the paving .
num numb num num change no .
num section numprecast cement concrete block slope wall castinplace cement concrete slab slope wall num descriptionthis work is construction of precast cement concrete block or castinplace cement concrete slab slope walls .
num material class a cement concretesection num reinforcementsections num and num precast cement concrete blockssection numa fine aggregate type asection num premolded expansion joint fillersection num joint sealing materialsection numb or c caulking compoundsection num waterstopssection numc watersection num mortarsection numb concrete curing compoundsection numa curing and protecting coverssection num geotextiles class num type asection num num constructionas indicated as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a precast cement concrete block .
place geotextiles class num type a as specified in section numc .
after placing the geotextiles carefully spread and shape the sand on the graded area .
except for cutoff walls lay the concrete blocks with long dimensions parallel to the toe wall bedded with numinch joints staggered and spaced as indicated .
straighten the courses by striking lightly with a sledgehammer against a suitable wood block placed against every fourth row .
maintain the specified gap between the blocks .
do not use cracked or defective blocks .
roll or tamp the blocks to a firm uniform elevation .
wet the joints with as much water as will be readily absorbed .
fill joints with mortar .
use mortar of as dry a consistency as practical and fill joints flush with the top surface of adjacent blocks .
strike off the mortar to form a smooth joint between the blocks .
pointing is not required .
if the bond has breaks around a block remove the block along with the mortar from the joint then clean and reset with fresh mortar as specified .
b castinplace cement concrete slab .
place the concrete directly on the prepared graded area without placing a sand bed .
construct the slabs of class a cement concrete num inches in depth and of uniform dimension not over num feet in length or width unless otherwise directed for closures .
numb numb num num change no .
num place indicated reinforcement midway between the top and bottom of the slabs .
score the slabs to a minimum depth of num inch in numfoot squares or as directed .
place numinch thick premolded expansion joint filler for the full depth between adjacent slabs and at contact points between slabs and structures .
construct a cutoff wall num inches wide and num inches deep monolithically with the slabs at each end of the slope paving .
construct toe walls to the dimensions indicated .
use class a cement concrete for toe and cutoff walls .
finish and cure the concrete as specified in the applicable requirements of sections numk and l. seal the joints as specified in section numn .
num measurement and payment a precast cement concrete block slope wall .
square yard b castinplace cement concrete slab slope wall .
square yard num numb num num change no .
num section numstone slope walls num descriptionthis work is construction of plain or mortared stone slope walls .
num material a stone .
use stones of acceptable quality sound and free from structural defects and foreign substances .
submit samples to the lts for petrographic examination before use unless the rock comes from material providing an approved type a aggregate .
use stones at least num inches thick of a length at least three times the thickness and of a width at least equal to the depth of the slope wall from the exposed surface of the slope wall to the subgrade except for spalls for packing voids .
for stones in excess of num inches thick use stones at least twice as long as their thickness .
b other material .
class a cement concretesection num premolded expansion joint fillersection num mortarsection numb except use type c fine aggregate .
filleracceptable coarse sand gravel or other material .
geotextiles class num type asection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a plain stone slope wall .
place geotextiles class num type a as specified in section numc .
after placing geotextiles set stones by hand and firmly bed on the prepared graded area with the length dimension approximately parallel to the toe wall foundation .
bed stones one against the other with ends and sides in contact then break joints .
lay the stones flat in toe wall and cutoff wall areas .
set the stones on edge in anchor wall areas and on sloped areas .
pack spaces between the larger stones with spalls then ram into place .
tamp the whole area of the wall to a tight even surface .
fill voids by sweeping filler over the surface .
b mortared stone slope wall .
set the stones as specified in section numa .
fill the voids with mortar and spalls as required to within num inch of the surface of the adjacent stone .
use mortar with a stiff but workable consistency .
pointing is not required .
do not hammer roll or ram the stones after mortaring .
if the bond around stones becomes broken remove stones and mortar reset the stones and fill the voids with mortar as specified .
do not place mortar in freezing weather unless permitted in writing and then only with adequate protection .
remove and replace work damaged by frost .
protect completed wall from the elements and cure with water for a period of at least num days .
c toe walls cutoff walls and anchor walls .
construct concrete toe anchor and cutoff walls as indicated and as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
obtain approval .
num measurement and payment a plain stone slope wall .
cubic yard b mortared stone slope wall .
cubic yard num num num num change no .
num section numrandom stone slope wall num descriptionthis work is construction of random stone slope walls .
num material coarse aggregate type a no .
num stonesection num class a cement concretesection num premolded expansion joint fillersection num joint sealing materialsection numb or c geotextiles class num type asection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows construct concrete toe anchor and cutoff walls as specified in section num .
where the wall butts another rigid concrete structure place a numinch premolded expansion joint filler .
seal the top num inch of the joint with joint sealing material .
place rock and geotextiles as specified in section num .
spotcheck the finished surface with a string line .
fill depressions and cut high areas greater than num inches as required .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard the department will measure to include toe anchor and cutoff walls .
num nume num num initial edition section numcement concrete sidewalks num descriptionthis work is construction of cement concrete sidewalks and curb ramps on an aggregate bed .
num material class a cement concretesection num aggregate section num premolded expansion joint fillersection num concrete curing compoundsection numa curing and protecting coverssection num mortarsection numd joint sealing materialsection num a b or c num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a preparation of foundation .
excavate as required and form the foundation at a depth num inches parallel with the finished surface of the sidewalk .
if directed remove unsuitable material as specified in section numb .
thoroughly compact the foundation finish to a firm even surface moisten if required .
b placing aggregate for bed .
spread aggregate on the prepared foundation to form a thoroughly compacted bed num inches deep .
c forms .
use acceptable wood or metal forms that extend the full depth of the concrete .
d concrete .
as specified in section num .
place concrete num inches deep .
strike off finish and test as specified in sections numk and p except that manual operations are allowed and a light broom finish applied .
form outside edges and joints with a numinch radiusedging tool .
form transverse dummy joints at numfoot intervals approximately num inch wide and at least num inch deep .
e expansion joints .
place numinch premolded expansion joint material for the full depth of the sidewalk opposite expansion joints in adjacent curb between the sidewalk and curb and between the sidewalk and rigid structures .
num .
seal joints .
clean joints of all scale dirt curing compound and other foreign material with a mechanized wire brush .
do not place poured jointsealing material if the air temperature is less than numf unless allowed .
use heating equipment of an indirect heating type constructed as a double boiler .
provide positive temperature control and mechanical agitation .
obtain the safe heating temperature and recommended pouring temperature from the manufacturers shipping container .
place the material within this temperature range but as close as possible to the recommended pouring temperature .
maintain a safe heating temperature .
maintain a single material batch at the pouring temperature for no more than num hours .
heat the material only once .
nume numb num num initial edition fill the joint reservoir created by the cleaning operation with sealing material to a depth num inch below the top of sidewalk .
do not allow sealing material to spread over concrete surfaces .
f removal of forms .
do not remove side forms until at least num hours after placing concrete .
after removal of forms fill minor honeycombed areas with mortar .
as directed remove and replace defective major honeycombed areas .
g backfilling .
after the concrete has cured for at least num hours backfill spaces adjacent to the sidewalk using acceptable embankment material as specified in section numbnum .
repair or replace existing pavement curb and sidewalk damaged due to construction .
satisfactorily dispose of unsuitable and surplus materials .
h curb ramps .
as required and where indicated construct cement concrete sidewalk for curb ramp configurations as indicated on standard drawing rc numm except for the detectable warning surface located at the bottom of each ramp .
construct the detectable warning surface as specified in section num .
create a slipresistant textured surface for the full width and length of the curb ramp and any sideflares excluding the detectable warning surface .
use a coarse stifftoothed broom to create a textured pattern that is worked perpendicular to the slopes of the curb ramp .
shape rounded edges instead of sharp angled edges while the concrete is still plastic for all slope changes of the curb ramp especially where the top of the curb ramp meets adjacent sidewalk surfaces .
embed detectable warning surface in fresh wet concrete at the proper location for the curb ramp before the wet concrete has set .
num measurement and payment a cement concrete sidewalks .
square yard b class numa excavation .
cubic yard num num num num initial edition section numselected material surfacing num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and placing of selected material on a prepared area .
num materialsection num num constructionuniformly spread aggregate upon the prepared areas in loose layers not exceeding num inches in depth without segregation of coarse and fine material .
compact with a roller as specified in section numcnum.a or num.b .
satisfactory compaction will be determined by the stability of the material under the specified compaction equipment .
if material used does not contain sufficient fines to properly lock under the roller add additional fines of the same material or limestone fines as necessary to obtain the compaction and stability .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard or ton num numh num num initial edition section numpermanent barricades num descriptionthis work is construction of permanent barricades .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a posts .
num .
wood posts .
no .
num stressrated southern pine no .
num douglas fir larch select structural hemfir mountain hemlock western hemlock or sound square edge red oaks seasoned before treatment as required by awpa or awpb standards and pressure treated according to awpa and awpb standards and as follows treatment species except red oaks retention pounds per cubic foot ammoniacal copper arsenite aca num pentachlorophenol num chromated copper arsenate cca types a b or c num red oaks pentachlorophenol num certify as specified in section numbnum .
a tolerance of num inch scant from nominal dimensions is required for the size of posts .
do not use posts that for any reason prevent attachment of guide rail fittings or alignment with other posts .
throughout the project use posts treated with the same type of preservative .
num .
steel posts .
section num b wood planks .
seasoned no .
num structural grade long leaf yellow pine or select structural grade douglas fir pressure treated as specified .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
c class a cement concrete .
section num d extruded aluminum channel .
section numa .
the contractor may use an alternate channel section of equal or greater section modulus with suitable dimensions to utilize the mounting hardware .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
e aluminum blanks for wood barricade panels .
section numa alloy numtnum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
f reflective sheeting .
section numc certify as specified in section numbnum .
g miscellaneous material .
aluminum hardware itemssection num aluminum round head wood or lag screwssection num other hardware itemssection num h extruded aluminum channel and aluminum blank preparation .
section numb num num num num initial edition num constructionas shown on the standard drawings using either aluminum channels or wood planks with wood or steel posts .
apply the reflective sheeting to the aluminum channels as specified in section numc or to the aluminum blank as specified in section numb .
the post spacing may vary to a maximum of num feet centertocenter .
mechanically drive posts or erect in concrete footings .
cut and peen bolts against the faces of nuts .
after erection treat galvanized components including the cut ends of bolts that are abraded or damaged as specified in section numanum .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num numb num num initial edition section numslab stabilization num descriptionthis work is the filling of voids beneath existing rigid base courses or pavements at locations as directed .
num material a cement .
section num b water .
section num c admixtures .
section num a multiphase wetting agent and an expansive agent may be used .
use an accelerator if required .
d pozzolan .
section num e rapid set concrete patching materials .
supplied by a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
use within the shelf life and temperature limitations set by the manufacturer .
f mix design .
submit a mix design to the district executive for review and acceptance before starting work .
include with the submittal independent laboratory testing showing num num and numday compressive strengths flowability shrinkage and expansion results and the time of initial set .
proportion the mix as follows one part cement by volume three parts pozzolan by volume admixturesif required and accepted wateran amount such that the time of efflux is within num seconds to num seconds astm c num furnish mix with an expansion of num to num astm c num an initial setting time of num hour to num hours aashto t num and bleeds no more than num of the volume astm c num .
a numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch minimum is required based on the average of five test cylinders ptm no .
num .
submit a new mix design if the source of any material is changed .
num construction a general .
do not begin this work until it is satisfactorily shown that qualified personnel with successful experience are available at the job .
do not perform work if daytime temperatures are below numf or if the subgrade andor base course material is frozen .
b deflection testing .
if no preliminary testing was performed test each joint and crack as directed and as follows do not perform testing if air temperature exceeds numf .
do not test during spring thaw conditions or if subgrade is frozen .
furnish and maintain four gauges capable of detecting slab movement to within num inch .
use approved gauge mounts .
furnish and maintain a vehicle having a dualtire single axle with an numpound single axle load .
verify by measuring the force of gravity upon a certified scale .
position two gauges as shown on the standard drawings .
zero both gauges to the pavement surface with no force on the slab on both sides of the joint or crack .
slowly move the test vehicle into position and stop when the test axle is in the position shown on the standard drawings for the loaded approach slab condition .
read both gauges and record the results .
numb numd num num initial edition move the test vehicle slowly across the joint and stop it in the position shown on the standard drawings for the loaded leave slab condition .
read both gauges and record the results .
repeat this procedure at every transverse joint and crack .
stabilize all joints or cracks that have a loaded slab corner deflection of num inch or more and a joint efficiency at num or more .
patch and stabilize all joints or cracks that have a loaded slab corner deflection of num inch or more and a joint efficiency of less than num .
joint efficiency je is defined as follows je unloaded slab corner deflection x num loaded slab corner deflection use the highest loaded slab corner deflection and the lowest joint efficiency at each joint or crack .
c equipment .
num .
grout plant .
provide a satisfactory positive displacement cement injection pump and a satisfactory mixing machine capable of operating at a minimum speed of num rpm and a maximum speed of num rpm .
num .
water tanker .
supply water from a water truck with adequate capacity and pressure for delivery to the grout machine .
num .
drill .
provide generator core drill and diamondtip core barrels or other satisfactory equipment capable of drilling the grout injection holes through the pavement and base material and equipment in satisfactory condition and operated to produce holes that are smooth vertical and do not break out the bottom of the slab .
num .
vertical movement testing .
supply satisfactory equipment to measure slab lift capable of detecting simultaneously the lift of the pavement edge or of any two outside slab corners adjacent to a joint and the adjoining shoulder .
use equipment with a capability of making these measurements to within num inch .
num .
miscellaneous .
provide necessary hoses valving and valve manifolds with positive cutoff and bypass provisions to control pressure and volume pressure gauges with gauge protectors expanding packers or hose for positive seal during grout injection hole washing tools drill steel bits and any other miscellaneous tools required .
d procedure .
num .
drilling holes .
drill grout injection holes in the pattern shown on the standard drawings or as directed .
drill holes not larger than num num inches in diameter vertical and round and to a depth sufficient to penetrate any stabilized base .
num .
mixing .
accurately measure the dry materials by mass if in bulk or provide them packaged in uniform volume sacks .
batch with water through a meter or scale that totals the days consumption .
do not hold mixed material in the mixer or injection pump sump for more than one hour after mixing .
dispose of material held for longer times .
make flowability measurements at least two times during each work shift .
num .
void filling .
during the filling operation use a positive means of monitoring lift as specified in section numcnum .
upward movement of the pavement greater than num inch will not be allowed .
lower an expanding rubber packer or hose connected to the discharge from the pump into the hole .
do not extend the discharge end of the packer or hose below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
pump each hole until maximum pressure is built up or material is observed flowing from hole to hole .
do not exceed a maximum pressure of num pounds per square inch unless otherwise directed .
monitor the pressure in the grout line .
protect the gauge from the grout slurry .
allow the water displaced from the void structure by the grout to flow out freely .
excessive loss of the grout through the cracks joints or from back pressure in the hose or in the shoulder area will not be allowed .
numd numc num num initial edition num .
correcting panel displacement .
grind pavement raised in excess of the numinch allowable tolerance to the correct grade .
grind as specified in section num except grind into the high slab .
num .
radial cracks .
radial cracks spreading outward from the grout injection holes indicate poor quality or improper methods .
stop work until the cause is determined and corrected .
num .
transverse cracks .
if transverse cracks develop between adjacent grout injection holes replace the entire slab at no cost to the department .
num .
hole patching .
upon completion of the work patch drill holes full depth with a rapid set nonshrink concrete patching material .
strike patches flush with the surface of the surrounding pavement .
e retesting .
twentyfour hours after grouting and before acceptance retest each stabilized joint or crack as specified in section numb .
regrout slabs that deflect num inch or more and retest .
the representative may accept any slab that continues to show movement in excess of that specified after two properly performed groutings or direct the removal and replacement with a full depth concrete patch as specified in section num and paid for separately .
f opening to traffic .
do not open to traffic for a minimum of num hours after grouting operations have been completed .
num measurement and payment a deflection test .
each b holes drilled .
each the price includes patching of the hole .
c grout material .
bags of cement the unit price includes an accelerator if required .
for each num linear feet of radial cracking as specified in section numdnum the department will reduce this pay item by one bag of cement .
the department will not pay for any wasted grout material .
num numf num num change no .
num section numwaterproofing num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and placing of adhesive preformed membrane waterproofing systems to concrete or other surfaces as indicated .
num materialunless specified or shown on the plans select from the waterproofing systems listed in bulletin num. a adhesives conditioners primers mastics twopart liquid urethane membranes and sealing tapes .
as recommended for use with the respective preformed membrane sheet materials .
contact the membrane manufacturer or its representative for instructions .
b adhesivebacked preformed membrane sheet .
furnish adhesivebacked preformed membrane sheet consisting of a sheet of rubberized asphalt or polymer modified bitumen permanently applied to a polyethylene film or reinforced with a stitchbonded polyesterpolypropylene fabric or reinforced with a fiberglass mesh and conforming to the minimum requirements specified in table a. c protective covers .
provide a numinch thick asphalt protective board or numpound roofing material without mica coating or approved equal that furnishes equivalent protection to the membrane from being cut scratched or otherwise damaged from the backfill or equipment .
for bridge deck surfaces the bituminous overlay is the protective cover .
d bonding material .
section num and as recommended by the manufacturer .
e manufacturer technical representative .
ensure that a trained manufacturers technical representative is present during every phase of application unless applied by a factory trained licensed installer as indicated by written approval from the material supplier .
the manufacturers technical representative will provide training and technical assistance on surface preparation equipment mixing of components type and method of application and finish .
f certification .
certify each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
visibly label all shipments on the membranes or containers with the manufacturers name membrane trade name lot number and material quantity .
table a adhesivebacked preformed membrane sheet minimum requirements preformed membrane sheets for bridge deck surfaces for surfaces other than bridge decks property test rubberized asphalt type modified bitumen type rubberized asphalt type modified bitumen type tensile strength lbsin minimumnum astm dnum num num num num num elongation at break min num astm dnum num num num num num num pliability astm dnum num no cracks no cracks no cracks no cracks thickness mils minimumnum astm dnum polyethylene film backednum fabric reinforced backednum num num num softening point f minimum astm dnum num num num num numf numd num num change no .
num permeance perms maximum astm enum method b num num num num puncture resistance lbs .
min astm enum num num num num notes num breaking factor in machine direction .
num method a numinch wide strip with numinch minimum initial separation and numinch gage length at num inches per minute .
average num samples .
num at numf numf .
num machine direction .
num numdegree bend over a numinch mandrel at numf .
num total thickness of preformed membrane sheet and polyethylene film or fabric reinforcement .
num when fiberglass is used as the reinforcing layer .
num construction a limitation of operations .
apply waterproofing only if protective covering or bituminous overlay can also be placed within a time that ensures that the membrane will not be damaged by personnel equipment exposure to weathering or from any other cause .
do not install any part of a waterproofing system in wet humid or foggy weather conditions or if the ambient or concrete surface temperature is below numf unless recommended by the manufacturer and authorized in writing by the representative .
apply the primer and waterproofing membrane only when the concrete surfaces are completely dry .
b surface preparation .
prepare the surface to be waterproofed to a condition free from holes or projections that might puncture or otherwise damage the membrane .
round outside or chamfer inside all sharp corners to be covered .
thoroughly clean all concrete surfaces that are to be waterproofed .
remove any excess laitance oil concrete curing compounds previous membrane treatments and other foreign materials by sandblasting .
remove all dirt dust loose or unsound concrete and other extraneous material by vacuuming or blowing with compressed air .
use a scratch coat of asphalt as a leveling course on decks that have been milled and lack a surface that is acceptable to receive a membrane system .
asphalt paving less than one year old does not require a primer or surface conditioner to achieve proper membrane adhesion .
c applying conditioners and primers .
thoroughly mix and continuously agitate all primers and conditioners during application according to the manufacturers instructions .
uniformly apply primer or conditioner to the entire area to be sealed at the rate stated in the manufacturers instructions by squeegee brush or roller .
do not apply the primer by spraying .
apply a second coat of primer to any areas of concrete that appear dry .
brush out primer that tends to puddle in low spots to allow complete drying .
cure the primer according to the manufacturers instructions .
do not let primed areas stand uncovered overnight .
after the primer has dried to a tack free condition use squeegees or brooms to break any bubbles in the primer .
unless otherwise directed do not repair the areas where bubbles were broken .
if membrane sheets are not placed over primer or conditioner within the time recommended by the manufacturer recoat the surfaces at no additional cost to the department .
before applying the primer or conditioner on a bridge deck place an oil resistant protective film held with an adhesive or tape to any deck areas that will later be covered by expansion dams or headers .
place membrane seal and asphalt concrete across the protective film .
if directed cut the protective film and the preformed sheet at or near the expansion joint .
d adhesivebacked preformed membrane waterproofing systems .
num .
installation on bridge decks .
before installing any membrane waterproofing systems drill drain holes install the drain pipes and galvanized screens as shown on the standard drawings .
apply the preformed membrane sheets adhesive side down to the primed or conditioned surfaces either by hand methods or by mechanical applicators .
start placing the membrane sheets at the low side of the deck and work using a shingle overlap toward the high side of the deck so that a shingled effect is achieved in the direction that the water numd nume num num change no .
num will drain .
use either of the two acceptable methods indicated if working from a curb line or barrier railing .
method one as shown on the standard drawings and as follows install a numinch by numinch cant strip made of wood metal plastic mastic or other approved joint sealing material at a num degree angle between the curb face or barrier railing and the deck .
next install a numinch wide curb strip with the top edge of the strip kept a minimum of num inch below the wearing surface of the asphalt overlay .
put the numinch wide curb strip into positive contact with the curb face cant strip and bridge deck .
seal the curb strip at the top edge with a twopart urethane liquid membrane or mastic .
overlap the curb strip that extends onto the deck with the next full width membrane sheet by butting the sheet against the curb face at the gutter line .
lay subsequent membrane sheets longitudinally with numinch minimum side laps and numinch minimum end laps .
install sheets across the deck until the high side curb line is reached .
install a curb strip along the high side curb line as indicated for the low side curb line .
method two apply a bead of twopart urethane liquid membrane or mastic as recommended by the manufacturer between the low side curb face or barrier railing and the deck extending from the gutter line num inches to num inches onto the deck .
butt the edge of the membrane firmly against the curb face at the gutter line and embed into the liquid membrane or mastic .
seal the top edge of the membrane at the curb face with a numinch bead of liquid membrane or mastic .
lay subsequent membrane sheets longitudinally and side lap with the adjacent sheets not less than num inches and end lap by not less than num inches .
install sheets across the deck until the high side curb line is reached .
terminate the membrane sheet against the high side curb face .
place a bead of liquid membrane or mastic between the high side curb face and deck .
butt the membrane against the curb face along the gutter line and embed into the bead of liquid membrane or mastic .
seal the top edge of the membrane along the gutter line with a numinch bead of liquid membrane or mastic .
after placement roll the membrane sheets with hand rollers or other apparatus as necessary to develop a firm and uniform bond with the primed or conditioned concrete surfaces .
seal with mastic any laps that were not thoroughly sealed by rolling .
use procedures that minimize wrinkles and air bubbles .
patch any tears cuts or narrow overlaps using a satisfactory adhesive and by placing sections of membrane sheet over the defective area in a manner that the patch extends at least num inches in every direction beyond the edges of the defect .
vent bubbles of numinch diameter and larger by piercing with a suitable instrument at a nearly horizontal angle and expel the trapped air .
coat vented bubbles with mastic sealer .
lay the bituminous overlay the same day as the membrane .
if overnight delay is unavoidable keep the construction traffic off the membrane and make a careful inspection for punctures before placing the bituminous overlay .
provide the bituminous overlay at a mix temperature between numf and numf .
rubber tired pavers and trucks may be driven on the membrane provided care is taken to prevent sudden starts and stops .
do not allow trucks to turn their front wheels while standing still .
num .
installation of other surfaces .
install as shown on the standard drawings and as specified in section numb and as follows on vertical surfaces place preformed membrane material with each successive horizontal sheet lapped top over bottom to the preceding by a minimum of num inches .
lap horizontal splices by a minimum of num inches .
seal the exposed edges of membrane sheets after the membrane is placed with a troweled bead of a manufacturers recommended mastic or twopart urethane liquid membrane or with sealing tape .
provide watertight construction by flashing all projecting pipes conduits sleeves or other facilities passing through the preformed membrane waterproofing with prefabricated or field fabricated boots fitted coverings or other approved devices as necessary .
install protective covers after the application of waterproofing membrane .
apply bonding material of a type recommended by the waterproofing manufacturer to the surface of the membrane and adjacent concrete surface at a rate approximately num gallon per square yard sufficient to hold the protective covering in position until the backfill is placed .
allow the bonding material to dry until tacky .
place the sheets of protective board or roofing material on the bonding material with edges or ends of the boards either loosely buttjointed or overlapped .
e nonstandard applications .
for areas not covered in this specification regarding special application techniques of the waterproofing materials or regarding special application restrictions follow the manufacturers recommendations .
numf numb num num change no .
num f defective work .
before placing backfill structural backfill subbase or bituminous material repair or replace damaged membranes or protective coverings according to the manufacturers recommendations at no additional expense to the department .
num measurement and payment a membrane waterproofing systems installed on bridge deck .
square yard b membrane waterproofing systems installed on other surfaces .
square yard num numc num num initial edition section numslabjacking num descriptionthis work is filling voids beneath existing rigid base courses or pavements and pressure jacking the pavement or base course to grade with cement grout .
num materialssection num modified as follows f mix design .
one part cement by volume three parts pozzolan by volume admixturesif required and accepted wateran amount such that the time of efflux is within num seconds to num seconds astm c num .
a more fluid mix with an efflux time of num seconds to num seconds may be used for the initial injection in each hole .
use a stiffer mix if the above mix fails to raise the pavement slab .
num construction a general .
section numa b equipment .
num .
grout plant .
section numcnum num .
water tanker .
section numcnum num .
drill .
section numcnum num .
miscellaneous .
section numcnum c slabjacking .
num .
drilling holes .
section numdnum except penetration of the stabilized base may not be necessary .
num .
mixing .
section numdnum num .
jacking .
connect an expanding rubber packer to the discharge hose on the grout pump and lower into the holes .
do not extend the discharge end of the packer below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
if jacking continuously reinforced concrete pavement pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within num foot plus or minus from a string line grade or as directed .
if jacking jointed slabs of concrete pavement and bridge end slabs pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within num foot plus or minus from a string line grade or as directed .
continuous pressures to num pounds per square inch will be allowed .
pressure to num pounds per square inch will be allowed only for short periods except in the event the pavement is bonded to the subgrade brief pressure rises to num pounds per square inch will be allowed .
num .
overjacking .
bring pavement raised above the tolerances listed above to grade by grinding .
if the overjacking is greater than num foot satisfactorily remove and replace the pavement in as specified in section num at no cost to the department .
num .
radial cracks .
section numdnum num .
transverse cracks .
section numdnum numc numb num num initial edition num .
hole patching .
section numdnum num measurement and payment a holes drilled .
section numb b grout material .
section numc num numa num num initial edition section numconstruction surveying num descriptionthis work is construction surveying for roadways roadway appurtenances and structures .
this work is to preserve vertical and horizontal controls and stationing throughout the construction phase up to and including final inspection and to provide the department inspection force with surveying control points to ensure quality of construction activities .
construction surveying is classified into six types as follows a construction surveying type a. surveying for new construction based on precise horizontal and vertical geometry established from surveys and num inch equal to num feet scale or num inch equal to num feet scale topographic mapping referenced to the national geodetic reference systempennsylvania state plane coordinate system .
b construction surveying type b. surveying for reconstruction with the alignment based on or related to asbuilt plan horizontal and vertical geometry or horizontal and vertical geometry produced on the existing roadway with minimal realignment .
the planimetric features and cross sections may have been developed from mapping or by electronic surveying .
c construction surveying type b modified .
surveying for reconstruction the alignment may have been based on various alignment data such as as built plan horizontal geometry horizontal geometry produced on the existing roadway random traverse baseline flat chain alignment along the center of the existing roadway or a combination of horizontal geometry random traverse base line andor flat chain alignment .
the vertical reference may have been based on plan profile or finish grade only cross sections related to the existing roadway section produced base line grades or templates based on the existing roadway cross sections .
d construction surveying type c. surveying for general maintenance construction based on existing roadway alignment with no horizontal or vertical geometry .
the drawings or detail sketches are developed using flat chain stations or segmentsoffsets for location reference .
grade and elevations relate to the existing roadway unless otherwise indicated .
e construction surveying type d. surveying for the construction or replacement of a bridge culvert arch or special structure .
the horizontal alignment is based on third order class i surveys closure num num .
reference all work points shown on the structure stakeout plan .
f construction surveying type d modified .
surveying for the minor or major rehabilitation of a bridge arch or culvert .
bridge rehabilitation may involve repair or replacement of part of the substructure or all or part of the superstructure .
rehabilitation of an arch or culvert may involve the repair andor extension of the existing structure .
num material a tack .
standard engineers tack .
numb numm num num initial edition b stake .
planed hardwood num inches .
c hub .
planed hardwood num inches .
d nail .
metal num pennyweight .
e guard stake .
stake num inches with space to identify the point guarded .
f grade point .
hub with engineers tack or numpennyweight spike .
g reference for bridge .
hub with engineers tack or iron pin with work center punch .
h paint .
latex yellow orange or white .
i flat .
planed hardwood num inches .
j pk nail .
hardened masonry nail .
k flagging .
vinyl material .
l benchmark discs .
furnished by the department .
m survey grade global navigation satellite system gnss inspection units .
including all necessary components communication devices integrated antennae and receiver controller andor data collector cables software operating manuals attachments and fastening hardware to meet the minimum requirements described below equipment must be operational and in good condition units of the same model and manufacturer as those used by the contractor .
be not more than num years old from the date of manufacturing to the time of delivery .
provide a dated copy of the manufacturers receipts for the purchase lease or rental of the units .
include the same versions of gnss planning software data collection software navigation software stakeout software and post processing software .
provide the most current version of properly licensed software including firmware available from the manufacturer at the time of delivery of the gnss units .
enabled for both standard usb cable and bluetooth wireless technology for data transfer .
ability to importexport and display point and alignment data in xml format .
internal or modular rechargeable battery system capable of operating a minimum of num hours may include interchangeable batteries including the battery charger .
hard or soft shell carry case and all appropriate operation manuals .
equipped to receive and be capable of utilizing real time kinematics rtk correctional data current version of radio technical commission for maritime services rtcm format compact measurement record cmr through integrated communications with a base gnss receiver which includes all necessary communication devices repeaters and systems to meet the minimum required accuracy and not exceed a num second latency at the rover .
the rtk data must be available at all locations across the entire contract site during all hours of construction and inspection operations .
capability to localize both the horizontal and vertical control to local project monumentation while numm numa num num initial edition utilizing rtk corrections from a reference network .
able to display the number of satellites tracked at any one time and indicate the accuracy quality of each measurement relative to the strength of signals and the geometric dilution of precision gdop .
include dual frequency receivers .
minimum required kinematic accuracy relative to primary project control horizontal num feet num parts per million vertical num feet num parts per million .
the data controller must allow the user to program and store multiple configurations also known as user preferences prior to the actual field measurements .
configurations must be capable of being stored and recalled in the field .
one fixed height rover rod num meters in length one attachable bipod which is compatible with the rover rod and one topo shoe for each unit provided .
a gnss unit set up fixed height tripod to operate as a base station must include all necessary additional cables hardware and fasteners .
must possess fcc license and maintain copy of license with equipment .
num construction a general .
the department will provide all pertinent survey information at the preconstruction conference .
do not begin construction surveying until on or after the notice to proceed .
upon completion of the survey work return all survey information to the representative .
the centerline or base lines or both side road and channel alignments plan base lines and interchange alignments will be established during project design .
if there is an extensive time lapse between the design phase and the beginning of work the representative will refurbish the alignment by marking and placing new guard stakes at the preestablished control points .
the contractor is responsible for verifying the alignment grades elevations and dimensions indicated .
the contractor is responsible for documenting any design error .
immediately notify the representative of any error omission or discrepancy upon discovery .
prior to removal of any existing benchmark discs give the representative written notice at least num weeks in advance of intent to remove the discs .
return the old discs to the representative .
place the new benchmark discs as directed at a point that can be occupied by a survey level rod .
provide a written statement of completion to the representative .
the representative will establish the new elevation on the new discs and stamp the discs accordingly .
provide all construction surveying services material and equipment needed to stake mark reference and monitor the project .
provide the representative with any assistance requested for verification of lines grades widths elevations and measurements or for qa verification .
record geometric or coordinate ties on all lines produced .
all survey activities will be performed according to the standards set forth in publication numm the departments surveying and mapping manual .
employ a professional land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state qualified in the use of highway and bridge plans cross sections and specifications and procedures for establishing line and grade structure locations and dimensions as may be required .
assume full responsibility for dimensions and elevations taken from control stakes and for the setting of structure location and line and grade stakes .
for type a type b type b modified type d and type d modified construction surveying provide a surveyor or engineer to work under the direction of the registered professional land surveyor or professional engineer .
this individual shall have as a minimum highway surveying knowledge skills and abilities equivalent to those of the states surveyor technician supervisor job classification or have experience in the prerequisite work elements of the national institute for certification in engineering technologies nicet transportation engineering technicianhighway surveys level iii technician .
numa numa num num initial edition references to minor structure work or minor roadway work refer to structure or roadway work representing num or less of the total contract price .
for all projects including those with unsuitable and borrow excavation material the department will provide all cross sections needed to compute quantities for payment purposes .
num .
automated machine guidance amg .
should the contractor elect to use this technology submit an amg qc plan to department as specified in section numb at least num week before the preconstruction conference .
as a minimum the amg qc plan must demonstrate that the grading control equipment meets the performance requirements within acceptable tolerances .
also the amg qc plan must provide a methodology that the representative can utilize to make checks for location grade flowline and position in accordance with the contract and as specified in section numb num .
the representative may perform spot checks of the machine control grading results surveying calculations records field procedures and actual staking .
provide base stations to be set up to facilitate inspection as directed .
if the representative determines the work is not being performed in a manner to assure accurate results the representative may order such work to be redone to the requirements of the contract documents at no additional cost to the department .
checks performed by the representative do not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the accuracy of work performed .
num .
department provided information and electronic files .
the representative will set the initial horizontal and vertical control points in the field for the project as indicated in the contract documents .
computer aided design drafting cadd files will include the following as applicable files representing the design surfaces files containing all horizontal and vertical alignment information documentation file describing all of the profiles primary design file cross section files all reference files no guarantee is made that the data systems used by the department will be directly compatible with the systems the contractor uses .
the department will develop and make available electronic data to the contractor for review as part of the contract bid documents as specified in section nume .
ensure the electronic data will function in the contractors machine control grading system prior to bid .
num .
survey control report .
develop and submit a contractor survey control report for all contracts which includes a contract pay item for construction surveying and when amg is utilized by the contractor .
survey control includes all statewide or local primary and secondary and horizontal and vertical controls used for the geospatial positioning of work items .
upon completion of initial survey reconnaissance control verification and num working days before the scheduled beginning of primary field operations submit the survey control report to the representative for acceptance .
submit the contractor survey control report form snum amgnum is to be signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor registered in the state .
include the following required control information tabular form is acceptable as part of the contractor survey control report form snumamgnum all contract control shown in the contract documents or in the contractor survey control report submit all contract control points or benchmarks o indicate if control points or benchmarks were recovered in the field and did they appear undisturbed .
o contract coordinate or elevation o field determined coordinate or elevation o contractor adjusted coordinate or elevation if necessary o point or benchmark intended to be used for construction purposes adjustment method used to balance or adjust the control e.g .
compass rule for baseline calibration report for gnss etc ..
attach a copy of the localization or site calibration necessary for survey grade gnss inspection and automated machine guidance along with any other miscellaneous adjustments .
control network diagram drawn to legible scale with roadways indicated numa numb num num initial edition pennsylvania state plane coordinate system pspcs north or south zone utilized horizontal datum used vertical datum used combined factor used to account for the ellipsoidal reduction factor and the grid scale factor indicate if additional new control is anticipated and where they would be set when a gnss base stations is used on a project either for inspection or stakeout provide the determined coordinate and elevation value of the station and the datum differential from existing control provided by the department do not begin primary field operations until the contractor survey control report is accepted by the representative .
upon acceptance of the contractor survey control report provide two signed and sealed copies to the representative .
provide all revisions or additions to contract control for the purpose of stakeout or layout of proposed work items in writing to the representative prior to beginning that revised portion of stakeout or layout work .
b construction surveying type a .
the centerline or base lines or both side road and channel alignments plan base lines and interchange alignments will be established on the ground at major control points .
the maximum interval between referenced major control points will not exceed num feet .
all major control points will be referenced and vertical benchmarks will be established at appropriate locations .
the contractor is responsible for the construction stakeout of the project using the horizontal and vertical control established by the department .
the contractor is responsible for relocation andor preservation of all horizontal references of major control points and vertical benchmarks established by the department .
provide the representative with a comprehensive stakeout schedule for development of the project listing areas or grading sections by plan designation or station location .
the contractor is responsible for checking the cross section original ground and template intersection on each side of the grade points at each station for accuracy and acceptance .
in case of any cross sectional or template discrepancy forward documentation to the representative prior to continuing any earth disturbance .
where the finished grade is num feet or more vertically above or below existing grade place an offset grade point with a guard stake at right angles to the centerline or base line controlling the grade points or at num degrees from the tangent to the curve at each numfoot station .
offset grade points from the intersection of the cross section template and original ground .
mark guard stakes according to the rounding station offset right or left of centerlinebase line and offset from the intersection of the template and original ground .
where finished grade is constructed using grading equipment controlled by amg systems the longitudinal interval for setting finished grade points may be increased to not more than num feet for tangent sections only provided the requirements of section numbnum are met .
establish a finished grade control line offset parallel to the centerline or base line by setting grade points at num foot intervals .
establish grade points at numfoot intervals for arcscurves equal to or greater than num degrees .
provide control points and conventional grade stakes at critical points such as but not limited to pcs pts superelevation points and other critical points required for the construction of drainage and roadway structures .
furnish the representative with grade sheets for all grade points and finish grade points .
show the grade point elevation finish grade elevation and offset right or left of the grade point or finish grade point from the centerline or base line on form dnum .
the contractor is responsible for staking the plan alignments and grade points for temporary construction easements and temporary roadways or crossovers .
the contractor is responsible for staking legal rightofway lines and temporary easement lines if required .
provide the representative with all coordinate networks used in staking the project including coordinate geometry horizontal geometry and referenced network points .
num .
automated machine guidance amg include with the amg qc plan the equipment type control software manufacturer and version grading plans quality processes tolerance requirements and the proposed location of the local gnss base station used for broadcasting differential correction data to rover units to the department in accordance with section numb .
provide the representative with a survey grade gnss inspection units for use during the duration of the contract .
maintain the units until num days after physical work has been satisfactorily completed .
after the num days units will be returned .
maintain units in good working condition and provide replacement due to breakdown damage or theft within num working days .
ensure all gps units are fully operational .
review and apply data the department has provided to perform amg machine control grading .
numb numb num num initial edition the contractor bears all costs including but not limited to the cost of actual reconstruction of work that may be incurred due to errors in application of amg machine control grading techniques .
correction of grade elevation errors and associated quantity adjustments resulting from the contractors activities are at no cost to the department .
convert the departments electronic data into a format compatible with the machine control system .
manipulation of the departments electronic data is undertaken at the contractors own risk .
check and recalibrate if necessary the gnss machine control system at the beginning of each work day .
download data to the inspection units for use by the representative and include horizontal and vertical alignments project control network points and numd models .
utilize the department provided survey control network as the spatial reference datum network from which rtk base corrections are derived .
select communication techniques and devices to be used to ensure the consistent and reliable delivery of rtk correctional data from gnss units .
meet the same accuracy requirements as conventional grading construction .
this may require supplemental technologies to meet final grade accuracy when using amg .
establish secondary control points at appropriate intervals and at locations along the length of the project and outside the project limits andor where work is performed beyond the project limits as required at intervals not to exceed num feet .
determine the horizontal position of these points using static or rtk gps sessions or by traverse connection from the original baseline control points .
establish the elevation of these control points using differential leveling from the project benchmarks forming closed loops .
be responsible for all errors .
correct all deficiencies to the satisfaction of the representative at no additional cost to the department .
preserve all reference points and monuments that are established by the representative within the project limits .
reestablish reference points that have not been preserved at no additional cost to the department .
provide a revised survey control report to the department for any reestablished reference points .
provide controls points and conventional grade stakes at critical points such as but not limited to pcs pts superelevation points and other critical points required for the construction of drainage and roadway structures .
provide electronic construction data for the machinecontrolled data surface model compatible with microstation .
mount the base station semipermanently in a stable and secure location where it will not be disturbed by construction activities or be easily damaged by vandalism .
select a location where the base station will be capable of providing radio signal coverage over the entire contract area .
if the base station can not broadcast a signal that covers the entire site provide adequate repeater radios or other communications .
do not relocate a gnss unit installed as a base station for inspection operations without the approval of the representative .
at a minimum set grade points at right angles to the centerline on tangents and radial offsets on curves at num foot intervals the entire length of mainline .
in addition set a minimum of two grade points on each ramp on each intersecting roadway and on projects less than num feet in length .
tabulate and provide offsets and elevations of all grade points using form dnum to the representative .
accompany rough grade and fine grade stakes with a guard stake for easy identification .
provide other points as directed for verification of accuracy by the department .
within num feet horizontally andor longitudinally from any tieins to existing pavement or structures set grade points at numfoot intervals in accordance with section numb .
provide the same project specific control network to the department as that used during construction .
the department will review the network and monitor the project .
test the finished surface at all hinge points andor centerline edge of lane and edge of shoulders on the cross section at all critical locations and as established in the amg qc plan .
all locations are required to be within num inch .
upon successful quality control testing notify the representative the finished surface is ready for acceptance .
at a minimum the representative will witness grade testing of the finished surface at all hinge points andor centerline edge of lane and edge of shoulders on the cross section at random locations every num feet in accordance with ptm no .
num for acceptance .
test results will be documented on form snumamgnum .
if more than num of all acceptance tests are determined to exceed num inch in any phase of the project the representative may require setting grade points at num foot intervals and at num foot intervals for arcscurves equal to or greater than num degrees in accordance with section numb .
num.a survey grade gnss inspection unit training .
for all survey grade gnss inspection units provide department staff and or their representatives with a minimum of two separate num hour minimum training sessions on the use and operation of the units during the first year of the contract .
provide the first session within num week of delivery of the units to the site .
provide the second session upon the request of the department .
provide one additional num hour minimum training session during each additional contract year that the units are in service .
numb numf num num initial edition submit qualifications of the training facilitator and proposed training location to the representative for approval .
all training must be from a manufacturerverified trainer who is approved by the representative .
c construction surveying type b .
provide this type of surveying for roadway construction with minor structure work .
construction surveying required for the minor structure work if any is incidental .
perform incidental surveying as specified for the applicable type .
the centerline or base lines or both and side road and channel alignments will be established on the ground at major control points .
the maximum interval between referenced major control points will not exceed num feet .
all major control points will be referenced and vertical benchmarks will be established at appropriate locations .
the contractor is responsible for the construction stakeout of the project using the horizontal and vertical control established by the department .
the contractor is responsible for relocation and or preservation of all horizontal references of major control points and vertical benchmarks established by the department .
establish all base lines grade lines parallel lines traverse lines and reference lines deemed necessary by the engineer to control construction operations .
the contractor is responsible for staking the plan alignment and grade for temporary roadways and crossovers .
the contractor is responsible for staking legal rightofway lines and temporary easement lines as required to construct the project .
stake the lines based on plan data .
provide the representative with all coordinate networks used in staking the project including coordinate geometry horizontal geometry and reference network points .
d construction surveying type b modified .
provide this type of surveying for roadway construction with minor structure work .
construction surveying required for the minor structure work if any is incidental .
perform incidental surveying as specified for the applicable type .
the centerline or base lines or both will be established on the ground at major control points .
vertical control will be established at appropriate locations .
legal rightofway lines or temporary easement lines will be established as required at project locations controlled by flat chain stations .
the department will stake rw on flat chain projects if curved alignments or complex configurations are beyond the scope of the flat chain survey .
the contractor is responsible for the construction stakeout of the project using the alignment established by the department .
the contractor is responsible for the relocation or preservation or both of any major control point or vertical benchmark .
the contractor is responsible for placing and maintaining all grade points guard stakes nails hubs or paint marks necessary to control construction of the project .
the contractor is responsible for staking plan alignment and grade for temporary roadways and crossovers .
the contractor is responsible for staking legal rightofway lines or temporary easement lines where controlled by horizontal geometry .
stake the lines based on plan data .
e construction surveying type c. only the limits of work will be established by marking the beginning and ending station or the beginning and ending segments and offsets .
the limits of work will be established only once during the life of the contract .
for group contracts the limits of work will be established using state route and segment markers .
establish the stationing or segments and offsets or both at numfoot intervals between the limits of work by flat chain measurements .
establish stationing at the centerline or edges of pavement with paint marks or by placing stakes at right angles to the station or segmentoffset .
place additional stakes or marks as necessary to control construction operations .
f construction surveying type d. provide this type of surveying for structure construction with minor roadway work .
construction required for the minor roadway work if any is incidental .
perform incidental surveying as specified for the applicable type .
all centerline or base line or both structure control points will be established on the ground .
the contractor is responsible for the construction stakeout of bridges arches culverts and other special structures as required to facilitate and control the work using the horizontal and vertical control established by the department .
review the structure stakeout plan sheet designating work points to be referenced with the representative before performing the field stakeout .
numf numa num num initial edition obtain approval for any variance or exception to the field stakeout plan before performing the work .
reference all designated work points .
reference each work point on a direct line through any adjacent work points .
establish three reference points for the work point at each corner of abutments and at each end of wingwalls .
establish three reference points for work points on proprietary or other walls .
for land piers establish three reference points on each side of the substructure for work points on the centerline of bearing .
the distance between a work point and its first reference point is to be less than num feet with the exception of centerline pier reference .
establish a third order class i traverse network at each structure site coordinating abutment and pier reference .
show the precision ratio and comparisons of longitudinal distances .
furnish the representative prior to any structure construction activities with a field stakeout sketch a sketch will not be required for single span bridge culverts and arches based on the structure plan stakeout showing only centerlinebase line stations span lengths reference angles and reference lengths .
show two described vertical benchmarks .
furnish the representative prior to any structure construction activities with a sketch showing a triangulation network or traverse network at each structure site a sketch will not be required for single span bridge culverts and arches .
for waterbound piers include base line control showing length of sides a and b and interior angles a and b .
include the date structure description contractors name and person responsible for the stakeout on field stakeout sketches .
g construction surveying type d modified .
provide this type of surveying for structure constructionrehabilitation with minor roadway work .
construction surveying required for the minor roadway work if any is incidental .
perform incidental surveying as specified for the applicable type .
all centerline or base line or both structure control points will be established on the ground .
the contractor is responsible for the construction stakeout of the structure rehabilitation using the horizontal and vertical control established by the department .
review the structure stakeout plan sheet designating the work points to be referenced with the representative before performing the field stakeout .
reference all designated work points .
reference each work point on a direct line through any adjacent work points .
establish three reference points for the work point at each corner of abutments and at each end of wingwalls .
for land piers establish three reference points on each side of the substructure for work points on the centerline of bearing or as indicated on the structure plan stakeout .
the distance between a work point and its first reference point is to be less than num feet with the exception of pier reference .
for waterbound piers use base line reference .
furnish the representative prior to any structure construction activities with a field stakeout sketch based on the structure plan stakeout showing reference points lengths vertical control and pertinent plan data .
furnish the representative prior to any structure construction activities with a separate sketch showing a triangulation network or traverse network or methodology for a mathematical check of the survey produced .
num measurement and payment a construction surveying .
lump sum for the type indicated .
the department will pay for this item as specified in section num in four payments according to the following schedule when work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item the department will pay num of the amount bid for this item .
when work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item the department will pay num of the amount bid for this item .
when work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item the department will pay num of the amount bid for this item .
upon completion of the project the department will pay the remaining num of the amount bid for this item .
numa numc num num initial edition one survey grade gnss inspection unit training maintenance calibration electronic file data preparation and required system checks are incidental to this item .
b unidentified work .
the department will pay for unidentified work as follows num .
negotiated price .
at an agreed upon price .
the department and the contractor will agree upon this price before performing the work .
num .
force account basis .
section numd c additional survey grade gnss inspection units as requested by the department .
each num numc num initial edition section nummicrocomputer system num descriptionthis work is furnishing setting up and maintaining a microcomputer of the type specified and a battery backup system if indicated for the exclusive use of department personnel .
num material a general .
provide all material necessary for setup and operation of a microcomputer system including all cords and cabling .
upon delivery to the field office ensure that all hardware and software are compatible and operational .
b microcomputer .
the type a microcomputer is a desktop or tower model .
the type c microcomputer is a laptop computer with an attached numinch widescreen wxgalcd panel screen having a minimum native resolution of num x num .
the minimum hardware specifications for each type microcomputer systems are as indicated in table a and as follows num .
monitor .
for both the type a and type c microcomputer systems provide an external numinch minimum widescreen lcd monitor with wxga video support having at a minimum native resolution of num x num with num num contrast ratio with vga dvi and hdmi connectors .
num .
surge protector .
provide a surge protector for each computer type a andor type c with a minimum of six ac outlets and one telephone outlet with a num foot minimum length cord having a line voltage regulatorconditioner that protects against chronic high voltage voltage spikes and radio frequency interference .
num .
input devices .
provide a windows compatible num key full size multimedia function keyboard usb with a num foot minimum length cord .
provide a microsoft compatible num button optical scrolling mouse usb with a num foot minimum length cord .
provide both devices for type a andor type c computers one each .
num .
docking station .
docking station .
provide a compatible docking station for all type c microcomputers with a minimum of num usb num ports num usb num ports along with dvi hdmi ethernet connectivity and audio inout ports .
num .
miscellaneous .
provide two lithiumion batteries with num hours minimum per battery ac adapter automobile adapter with a type c microcomputer .
provide a carrying case large enough to carry the type c microcomputer spare battery pack external pointing device mouse ac adapter automobile adapter .
c software .
all system software must be installed on the c drive partition .
provide ms windows num professional num bit operating system with service pack num to include all windows and microsoft updates .
set up this operating system as a new installation not as an upgrade from a previously installed older version of windows .
provide ms office num professional numbit with all microsoft office updates .
provide acrobat reader num xi or newer with the most current version .
provide winzip version num or newer .
provide sun microsystems java with most current version with all updates .
numc num num initial edition provide adobe flash player with most current version with all updates .
provide antivirus software that meets the departments current standard with updates for the duration of the project .
provide the inspectorincharge with all oem software cdslicenses manuals and documentation to be maintained in the departments project field office for the duration of the project .
provide the internet explorer browser that meets the departments current standard for ecms .
d battery backup system .
for the type a microcomputer provide a ups uninterrupted power supply battery backup system meeting the following minimum requirements load wattage minimum num full load maximum time num minutes number ac outlets regulated num number ac outlets wbattery backup num number ac outlets with noise isolation and spike protection num indicator lights line and battery power circuit protection line breaker battery internal fuse alarm audible tone during battery operation with defeat switch table a minimum specifications system type type a type c central processing unit min intel core inum inter core inum cpu speed min num ghz intel vpro num ghz intel vpro random accessible memory ram min numgb ram num gb ram internal sata hard drive min numgb sata numgbs num gb sata numgbs internal dvd burner min numx dvdrw sata numx cddvd burner usb num button optical mouse yes yes internal pointing device touchpad yes usb num ports min num num front num rear num external usb num numport hub min yes network port yes yes type ii pcmcia slots num e maintenance agreement .
furnish a maintenance agreement which provides for on site repair service within num hours of notification .
if the system can not be repaired provide a replacement within num hours of notification .
f compatibility .
all references to compatibility require that compatibility be demonstrated in the inspectors field office .
num constructionfurnish microcomputers for department use no later than num working days after the notice to proceed date or num days before the scheduled start of work .
provide the type of microcomputer specified and install in the inspectors field office .
maintain the system from installation until num days after physical work including work on punch list items identified during the final inspection has been satisfactorily completed unless released earlier num numa num initial edition by the representative .
the representative may direct that the system be maintained for more than num days after physical work has been satisfactorily completed as necessary to allow time for department personnel to process outstanding project records due to the contractors failure to submit complete andor correct required certificates or documents as established during the final inspection .
remove and properly dispose of all dispensable items for the life of the project and upon release by the representative .
num measurement and paymentlump sum for the type indicated .
paid in three payments in accordance with the following schedule whenever all the requirements specified of section numa have been met and compatibility satisfactorily demonstrated to the representative num of the amount bid for this item will be paid .
whenever work is performed equal to num of the original contract amount excluding the bid price for this item num of the amount bid for this item will be paid .
whenever work is performed equal to num of the original contract amount excluding the bid price for this item the remaining num of the amount bid for this item will be paid .
a price adjustments .
adjustments to the lump sum prices for the indicated type microcomputer system as applicable will be made as follows num .
time extensions and reductions .
in the event the time for completion of all work on the project is extended or reduced as specified in section num to be more than a percent or less than b percent of the original contract time where a and b are as specified in table b an appropriate adjustment payment to the contractor or rebate to the department will be made to the lump sum prices bid for the indicated microcomputer systems as applicable for that portion of adjusted contract time in excess of a percent of payment or less than b percent of rebate the original contract time at the following daily rate daily price adjustment rate num x contract lump sum price original contract time in days table b contract time original contract time in days percent from more than to and including a b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
systems maintained more than num days after physical work completion .
in the event the representative directs that the microcomputer systems be maintained for more than num days after the date of physical work completion as specified in section num an appropriate adjustment payment to the contractor will be made to the lump sum prices bid for the indicated microcomputer systems as applicable for the days in excess of num until released by the representative at the daily price adjustment rate specified in section numanum .
no adjustment will be made if the representative directs that the microcomputer systems be maintained for more than num days after the date of physical work completion due to the contractors failure to submit complete andor correct required certificates or documents as established during the final inspection .
num numa num num change no .
num section numconstruction scheduling num descriptionthis work is the preparation maintenance and revision of the construction project schedule using a narrative critical path method cpm or resource loaded cpm schedule as indicated to monitor progress of project operations .
for designbuild or partial designbuild projects include in the construction schedule design activities associated with the designbuild elements of the project as well as the review and approval durations as indicated in the contract provisions .
definitions are as follows controlling activities .
those activities that control the total length of the project time by forming a chain that makes up the largest sum of activity durations .
in the cpm schedule these activities are also identified as critical path activities .
float .
the length of time that the start or finish of an activity can be delayed without affecting the required completion date of the project .
float is a shared commodity .
redundant relationship .
a relationship representing a link between activities that is also represented in a parallel path or relationship .
redundant relationships can be removed without impacting the logic or calculations of the schedule and may add unnecessary complexity to the schedule and hinder review and analysis .
resource .
the labor and equipment required by an activity and needed to perform the work of the project .
num materialthe departments software standard for scheduling and project management is asta powerproject produced by elecosoft .
the contractor may use a commercial scheduling software package to produce the schedule and reports according to the requirements of this specification .
the contractor may elect to submit the narrative schedule or related reports to the representative in electronic format .
in all cases the cpm schedule must be developed in asta powerproject .pp or a compatible format .mpp .xml .xer .pnumb .dir and .stx .
verify the compatibility of the other software packages with the departments version of asta powerproject .
the cpm schedule must be submitted to the representative in an asta powerproject .pp electronic format .
if the cpm schedule is developed in an asta powerproject compatible format convert the native cpm schedule format to an asta powerproject .pp file format using the penndot construction template before submitting to the representative .
ensure the converted file is a one to one comparison between the native format and the asta powerproject file before submittal .
upload and submit the asta powerproject .pp schedule through the penndot project collaboration center ppcc .
uploading the schedule into ppcc will allow all authorized parties to view the current baseline schedule .
the department will then review the submitted schedule and will either accept or reject the schedule .
once the schedule is accepted by the department the asta powerproject .pp file will be the governing schedule on record .
after the schedule is accepted the department will download the accepted schedule from ppcc and a baseline must be created .
any subsequent changes to the baseline schedule through the submission of any updates revisions or recovery schedules will also be uploaded to the project within ppcc in the same way in order to maintain a record of schedule versions .
num constructionas specified in section numb construction project scheduling and as follows a narrative schedule .
base the initial narrative schedule on the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal .
submit the narrative schedule within num calendar days after the actual notice to proceed date .
the district executive may withhold current estimate payments until the narrative schedule is submitted and accepted .
if the actual notice to proceed is issued after the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal submit a narrative schedule based on the actual notice to proceed date within num calendar days after the actual notice to proceed date .
the narrative schedule based on the actual notice to proceed date will not be considered without prior or concurrent submission of the narrative schedule based on the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal .
the representative will review and respond to the detailed narrative schedule and supporting documentation numa numb num num change no .
num within num calendar days of receipt .
include as a minimum the following in the initial narrative schedule and in all schedule revisions activity description activity duration in working days and start and finish calendar dates of activities .
in addition submit a workday calendar showing work days and nonwork days number of shifts per day and number of hours per shift .
provide enough activities to demonstrate the necessary interdependencies .
use the above information to complete a narrative description of the construction schedule .
if the narrative schedule is not received within num calendar days after the actual notice to proceed date the contractor will be required to attend a scheduling workshop in order to prepare an acceptable narrative schedule .
the district executive may elect not to release current estimate payments until the narrative schedule is submitted and accepted .
b cpm schedule .
as specified in section numb construction project scheduling and as follows num .
num calendar day work plan .
at the preconstruction conference submit a num calendar day work plan in an asta powerproject .pp file format that includes a breakdown of activities .
provide a generalized project schedule for the balance of the work to meet the required completion date and specified milestone dates .
in lieu of the num calendar day work plan the contractor may submit the cpm schedule specified in section numbnum within num calendar days after the contract execution .
maintain and submit on a biweekly basis a num calendar day work plan until the cpm schedule is accepted .
num .
bid preparation schedule .
submit the schedule used to prepare the contract bid within num calendar days after contract execution in an asta powerproject .pp file format .
at a minimum this schedule should include the scheduling concepts and logic that were used in sequencing work activities in order to prepare the contract bid a workday calendar that identifies work days and nonwork days the number of shifts per day and the number of hours per shift and identify the labor and equipment resources assigned to each parent activity .
in lieu of the bid preparation schedule the contractor may submit the cpm schedule specified in section numbnum within num calendar days after the contract execution .
the district executive after consultation with the contractor may withhold current estimate payments until the bid preparation schedule or cpm schedule is submitted and accepted .
num .
cpm schedule .
base the initial cpm schedule on the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal .
submit the cpm schedule in an asta powerproject .pp file format using the penndot construction template as defined in publication num within num calendar days after the actual notice to proceed date .
if the actual notice to proceed is issued after the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal submit a cpm schedule based on the anticipated notice to proceed date concurrently with a cpm schedule based on the actual notice to proceed date within num calendar days after the actual notice to proceed date .
the cpm schedule based on the actual notice to proceed date will not be considered without prior or concurrent submission of the cpm schedule based on the anticipated notice to proceed date in the proposal .
include at a minimum the following information for each activity in the initial schedule submission and all subsequent submissions activity id activity description activity duration in working days early start date early finish date late start date late finish date constraint dates constraint type total float numb numb num num change no .
num predecessor successor calendar resource allocation if applicable resource effort if applicable the representative will review and respond to the detailed cpm schedule within num calendar days of receipt .
if the department does not accept the schedule revise the schedule and resubmit within num days of receiving the departments comments .
if an updated schedule is not submitted in the format required the district executive may withhold current estimate payment at the departments sole discretion until acceptable monthly updates as specified herein are received .
a standardized list of activities must be utilized in all cpm and cpm resource loaded schedules .
these activities must be used verbatim if they are applicable to the project .
the description of these activities can not be modified .
the following is a list of standardized activities that must be included where applicable project award notice to proceed anticipated unless issued after the anticipated then use actual physical work start paving deadline implement detour remove detour open to traffic project completion use a unique activity id to describe each activity throughout the duration of the project .
limit activities with duration times in excess of num working days to a minimum .
provide enough activities to demonstrate the necessary interdependencies .
limit the fineness of detail where possible to a minimum numday activity duration .
all activities with the exception of the single start activity and the single finish activity must have at least one predecessor and one successor .
the number of redundant relationships is not to exceed num of the total number of relationships in the schedule .
submit the cpm schedule with the following format make all relationships finish to start relationships .
identify a single start activity and a single finish activity for the entire schedule .
incorporate laglead times as a separate activity .
incorporate the standardized activities verbatim if applicable to the project .
start on constraint on notice to proceed .
finish on constraint on project completion .
interim milestone included in the contract should use soft constraints i.e .
start on or after or finish on or before and utilize a num day no holiday calendar .
submit schedule updates at the frequency specified in section numb using the accepted baseline schedule as the basis for the update .
ensure updates are prepared in the proper format and include the content as described .
failure to submit acceptable schedule updates will impact contractor evaluations .
progress the schedule through the end of the established progress period with actual start and finish dates and overall percent completes .
include with updates electronic schedule in asta powerproject .pp file format for review along with a .pdf file in bar chart format or other format the department has approved submitted in ppcc .
a narrative report including o the reason for the update .
o any schedule concerns .
a pdf of the updated schedule showing the following information in the penndot construction template the view construction update includes all of these columns o activity id o activity description numb numc num num change no .
num o activity duration in working days o original baseline duration o early start date o early finish date o late start date o late finish date o baseline start date o baseline finish date o constraint dates o constraint type o total float o predecessor o successor o actual start date o actual finish date o overall percent complete o remaining duration o resource allocation and effort if applicable also include with the schedule updates a summary of how the schedule is recovered recovery plan or a summary of how to complete the project on time with or without acceleration .
include the following in the summary contract duration complete days remaining approved time changes revised completion date andor changes to milestones .
affected activities with explanations for delays or duration variance from original accepted baseline .
a definition of any new calendars utilized .
whether or not the extra or additional work items affect the critical path .
the department will review the updated schedule within num calendar days of receipt .
if the cpm schedule is not received within num calendar days of the actual notice to proceed date the contractor will be required to attend a scheduling workshop in order to prepare an acceptable cpm schedule .
the district executive may withhold current estimate payments until the cpm schedule is submitted and accepted .
c resource loaded cpm schedule .
section numb and as follows the resources allocated to meet the required completion date and any specified milestone dates .
also include at a minimum the following information for each summary activity in the initial schedule submission and all subsequent submissions business partner identification number id proposed equipment name proposed equipment number example backhoe num and num activity resource activity resource duration in working days labor in addition submit a spreadsheet in an electronic format or a pdf similar to table a or use allocation groups within asta powerproject .
have it display labor and equipment that will be on the project site num of the time for the following business partner ids labor crews with crew designation number of personnel per crew and activity resource proposed equipment name and proposed equipment number example backhoe num and num and activity resource numc numc num num change no .
num table a workforce equipment crew crew designation firm name business partner num crew a numa firm name business partner num crew num num num measurement and paymentlump sum a narrative schedule .
paid as specified in section num in three payments as follows the first payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid upon submission of the narrative schedule as specified in section numa in the form required by this specification .
the second payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid whenever work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item .
the third payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid whenever work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item .
b cpm schedule .
paid as specified in section num in four payments as follows the first payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid upon submission of an acceptable numcalendar day work plan as specified in section numbnum in the form required by this specification or upon submission of an acceptable cpm schedule as specified in section numbnum in the form required by this specification .
the second payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid upon submission of an acceptable cpm schedule as specified in section numbnum in the form required by this specification .
the third payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid whenever work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item .
the fourth payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid whenever work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item .
c resource loaded cpm schedule .
paid as specified in section num in four payments as follows the first payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid upon submission of an acceptable numcalendar day work plan as specified in section numcnum in the form required by this specification or upon submission of an acceptable cpm schedule as specified in section numcnum in the form required by this specification .
the second payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid upon submission of an acceptable cpm schedule as specified in section numcnum in the form required by this specification .
numc numc num num change no .
num the third payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid whenever work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item .
the fourth payment equal to num of the amount bid for this item will be paid whenever work representing num of the total contract price is completed excluding the bid price for this item .
num num num num initial edition section numshoulder relief joint num descriptionthis work is construction of a shoulder relief joint on a prepared surface .
num material superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma base coursesection num asphalt cement pg numsection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a base course .
construct superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma base course as specified in section num or section num .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured transversely .
num num num num initial edition section num detectable warning surface num description this work is furnishing all material equipment tools and labor required for the placement and installation of detectable warning surfaces on cement concrete sidewalk curb ramps and other designated surfaces in order to provide a tactile warning for pedestrians with visual impairments under the provisions of the americans with disabilities act ada .
num material a detectable warning surface dws .
provide a dws product from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and meeting the requirements of the proposed accessibility guidelines for pedestrian facilities in the public right ofway prowag .
provide certification as specified in section numbnum that the dws meets the following prowag criteria general .
detectable warning surface with the surface comprised of truncated domes .
dome size and spacing as specified and as indicated on standard drawing rcnumm .
surface .
slip resistant .
contrast .
provide a dws color as approved by the representative that contrasts visually with adjacent walking surfaces either lightondark or darkonlight .
b other material .
class a cement concrete section num subbase section num joint sealant material section numa b or c num construction a general .
provide a copy of the dws manufacturers written installation instructions .
b new construction .
coordinate this work with the requirements for new cement concrete sidewalks section num .
follow dws manufacturers instructions for a castinplace installation at the locations indicated and in accordance with the requirements of standard drawing rcnumm for the designated curb ramp type or other designated surface .
c alteration or retrofit construction .
saw cut and remove the entire depth of existing concrete from the area where the dws will be placed .
replace any removed or disturbed aggregate subbase and compact before placing new concrete .
place new cement concrete and follow the dws manufacturers installation instructions for a castinplace installation .
fill any saw cut gaps with approved joint sealant material .
fill any gaps around the dws edge installation with the joint material if necessary .
d protection .
protect the new sidewalk and dws surface from pedestrian traffic until the adjoining cement concrete surfaces have properly cured and work is complete at the curb ramp location .
clean the dws surface using a method recommended by the manufacturer .
num measurement and payment square foot num numb num num initial edition section numtemporary impact attenuating devices num descriptionthis work is the furnishing placing and removing of temporary impact attenuating devices for maintenance and protection of traffic during construction as indicated .
num material temporary impact attenuating devices from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num construction a general .
submit shop drawings as specified in section numd .
b installation .
install according to manufacturers specifications and installation instructions or as indicated .
num measurement and payment a temporary impact attenuating device .
each b repair of impact attenuating device .
the department will pay for repair of temporary impact attenuating devices as specified in section numd forceaccount work if money has not been secured through other sources for the same purpose .
num num num num initial edition section numreset temporary impact attenuating devices num descriptionthis work is the resetting of a temporary impact attenuating device from one construction area to another within the project limits as indicated .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows reset temporary impact attenuating device if construction operations require a change in the protection of traffic or as directed .
store or transport the attenuating devices as required .
num measurement and paymenteach num numc num num initial edition section num material section numcement num generalobtain cement from a producer listed in bulletin num and from silos set aside for department use .
do not use retrieved or reclaimed cement .
do not use cement with a material temperature exceeding numf at the time of delivery to the plant .
a qc .
section numanum b certification .
num .
general .
conduct a monthly mill test according to astm c num .
submit a copy of the monthly mill test to the lts for verification of compliance with department specifications base the monthly mill test on actual or historical statistical process controls .
specify the type of material and crossreference the test to the bill of lading .
ensure that a responsible company official sign the monthly mill test .
submit split sample with corresponding test results monthly .
num .
levels of certification .
section numbnum.e c handling and transportation .
section num and as follows for each shipment to the project furnish two copies of the vendors bill of lading .
include one copy with the shipment to the project the vendor shall retain the other copy .
use a form acceptable to the lts that contains the following information statement that material has been tested and conforms to department specifications .
type of material silo number company lot identification date of shipment producers name and location consignees name and location temperature of cement trailer number quantity tons numc numc num num initial edition alkali content determined according to aashto t num .
ship bulk cement in clean acceptable metal rubber or plastic waterproof containers or compartments .
ship bagged cement num pounds net per bag in suitable paper bags with the brand type and manufacturers name printed on them .
protect cement bags from the weather .
reject cement bags with net weight more than num below that specified .
d storage .
section num and as follows provide storage capacity sufficient to maintain the paving schedule .
store bulk cement in acceptable silos .
store bagged cement in enclosed buildings .
store bagged cement in stacks not exceeding eight bags in height and cover .
e chemical and physical requirements and testing .
aashto m num and aashto m num except sample according to ptm no .
num. f limited number of sources .
obtain cement for each project from a single source unless otherwise allowed by the representative in writing .
if using more than one source separate cement of different types and from different sources .
use each type and source in continuous segregated portions of the project .
if possible limit cement used in an individual structure to a single type and source .
if this is not possible use one type and source for footers piers and abutments and one type and source for superstructures .
num numc num num initial edition section numbituminous material num generalobtain bituminous material conforming to the requirements of bulletin num from a producer listed in bulletin num. a qc .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section numanum .
submit the qc plan to the lts for review before shipping material to the project and at least annually .
for pgbinder suppliers the qc plan shall conform to aashto r num as supplemented by bulletin num. b certification .
num .
general .
obtain a verification sample from each batch and test according to bulletin num .
a batch is a tank completely filled partially filled or refilled with a blend of residual and new material .
test one half of each sample and forward the results and remaining onehalf of each sample to the lts .
the lts will evaluate qc on the basis of verification samples .
provide a certificate of compliance signed by a responsible company official that lists the type of material tank number and company lot number for crossreferencing to the bill of lading .
the departments qa teams will periodically review the qc plan inspect production and testing facilities and take qa samples of material either at the plant or the point where the material will be incorporated into the project .
num .
levels of certification .
section num.bnum.e c handling and transportation .
section num and as follows for each shipment to the project or bituminous concrete producer submit one copy of the vendors bill of lading on a form acceptable to the lts that contains the following information statement that the material has been tested and conforms to bulletin num .
statement that the shipment container was free of contamination before loading .
class of material .
tank number .
company batch number .
date of shipment .
producers name and location .
consignees name and location bituminous concrete plant or maintenance district .
for cutback asphalts and emulsified asphalts minimum and maximum mix or application temperature requirements handling and storage requirements for proper usage percent bitumen residue by weight and statement that material is compatible with job aggregate .
for nonpolymermodified pgbinders a temperatureviscosity chart figure num bulletin num for each lot or batch of material to be shipped based on the rotational viscosities in either pascalseconds pa s or centipoises at numf and numf .
instead of plotted data provide minimum and maximum laboratory numc numc num num initial edition mixing and compaction temperatures based on figure num bulletin num .
the bituminous mixture placement temperatures for the type and class of pgbinder used are listed in section num or section num table a and bulletin num .
for polymermodified pgbinders any specific handling and storage requirements and minimum and maximum laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures .
the bituminous mixture placement temperatures for the type and class of pgbinder used are listed in section num or section num table a and bulletin num .
specific gravity at numf .
quantity of material .
num numc num num change no .
num section numaggregate num fine aggregate a general .
fine aggregate is natural or manufactured sand consisting of hard durable and uncoated inert particles reasonably free from clay silt vegetation and other deleterious substances such as reactive chert gypsum iron sulfide amorphous silica and hydrated iron oxide .
substances that are present in amounts large enough to cause inconsistent performance in the properties of bituminous concrete or plastic or hardened portland cement concrete are considered deleterious .
spent foundry sand may be used as fine aggregate in asphalt concrete and flowable fill .
obtain fine aggregate with physical properties conforming to table a from a source listed in bulletin num or approved by the lts before use .
num .
natural sand .
natural sand is fine aggregate resulting from glacial or water action .
fine aggregate produced simultaneously with gravel coarse aggregate may contain crushed particles .
num .
manufactured sand .
manufactured sand is fine aggregate from the controlled mechanical breakdown of rock aircooled blast furnace slag or aircooled steel slag into sound approximately cubical particles .
the department will accept manufactured sand only if it is the primary product of the crushing operation and sized by a sand classifier .
however for fine aggregate used in bituminous concrete mixtures a sand classifier is not required .
fine aggregate manufactured from limestone may not be used in concrete wearing surfaces .
fine aggregate manufactured from steel slag may not be used in cement concrete or mortar mixtures .
steel slag fine aggregate may only be used in bituminous wearing courses with the approval of the lts however do not use steel slag fine aggregate in conjunction with steel slag coarse aggregate .
provide steel slag fine aggregate that is uniform in density and quality .
cure steel slag fine aggregate according to the following procedure after gradation preparation place steel slag fine aggregate whether reclaimed from an old stockpile or processed directly from the steelmaking process in a controlled stockpile .
limit the stockpile size to a maximum of num num tons .
completely soak the steel slag fine aggregate with water before or during stockpiling .
submit the method of constructing and controlling the stockpile to the representative for review .
maintain the stockpile in a uniform moist condition for a period of not less than num months .
after the minimum cure period the representative will sample and test the stockpile for expansive characteristics according to ptm no .
num .
the representative will approve the stockpile for use if the average total volumetric expansion according to ptm no .
num is less than num .
if the stockpile fails expansion criterion continue curing the stockpile for a minimum of two additional months .
the representative will resample and retest the stockpile after the required additional cure period .
the lts will evaluate the quality of fine aggregates by conducting petrographic analysis according to ptm no .
num and other tests necessary to demonstrate that required construction of acceptable durability can be achieved .
b production testing .
num .
personnel and equipment .
provide and assign to the work a penndot certified aggregate technician who will test fine aggregate at the source according to the requirements listed in bulletin num .
provide equipment for acceptance testing and for developing and maintaining a qc program to ensure compliance with specification requirements during production as required in bulletin num .
num .
testing and documentation .
perform tests as required by bulletin num .
evaluate the test results to ensure the quality requirements are met .
document the results of tests made during production and make them available to the department upon request .
c grading and quality requirements .
numc numa num num change no .
num num .
gradation .
table a lists the extreme limits for determining the suitability of supply sources .
control the grading of type a fine aggregate so that the fineness modulus of at least nine out of ten consecutive test samples from a single source delivered to a project or plant varies less than num from the average fineness modulus of the consecutive test samples .
determine the fineness modulus according to ptm no .
num .
for bituminous mixtures if directed vary the gradations within the limits listed in table a .
a blend of fine aggregates may be used if the proposed gradation limits for blending are approved by the district executive in writing .
if filler is required provide fine aggregate conforming to the gradation of table a and use cement cement dust fly ash or fines from the crushing of stone gravel or slag that are reasonably free of clay .
num .
material finer than the num m no .
num sieve .
determine the loss by washing according to ptm no.num .
num .
minimum strength ratio .
determine the organic impurities in fine aggregate type a and type c only according to aashto t num .
if the color value result is greater than organic plate no .
num determine the minimum strength ratio according to aashto t num and use fine aggregate meeting the strength ratio requirements of table a .
num .
soundness test .
determine the percentage loss after five cycles of immersion and drying using a sodium sulfate solution according to ptm no .
num .
num .
specific gravity and absorption .
aashto t num .
table a fine aggregate grading and quality requirements cement concrete sand bituminous concrete sand type b mortar sand sieve size type a num num filler type c num mm numinch num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num num mm no .
num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num num num m no .
num num num num num material finer than num m no .
num sieve max .
percent passing num strength ratio min .
percent num num soundness test max .
loss percent num num num num fineness modulus num num num coarse aggregate a general .
coarse aggregate consists of hard tough durable and uncoated inert particles reasonably free from numa numa num num change no .
num clay silt vegetation and other deleterious substances such as reactive chert gypsum iron sulfide amorphous silica and hydrated iron oxide .
substances that are present in amounts large enough to cause inconsistent performance in the properties of bituminous concrete or plastic or hardened portland cement concrete are considered deleterious .
the lts will evaluate the quality of coarse aggregates by conducting petrographic analysis according to ptm no .
num and other tests necessary to demonstrate that required construction of acceptable durability can be achieved .
furnish coarse aggregate crushed and prepared from one of the materials described below with physical properties conforming to tables b c and d. obtain coarse aggregate from a source listed in bulletin num or approved by the lts before use .
num .
stone .
durable stone free from slate texture or cleavage planes .
num .
gravel .
durable gravel particles .
for use in cement concrete wash thoroughly during production .
for use in all bituminous wearing courses unless otherwise specified a minimum of num crushed particles with at least two faces resulting from fracture is required .
for use as no .
ogs a minimum of num crushed particles with at least three faces resulting from fracture is required .
for all type a use the maximum allowable absorption determined according to aashto t num is num however this restriction does not apply to dredged river gravel used in portland cement concrete .
for all type b use the maximum allowable absorption determined according to aashto t num is num .
num .
blast furnace slag .
byproduct of a pigiron making process .
tough hard and durable pieces of aircooled blast furnace slag .
blast furnace slag is excluded from the abrasion requirements .
the density unit weight of blast furnace slag can not be less than num pounds per cubic foot .
num .
steel slag .
byproduct of a steel making process .
tough hard and durable pieces of steel slag reasonably uniform in density and quality .
after crushing grading and forming a stockpile take a sample from the stockpile and submit it to the lts for testing of expansive characteristics .
the lts will accept the stockpile for use if the total expansion determined according to ptm no .
num is less than num .
once a stockpile is accepted do not add to it if it is for department use .
limit the stockpile size to a maximum of num tons .
if the stockpile fails expansion requirements cure the aggregate stockpile as follows rework the stockpile and soak the aggregate completely with water .
submit the proposed method of constructing and controlling the stockpile during the cure period for review and acceptance .
maintain the aggregate in a uniformly moist condition in the stockpile for a period of at least num months .
take a sample after this curing period and submit it to the lts for testing according to ptm no .
num .
the representative will accept the stockpile for use if the total expansion is less than num .
if the stockpile still fails the expansion requirement continue curing for at least two additional months before resampling and retesting .
aggregate manufactured from steel slag is not acceptable for pipe or structure backfill or in cement concrete .
steel slag may be used for subbase selected granular material shoulders selected material surfacing and in bituminous surface courses .
num .
granulated slag .
byproduct of an ironmaking process .
granulated blast furnace slag is the granular glassy material formed when molten slag from ironmaking is rapidly quenched by immersion in water and contains not more than num total iron reported as fenumonum .
provide material containing not more than num by mass weight of substances that are not granulated slag .
use material with a dry rodded density unit weight determined according to aashto t num of not more than num pounds per cubic foot .
provide uniform material having a maximum size of num mm num inches and not more than num passing the num m no .
num sieve .
granulated slag may only be used for subbase material as specified in section num .
num .
lightweight aggregate .
acceptable types of lightweight aggregate are as follows aggregate prepared by expanding pelletizing or sintering products such as blastfurnace slag numa numa num num change no .
num diatomite fly ash clay shale or slate .
aggregate prepared by processing natural materials such as pumice scoria or tuff .
furnish lightweight aggregate conforming to aashto m num the soundness and abrasion limits for type a aggregate as specified in table b and the following durability requirements .
aggregate absorption factor ptm no .
num max .
num freezethaw resistance of concrete decrease of dynamic modulus at num cycles aashto t num procedure b except that after num days of moist cure dry the beams num inches by num inches by num inches at numf numf and approximately num relative humidity for num days .
then soak the beams in water for num days before starting the freezing and thawing test .
max .
num freezethaw resistance of aggregate ptm no .
num max .
num table b coarse aggregate quality requirementsnum type a type b type c type s soundness max .
num num num num abrasion max .
num num num num freezethaw loss max num thin and elongated pieces max .
num num material finer than num m no .
num sieve max .
num num num num crushed fragments min .
num num num num compact bulk density unit weight lbs.cu .
ft. num num num num deleterious shale max .
num num num num clay lumps max .
num num num num friable particles max .
excluding shale num num coal or coke max .
num num num num glassy particles max .
num or num num or num iron max .
num num num num absorption max .
num num num total of deleterious shale clay lumps friable particles coal or coke allowed max .
num num num num notes num see section numcnum .
num see section numcnum .
num see section numcnum .
num gravel only for types a and b .
see section numcnum .
all natural aggregates for type s. num see section numcnum .
num blast furnace slag excluded .
see section numanum .
num natural coarse aggregates with an absorption less than num are considered freeze thaw resistant and not subject to testing according to aashto t num procedure a .
numa numc num num change no .
num natural aggregates with an absorption exceeding num shall be considered freeze thaw resistant if either their sodium sulfate soundness level is less than num or their aashto t num freeze thaw loss after num cycles coarse fraction does not exceed num .
type s numa aggregate may be supplied where type numa aggregate for purposes other than subbase is specified at no additional cost to the department .
num test methods to determine the quality requirements of table b are indicated in section num c. num .
recycled concrete .
salvaged and crushed concrete pavements and concrete highway structures from department county or municipal projects for use as aggregate in subbase only .
other recycled concrete may be used in subbase if the concrete was made using materials approved by the department .
provide recycled concrete conforming to table b and table c except soundness testing is not required .
b production testing .
num .
personnel and equipment .
provide and assign to the work a penndot certified aggregate technician who will test coarse aggregate at the source according to the requirements listed in bulletin num .
provide equipment for acceptance testing and for developing and maintaining a qc program to ensure compliance with specification requirements during production as required in bulletin num .
num .
testing and documentation .
perform tests as required by bulletin num .
evaluate the test results to ensure the quality requirements are met .
document the results of tests made during production and make them available to the department upon request .
c quality requirements .
the following notes are applicable to table b .
num .
soundness .
determine the percentage loss after five cycles of immersion and drying using a sodium sulfate solution according to ptm no .
num .
the lts may accept aggregate failing the test if it can be demonstrated in writing that the aggregate has a satisfactory service record in both pavements and structures .
acceptable aggregate produced from recycled concrete need not conform to soundness requirements since cementitious material can not be evaluated with this test .
num .
abrasion .
determine the percentage of loss according to aashto t num .
num .
thin and elongated particles .
astm dnum method b using the material retained on the num mm no .
num sieve .
measuring the ratio of num comparing the length to the thickness of the aggregate particles .
calculate the percentage of flat and elongate particles by mass .
numc numc num num change no .
num table c size and grading requirements for coarse aggregates based on laboratory sieve tests square openings total percent passing aashto number num mm num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num mm num num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa num num num num num num ogs num num num num num applies only for bituminous mixtures .
penndot number only type c will be listed in bulletin num .
for num m no .
num see table d. note a a combination of no .
num and no .
num may be substituted for no .
num provided that not more than num or less than num of the combination is no .
num size .
note b provide no .
ogs material that has a minimum average coefficient of uniformity of num .
the average coefficient of uniformity is defined as the average of the sublots within each lot .
determine the coefficient of uniformity according to ptm no .
num each time the gradation is determined .
the required minimum coefficient of uniformity for individual samples is num .
if the coefficient of uniformity of any sample falls below num reject the lot .
do not use the coefficient of uniformity in the multiple deficiency formula .
numc numa num num change no .
num num .
material finer than the num m no .
num sieve .
determine the loss by washing according to ptm no .
num and table d. this test is not required for aggregate processed through a mechanical dryer for use in bituminous concrete however the aggregate is required to be clean and free of fines that would adversely affect the coating of the aggregate with bituminous material .
this test is not required for aashto no .
num aggregates .
table d material passing the num m no .
num sieve based on laboratory sieve tests square openings section specification maximum num num num num num num subbase no .
numa subbase no .
ogs bit .
seal coat bit .
seal coat w precoat .
aggr .
bit .
surf .
treatment cement concrete all other uses num num num num num num num num .
crushed fragments .
astm dnum num .
deleterious shale .
determine the percentage of deleterious shale by four cycles of wetting and drying according to ptm no .
num .
the lts will use petrographic analysis to confirm the results .
num .
friable particles .
percent loss according to ptm no .
num .
num .
coal or coke .
determine the percentage of mass weight by visual identification and hand separation .
if required the lts will use petrographic analysis to confirm the results .
num .
glassy particles .
determine the percentage of mass weight by visual identification and hand separation .
pieces of slag containing more than num glass are considered to be glassy particles .
waste glass is also considered to be glassy particles .
for coarse aggregate used in cement concrete the maximum percentage of glassy particles allowed is num .
for other uses the maximum percentage of glassy particles allowed is num .
coarse aggregate containing glassy particles consisting of waste glass may not be used in cement concrete or bituminous wearing courses .
num .
metallic iron .
the lts will use petrographic analysis to determine the content of metallic iron .
pieces of slag containing metallic iron are considered to be metallic iron .
this requirement is waived when aggregate with metallic iron is used in bituminous mixtures or subbase .
ptm no .
num .
num .
clay lumps .
determine the percentage of mass weight by visual identification and hand separation .
if required the lts will use petrographic analysis to confirm the results .
num .
specific gravity and absorption .
aashto t num .
num .
bulk density unit weight and voids .
aashto t num. d testing and acceptance .
section numb num select granular material numrc a general .
select granular material consists of durable bank or crushed gravel stone or slag mixed or blended with suitable filler materials to provide a uniform mixture .
obtain select granular material from a source listed in bulletin num .
stockpile sample and test material before it is used to ensure reasonable uniformity and acceptability .
use material free from vegetable or organic matter lumps or an excessive quantity of clay or other objectionable or foreign substances and not more than num deleterious shale by mass weight .
numb numb num num change no .
num b gradation .
conforming to the following gradation determined according to aashto t num passing num mm numinch sievenum passing num mm no .
num sievenum to num passing num m no .
num sievenum to num num antiskid material a general .
for use on ice or snowcovered pavement surfaces furnish antiskid material conforming to table e from a producer or agent listed in bulletin num .
do not use material containing metal glass or substances that may be harmful to automotive equipment and vehicles .
use material reasonably free of deleterious substances or foreign materials including but not limited to dirt shale slate incinerated bituminous coal mine waste and within the maximum limits of the individual deleterious and total deleterious materials as specified in section numa table b type c. b description .
num .
type asnum .
either natural sand manufactured sand except slag aggregates or a combination of the two conforming to the following requirements bulk density unit weight .
minimum num pounds per cubic foot and not exceeding num pounds per cubic foot determined according to aashto t num .
crushed fragments .
if natural sand is furnished not less than num of the fragments retained on the num mm no .
num sieve are required to be crushed fragments determined according to astm dnum .
iron .
total of individual antiskid particles containing metallic iron may not exceed num by mass weight of material determined by dividing the mass weight of such particles retained on the num mm no .
num sieve by the total dry mass weight of the sample .
num .
type asnum and asnum .
crushed stone or crushed gravel conforming to the following requirements bulk density unit weight .
minimum num pounds per cubic foot and not exceeding num pounds per cubic foot determined according to aashto t num .
los angeles abrasion .
abrasion loss not exceeding num determined according to aashto t num gradation d. crushed fragments .
if crushed gravel is furnished not less than num of the fragments retained on the num mm no .
num sieve are required to be crushed one face determined according to asmt d num .
iron .
total of individual antiskid particles containing metallic iron may not exceed num by weight of material determined by dividing the mass weight of such particles retained on the num mm no .
num sieve by the total dry mass weight of the sample .
num .
type asnum .
crushed slag conforming to the following requirements bulk density unit weight .
minimum num pounds per cubic foot and not exceeding num pounds per cubic foot determined according to aashto t num .
numb numb num num change no .
num los angeles abrasion .
abrasion loss not exceeding num determined according to aashto t num gradation d. iron .
total of individual antiskid particles containing metallic iron may not exceed num by mass weight of material determined by dividing the mass weight of such particles retained on the num mm no .
num sieve by the total dry mass weight of the sample .
c gradations .
conforming to table e. table e antiskid gradation maximum percent passing sieve antiskid type num mm num num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num type asnum num num num num num type asnum num num num num num type asnum num num num num type asnum num num num num determined by ptm no .
num .
if the total percent passing the num mm no.num sieve is less than num then the total percent passing the num m nnum .
num sieve is allowed to be num. d testing .
if shipping test material for moisture content according to ptm no .
num .
a minimum of two tests per day is required .
if conditions exist that would cause a change in moisture content conduct additional tests .
a department representative will verify the test results .
document tests at the end of delivery quantity at the end of the day and determine the average moisture content .
the department will adjust the delivery quantity by deducting the average moisture content from the aggregate quantity shipped .
payment is based on the calculated oven dry mass weight .
num acceptance of construction aggregates a general .
the following describes the certification acceptance of construction aggregates .
accept aashto no .
num coarse aggregate as specified in section numanum .
b testing and acceptance .
certify each days shipment of aggregate as specified in section numbnum .
num .
qc .
section numbnum and as follows submit for annual review a qc plan conforming to the minimum department requirements for aggregate suppliers .
establish and positively identify aggregate stockpiles that have been tested according to the approved qc plan and conform to department specifications .
material may be added to or shipped from stockpiles at the producers discretion .
num .
source verification samples .
under the direction and supervision of the representative obtain a verification sample nnum from each stockpile to be tested .
obtain the sample from the stockpile according to aashto t num or from a ministockpile .
if the ministockpile method is chosen obtain the sample according to the following procedure place approximately num tons of aggregate into a ministockpile on a suitable surface .
use a loader to strike off the top of the ministockpile .
obtain sufficient material for sampling from random locations on the ministockpile using a square faced shovel .
numb numb num num change no .
num if project verification samples or lot acceptance samples in section numbnum result in a percent within limits pwl num the representative will direct additional source verification sampling of the stockpiles from which the failing material was shipped .
in such instances do not ship any additional materials from the stockpiles until test results from source verification samples have pwl num .
immediately deliver the source verification sample to the representative for testing using the equipment provided as specified in sections numb and numb .
the representative will test all three increments for compliance with tables a b c and d as applicable .
if the test results verify that the material conforms to the specifications use the material under certification unless project verification samples require lot acceptance .
if the material does not conform to the specifications the representative will determine the pwl according to section numanum .
if source verification results indicate a pwl num the representative will reject the stockpile .
if a stockpile is rejected increase qc testing according to the reviewed qc plan .
construct another stockpile of the aggregate to be tested consisting of num tons to num tons of material or the remainder of the quantity identified for department projects whichever is less .
the representative will accept the material under certification if test results verify that the material from the new stockpile conforms to the specifications unless project verification samples require lot acceptance .
num .
project verification samples .
under the direction and supervision of the inspector obtain verification samples nnum according to table f for aggregates used for subbase applications under the roadway and shoulders as specified in section num .
at the preconstruction conference provide the representative estimated aggregate quantities for subbase applications under the roadway and shoulders .
other aggregate types or applications may be sampled for project verification if the representative determines that the material is visually suspect .
obtain samples at the point of placement loose aggregate sample on grade before trimming and compaction and not from project stockpiles unless directed table f verification samples aggregate quantities number of samples nnum num tons or more but less than num tons num num tons or more but less than num tons num num tons or more up to num tons num each additional increment of num tons num the inspector will select sample locations according to ptm no .
num .
under the direction and supervision of the inspector immediately deliver the samples to the test site at either the producers location or the project site .
the inspector will test the samples using the equipment provided as specified in sections numb and numb .
the inspector will test all three increments for compliance with tables c and d plus the crushed fragments test of table b when applicable .
the inspector will provide the test results within num days from the date of sampling .
the department will continue to accept material under certification if test results verify that the material conforms to the specifications .
if the material does not conform to the specifications the inspector will determine the average pwl of the material as specified in section numanum .
if results indicate a pwl num for the material the department will discontinue certification acceptance and begin project lot acceptance of the aggregate .
discontinue all operations using that size of aggregate until the representative determines new lot sample locations according to ptm no .
num and authorizes operations to continue .
conduct lot acceptance testing at the point of placement according to the following procedure under the direction and supervision of the inspector use a penndot certified aggregate technician to obtain an acceptance sample nnum at the point of placement loose aggregate sample on grade before trimming and compaction for each num tons of material placed .
the lot size of num tons will be divided into three equal sublots .
o the inspector will select sample locations according to ptm no .
num .
the inspector will take possession of the sample and immediately transport the sample from the sampling point to the testing site .
the inspector will test all three sample increments for compliance with numb numb num num change no .
num section numc tables c and d plus the crushed fragments test of table b .
aggregates other than gravel will use num as the pwl for the crushed fragments test of table b .
the inspector will provide the test results within num days of sampling .
failure to provide test results within the targeted timeframe will not form a basis to dismiss the test results and the test results will govern in all cases .
o when less than num tons remain for the project the remaining quantity will be considered a lot .
divide the remaining approximated quantity into three equal sublots so that three increments are obtained .
o if a change in aggregate sources is made before three increments are obtained for a lot obtain additional increments from remaining materials on the project to provide one full acceptance sample nnum from the first source .
o the inspector will document the placement locations by station of material placed to clearly delineate the location of all material within the lot .
the department will continue project lot acceptance testing until five consecutive lots are accepted at numpwl .
once five consecutive lots are accepted at num pwl acceptance may again be by producer certification and verification testing will begin again at the frequency in table f for the remaining project quantity .
the contractor will be charged num for each lot of material placed for the project lot acceptance testing performed by the inspector .
for all test values the department will determine the lot pwl according to section numanum .
if results indicate a pwl num the lot is accepted at full payment .
if results indicate a pwl num for the material the department will determine the degree of nonconformance dnc for the lot according to the following o lot average values for any sieve size which do not conform to the specified limits will be used to calculate the dnc .
for each sieve where the average does not conform to specifications the difference between the average test value and the closest specified limit will be computed upper limit for average values where the upper limit has been exceeded or lower limit for average values where the lower limit was not reached .
each difference will be multiplied by the factor shown in table g. o crushed fragment average test results which do not conform to the specified limits will also be included in the dnc .
the dnc will include the difference between the lower specified limit and the lot average crushed fragment test results .
o the department will determine the total dnc for the lot by summing of all the non conformances for each sieve size and crushed fragments after each has been multiplied by applicable factors in table g and table h. the total dnc will be used to adjust the payment represented by the nonconforming lot as shown in table i .
table g multiplication factors for dnc sieve size multiplication factor num inch to no .
num inclusive num no .
num to no .
num inclusive num no .
num num no .
num table d table h crush count num numb numa num num change no .
num table h no .
num sieve upper limit and multiplication factor maximum upper limit to calculate dnc multiplication factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table i dnc pay reduction percent total sum of dnc percent of contract unit price reduction num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num greater than num if the sum of the dnc is greater than num the representative will direct that the material represented by the lot nnum be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department or left in place and final payment for the material will be at num of the contract unit price .
pending the decision by the representative do not place additional materials on or incorporated with the nonconforming material .
num .
qa samples .
cmd qa samples nnum may be taken at the source of supply or at the point of placement on the project .
submit samples to the lts for testing .
if results for any type of material indicate a pwt of less than num the district will immediately obtain an additional verification sample nnum at the appropriate site project or source .
the department will test all three sample increments at either the producers location or at the project site and determine the pwt for the material .
if results indicate a pwt for the material of less than num obtain source verification samples and project verification samples as specified in section numbnum and section numbnum .
c weighing responsibilities .
prepare weight slips and certifications attesting to the accuracy of the weights recorded and ensuring conformance with section numb .
designate a licensed weigh persons to act as the contractors agent .
ensure that scales are calibrated annually by an independent agency acceptable to the department .
a department inspector may provide random checking .
weigh empty trucks used to haul material measured by mass weight daily unless otherwise directed .
if the invoice mass weight exceeds the net mass net weight determined by a department mobile weigh team by more than num the department will consider the deviation to be excessive .
take immediate corrective action upon notification of an excessive deviation .
within num days of notification provide the district executive with a written description of corrective actions and safeguards and the time that they were implemented .
num certification of aggregates at bituminous and cement concrete plants a certification .
certify aggregate at bituminous and cement concrete plants yearly for quality requirements as specified in section numbnum using form csnum or another acceptable form .
num numb num num change no .
num section numcement concrete num general a description .
furnish the indicated class of cement concrete according to the requirements of table a .
cement concrete is a mixture of portland cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate water and airentraining admixture with or without water reducing admixture retarding admixture or pozzolan .
the methods of producing concrete referred to in these specifications are defined as follows num .
plant mixed cement concrete .
concrete proportioned and mixed in either a stationary commercial and central plant or a stationary plant located near the project .
concrete is delivered to the work site by truck agitator truck or mixer truck .
num .
truck mixed cement concrete .
concrete prepared by dry batching in a proportioning plant and placing the dry ingredients in a truck mixer .
measured water is then added to the truck drum from the plant water system and the concrete is mixed in the truck at the plant .
mixing is not allowed enroute to or at the work site .
num .
volumetric mixed cement concrete .
concrete proportioned and mixed in a truckmounted mobile mixer .
the unit is capable of proportioning concrete ingredients from selfcontained bins and mixing the materials with measured water in a selfcontained mixer .
the concrete is mixed and discharged at the work site .
b material .
cement type i or type iisection num fine aggregate type asection num coarse aggregate type a maximum size aashto no .
num no .
num or no .
num stone gravel or slag section num watersection num admixturessection num pozzolansection num table a cement concrete criteria class of concrete use cement factornum lbscu .
yd .
maximum water cement rationum lbslbs minimum mixnum design compressive strength psi proportions coarsenum aggregate solid volume cu .
ft.cu .
yd .
numday structural design compressive strength psi days min .
max .
num num num num aaap bridge deck num num num num num num aaanum other num num num num num num aa slip form pavingnum num num num num num num num aa paving num num num num num num num aa accelerated patchingnum num num num num num num aa structures and misc .
num num num num num num num a num num num num num num num c num num num num num num num numb numc num num change no .
num hes num num num num num num num notes num and num pertain to structure and miscellaneous concrete only .
num proportions shown in the table are shown on the reverse side of form tr numb and are controlled by class of concrete fineness modulus of fine aggregate ptm no .
num and the solids percent in coarse aggregate ptm no .
num .
num test procedures slumpaashto t num compressive strengthptm no .
num or maturity meter methodptm no .
num .
the upper age limit and lower age limit are defined by the values listed for numday and numday compressive strength .
num for use in miscellaneous or structural concrete if the fineness modulus fm is between num and num increase the minimum cement factor for the class of concrete num lbscu .
yd .
this requirement may be waived after adequate strength data is available and analyzed according to the mixdesign section in aci num .
num aaa concrete is not permitted to be used for new bridge decks .
num for exception see section numc .
cement factor may be increased to a maximum of num lbscu .
yd .
with the approval of the dmedmm .
num if a portion of the cement is replaced by pozzolan use a water to cement plus pozzolan ratio by weight .
the minimum water cement ratio for aaap is num lbslbs .
num for slip form paving provide coarse aggregate or a blend of coarse aggregate that has a minimum of num passing the numinch sieve .
base these results on the average of three samples with no single sample result below num passing .
conduct testing at the concrete plant according to the qc plan .
segregated stockpiles may be reworked and retested if material fails to conform to this requirement .
num for accelerated cement concrete submit mix design as specified section numc having a minimum target value compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at num hours when tested according to ptm no .
num .
num aaap trial mixtures are required to produce a minimum numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num pounds per square inch overdesign .
num dmedmm may accept mix designs based on the numday strength based on qualification testing .
num .
density of material .
except for admixtures use the following material densities unit weights when proportioning cement concrete type of material density water num pounds per cubic foot cement num pounds per cubic foot fine aggregate based on bulk specific gravity as specified in section numbnum coarse aggregate stone or gravel based on bulk specific gravity as specified in section numbnum slag based on field tests as specified in section numbnum pozzolan based on the lts tests num .
specific gravity of aggregates .
for fine and coarse aggregates use the bulk specific gravity saturated surfacedry basis listed in bulletin num .
if slag is used test at the site to determine its loosestruck unit weight solid volume per cubic yard and bulk specific gravity factor saturated surfacedry basis .
establish the concrete proportions on the basis of the bulk specific gravity factor determined by the test .
check the unit weight of the slag daily to maintain the established solidvolume proportions .
num .
adjustment of weight of free water .
adjust the batch weight of the aggregate to compensate for the free water on the aggregate .
base this adjustment on tests of representative samples taken from aggregate stockpiles .
num .
batching .
for plant and truck mixed cement concrete batch by weight .
for volumetric mixed cement concrete batch by volume .
c design basis .
numc numc num num change no .
num num .
general .
compute and prepare concrete mix designs according to aci num .
for aaap mix designs determine the aggregate gradation for the mix design according to ptm no .
num .
base concrete mix designs on the materials to be used in the work .
make trial mixtures for each class of concrete and mold and cure test specimens .
if the requirements of table a can not be achieved furnish other acceptable materials or make necessary changes in the mixing procedure to conform to the specified requirements .
notify the dmedmm at least num days in advance of preparing trial mixtures .
at the start of construction mix a fullsized batch using the type of mixer and the mixing procedure planned for the project .
use this batch to provide the basis for final adjustment of the accepted design .
mixture qualifications testing of antiwashout concrete in accordance with ptm no .
num to determine the maximum loss and required antiwashout admixture dosage may be conducted at an accredited lab or by the ready mix producer with oversight from a technical representative from the admixture supplier .
trial batching for determination and verification of other design requirements must be performed by the ready mix producer as specified in section numc .
document the test results from the mixture qualification testing on the mix design before submitting for department review .
num .
cement factor .
for all classes of concrete use the minimum cement factor cement or cement and pozzolan combined specified in table a except as follows if flyash is used the portland cement portion may be reduced by a maximum of num .
if ground granulated blast furnace slag is used the portland cement portion may be reduced by a minimum of num to a maximum of num .
if mechanically modified pozzolancement combinations are used the portland cement portion may be reduced by a maximum of num .
for aaap cement concrete replace type i or type ii portland cement with pozzolan silica fume or flyash or ground granulated blast furnace slag weighing as much as or more than the portland cement replaced .
the percentages of pozzolan applicable to aaap concrete are as shown below .
limit pozzolan to not more than two of the three pozzolans listed below in any one mix design as long as one of the pozzolan supplements meets the minimum percentage of replacement .
cement factor must include at least one of the following as a replacement for a portion of the cement ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs grade num or higher num min fly ash type c or type f num min silica fume num num .
air content .
design cement concrete to have an air content of num in the plastic state .
design aaap concrete mixes to have an air content of num in the plastic state .
obtain the air content through the addition of a solution of an airentraining admixture as specified in section numenum .
use the quantity of airentraining admixture necessary to maintain the plastic concrete air content determined according to aashto t num do not apply an aggregate correction factor for stone and gravel and aashto t num for slag coarse aggregate within a tolerance of num during the work .
the plastic concrete air content includes entrapped and entrained air .
if the hardened concrete exhibits deficiencies or the representative suspects the hardened concrete to have deficiencies and if directed determine the percent of entrained air in the hardened concrete according to ptm no .
num .
voids greater than num mils and less than num mils in their smallest dimension are considered entrained air .
voids num mils or more in diameter are considered entrapped air .
the entrained air in the hardened concrete must be between num and num inclusive .
for aaap mixes the entrained air on the hardened concrete must be between num and num inclusive .
num .
mix design acceptance .
submit a copy of each completed mix design to the representative before its use in the work .
the department reserves the right to review any design through plant production before its use in department work at no additional cost to the department .
the concrete design submitted for review is required to comply with the specified concrete class requirements supported by slump air content and compressive strength test data according to aci num .
the department will accept concrete designs on the basis of the numday strength tests class high early strength hes may be accepted on the basis of numday strength tests however conduct numday tests to show the potential of the design mix .
the department may also accept designs based on the numday tests .
numc numd num num change no .
num design aaap cement concrete mixtures to achieve slow strength gain .
adjust component proportions with an objective of attaining a numday to numday compressive strength ratio during mix design greater than or equal to num .
a penndot inspector will witness the compressive strength tests .
the num ratio is for mix design purposes only and not to be utilized as an acceptance factor during production .
in no case will the department accept any mixture during design which fails to meet a minimum numday to numday compressive strength ratio of num .
additional criteria for mix design acceptance of aaap concrete are as follows the producer is required to complete the following tests before mix design submittal and approval .
permeability design the concrete mixture to meet a target permeability of num coulombs after a numday curing period in accordance with aashto t num not to exceed num coulombs .
shrinkage microstrain the numday shrinkage based on astm cnum is not to exceed num microstrain unless approved up to num microstrains by the dmedmm .
wet cure specimens in the lab for num days before beginning the numday shrinkage testing num total days .
a higher class concrete may be used in place of an indicated lower class concrete if the higher class concrete conforms to all of the requirements of the indicated lower class and if approved by the department .
d testing and acceptance .
num .
qc plan .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section num and submit it for review before the start of the project and at least annually thereafter .
include in the qc plan testing frequencies and action points to initiate corrective measures .
do not start work until the department has reviewed the qc plan .
furnish a copy of the qc plan to be maintained in the departments project field office .
num.a field operation qc plan .
prepare a field operation qc plan for the representatives review as outlined on form csnum to evaluate concrete field operation .
submit the field operation qc plan at the preconstruction conference or at least num weeks before the first concrete pour .
describe the construction equipment personnel and methods necessary to construct and test concrete courses for all structural elements .
include testing frequencies and action points to initiate corrective measures .
do not establish action points at either the upper or lower specification limits .
num .
concrete technician .
provide and assign to the work a concrete technician properly instructed and trained to develop the concrete design to control the quality and gradation of aggregates used to perform required concrete tests and to control the operations and concrete deliveries so that the completed mixture conforms to the specifications at the point of placement .
the departments concrete plant inspector will not allow concrete that is considered unacceptable to be shipped to the project .
the inspector will not assume by act or by word any responsibility for batch control adjustments calculations or for setting of any dials gauges scales or meters .
failure of the inspector to reject unacceptable concrete will not relieve the contractors obligation to provide concrete conforming to the specifications .
num.a concrete field testing technician .
provide and assign to the work during placement of material a penndot certified field testing technician meeting the requirements outlined in publication num to perform the required acceptance testing .
the technician must carry a valid penndot certification card during placement of material .
num .
testing facilities and equipment .
provide sufficient thermometers air meters aashto t num and t num and slump cones aashto t num for each separate project operation as needed .
in the presence of the inspector calibrate all air meters a maximum num weeks before beginning concrete placement .
recalibrate all air meters in the presence of the inspector every num weeks during concrete placement .
have backup equipment available to ensure that no tests are missed .
provide sufficient numinch by numinch cylinder molds and tightfitting domed caps ptm no .
num for qc acceptance verification and qa samples .
provide sufficient incidental equipment such as wheelbarrows shovels and scoops as needed .
provide acceptable means to conduct compressive strength testing using a compression machine and capping device conforming to ptm no .
num .
provide a curing tank conforming to ptm no .
num .
provide curing boxes or other acceptable equipment conforming to ptm no .
num and capable of maintaining the air temperature immediately adjacent to the fieldcured cylinders in the range of numf to numf for the first num num hours .
provide sufficient highlow thermometers or other temperature recording devices to monitor the temperatures next to the test cylinders .
if required numd numd num num change no .
num cap cylinders at the testing site under the representatives supervision .
if using the maturity method to estimate concrete compressive strength provide one or more maturity meters and a sufficient number of temperature sensors meeting the requirements in ptm no .
num .
note casting concrete cylinders in accordance with ptm num is recommended in case maturity meter equipment malfunctions .
maintain all equipment used for testing in an operable condition .
using an independent agency acceptable to the department calibrate scales balances and the compression machine at least once per year .
recalibrate the compression machine whenever it is relocated .
maintain accurate records of calibration .
if the compression machine is out of tolerance or malfunctions return it to working order within num hours or supply a backup machine until the problem is corrected .
provide the necessary facilities for inspection including a plant office as specified in section numa with the exception of a minimum floor space of num square feet .
num .
qc testing .
perform qc testing according to the reviewed qc plan and as follows num.a qc sampling and testing of plastic concrete .
select an appropriate slump value that will provide a workable mix for the construction element .
the contractors technician must have a copy of the department reviewed qc plan in their possession during testing and must be aware of the target slump for the structural element being placed .
do not exceed the following slump upper limits type of mix slump upper limit without water reducing admixtures num inches with water reducing admixtures num num inches with high range water reducing admixtures superplasticizers num inches mixes specified in section numh num num inches except tremie concrete as specified in section numj aaap num inches perform plastic concrete slump air and temperature tests on the first three consecutive trucks at the beginning of concrete placement operations or after a significant stoppage such as plant or equipment breakdown to determine if material control has been established .
material control is established when all test results of concrete slump air and temperature for three consecutive trucks are determined to be within the established action points .
obtain samples of fresh concrete according to ptm no .
num .
perform slump tests according to aashto t num air content tests according to aashto t num do not apply an aggregate correction factor or t num and temperature tests according to astm cnum .
report test data to the concrete technician promptly in order to facilitate necessary changes .
continue testing consecutive trucks until material control is established .
once material control is established the frequency of testing may be reduced to a minimum of one test per num cubic yards .
select concrete batches for sampling according to the reviewed qc plan or as directed by the inspector .
notify the inspector when sampling and qc testing are to be performed .
the inspector will witness the sampling and qc testing .
if a qc test fails to conform to the specified requirements or exceeds the upper or lower action points included in the reviewed qc plan increase the testing frequency to every truck until material control has been reestablished .
maintain the cement concrete consistency within num num inches of the selected target slump value target range .
if the upper slump limit is exceeded on any slump test the contractors technician shall reject the cement concrete .
if any slump test result falls outside the target range and has not exceeded the upper limit immediately perform the air content and temperature tests .
if the air content and concrete temperature is within the specified limits the contractor may incorporate the material into the work provided a full set of quality control and acceptance cylinders are molded in addition to the cylinders made for the originally selected ptm no .
num sample location for compressive strength testing according to ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
if one or more truckloads of cement concrete exceeds the slump target range make additional quality control and acceptance cylinders from each truck .
use the lowest compressive strength cylinders for acceptance of the lot .
do not incorporate any concrete into the work that does not conform to the specified requirements .
num.b qc compressive strength test cylinders .
from the same sample of concrete selected for acceptance testing as specified in section numdnum mold a sufficient number of concrete qc cylinders to be tested for numday or numday compressive strength numday compressive strength aaap numday compressive strength form removal strength and loading strengths as specified .
if using the maturity method to estimate concrete compressive strength mold two or more cylindrical specimens for temperature history recording and embed a temperature sensor at the vertical and horizontal center of numd numd num num change no .
num the cylindrical specimen and activate the maturity meter or data acquisition equipment to record the temperature history for the numday numday numday aaap numday and as required numday compressive strength analysis .
field cure cylinders according to ptm no .
num section num for the specified curing period .
after concrete curing is discontinued qc cylinders may be relocated to a preapproved acceptable secure area to protect them from damage .
provide maintenance and security for the area at no additional cost to the department .
the secure area must be easily accessible for inspection at all times .
continue to provide the same field cure and protection from the elements on all surfaces of the cylinders as that provided for the inplace concrete the cylinders represent until the cylinders are tested for compressive strength .
remove cylinders from molds at the same time formwork is removed .
perform qc testing for numday or numday compressive strength numday compressive strength aaap numday compressive strength and form removal and loading strengths according to ptm no .
num .
if using the maturity method to estimate concrete compressive strength perform qc testing using the procedure to estimate in place strength according to ptm .
num .
do not use the maturity method for determining acceptance strength typically at num days .
notify the inspector when qc testing is to be performed .
the inspector will witness the qc testing .
unless otherwise directed use qc test results for numday or numday compressive strength and form removal and loading compressive strength to determine whether to place additional concrete in areas that will be impacted by the lot of concrete represented by the qc cylinders .
acceptable qc compressive strength test results do not relieve the contractors responsibility for providing concrete conforming to the numday minimum mix design compressive strength acceptance requirements specified in section numdnum .
for aaap mixes in addition to the samples required above mold and cure two concrete cylinders under qc conditions for num days .
after num days test the two cylinders for compressive strength and report the compressive strengths .
num.b.num numday or numday or numday aaap qc compressive strength .
if the numday hes concrete only or numday qc compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to the minimum mix design compressive strength requirement specified in table a the contractor may discontinue the field cure on the lot of concrete represented by the qc cylinders unless otherwise directed .
if the numday aaap qc compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to num pounds per square inch the contractor may discontinue the field cure on the lot of concrete represented by the qc cylinders unless otherwise directed .
if the numday hes concrete only or numday qc compressive strength test result is less than the minimum mix design compressive strength requirement specified in table a continue the field cure on the lot of concrete represented by the qc cylinders until the specified numday minimum mix design compressive strength is obtained or for a maximum of num days .
if the numday aaap qc compressive strength test result is less than num pounds per square inch continue the field cure on the lot of concrete represented by the qc cylinders until the specified numday minimum mix design compressive strength is obtained or for a maximum of num days .
num.b.num numday qc compressive strength .
if the numday qc compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to the numday minimum mix design compressive strength specified in table a acceptance of the concrete lot will be based on the compressive strength testing of acceptance cylinders as specified in section numdnum .
if the numday qc compressive strength test result is less than the numday minimum mix design compressive strength specified in table a but greater than or equal to the numday structural design compressive strength specified in table a acceptance of the concrete lot will be based on the compressive strength testing of acceptance cylinders as specified in section numdnum and as follows perform an investigation of procedures for material sampling testing and concrete cylinder molding and curing and evaluate the concrete mix design and specification compliance to determine possible causes for the qc test result not meeting the specified minimum mix design compressive strength .
implement corrective actions as required .
submit an investigation report to the district executive within num working days for review and approval .
if the numday qc compressive strength test result is less than the numday structural design compressive strength specified in table a acceptance of the concrete lot will be based on compressive strength testing of cores obtained from the lot of concrete represented by the qc cylinders as specified in section numd .
numd numd num num change no .
num num .
acceptance testing .
determine the lot size or portion thereof for partial lots for material acceptance according to table b .
establish new lots daily for each class of concrete .
lots must be specific to a particular structural element except for incidental concrete items .
the contractor may use a lot combining structural elements if allowed in writing before concrete placement and if the following conditions are met the total volume is num cubic yards or less .
the combined structural elements are constructed using the same mix design concrete .
the combined structural elements are cured using identical curing methods and conditions .
cylinders and cores when necessary for this lot will represent all of the combined elements .
table b lot size for concrete acceptance construction area lot size structural concrete num cu .
yd .
pavement concrete num cu .
yd .
pavement patching concrete num cu .
yd .
incidental concrete num cu .
yd .
pavement concrete rps section numu the representative will select sample locations for acceptance testing according to ptm no .
num nnum .
perform sampling and testing for acceptance in the presence of the representative .
obtain samples of fresh concrete at the point of placement according to ptm no .
num .
perform concrete temperature tests .
perform air content tests according to aashto t num or t num .
reject all concrete not conforming to the specification requirements at the point of placement .
if the results of plastic concrete testing conform to the specification requirements mold a sufficient number of acceptance cylinders according to ptm no .
num from the same sample of concrete taken for slump air content and temperature determination .
standard cure acceptance cylinders according to ptm no .
num section num for num days and num days aaap only at an acceptable location .
conduct numday and numday aaap only compressive strength testing of two acceptance cylinders according to ptm no .
num .
if for any reason two testable acceptance cylinders are not available for compressive strength testing obtain two cores of the representative concrete within num working days as directed and at no additional cost to the department .
conduct numday and numday aaap only compressive strength testing of the cores according to ptm no .
num .
the department will accept the lot of concrete when the numday acceptance cylinder compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to the numday minimum mix design compressive strength specified in table a and when the numday qc compressive strength requirements specified in section numdnum.b have been met .
if the numday acceptance cylinder compressive strength test result is less than the numday minimum mix design compressive strength specified in table a acceptance of the concrete lot will be based on the procedures specified in section num .
num .
verification testing .
the representative will perform verification testing on the initial acceptance sample for each type of concrete specified in table b and a minimum of one verification test for every ten acceptance samples thereafter .
verification testing will consist of testing for temperature air content and compressive strength .
verification tests will be performed on concrete from the same sample used for acceptance testing .
the representative will obtain the temperature of the sample concurrently with the acceptance sample .
immediately after an acceptable air content test result for acceptance is obtained the representative will test the sample for air content according to aashto t num or t num using the same air meter .
the representative will mold two verification cylinders according to ptm no .
num .
standard cure the verification cylinders along with the acceptance cylinders according to ptm no .
num section num for num days .
conduct numday compressive strength testing of the verification cylinders according to ptm no .
num in the presence of the representative .
conduct the testing at the same time the acceptance cylinders are tested and using the same equipment .
verification test results will be compared to the associated acceptance test results and will not be used to determine acceptance of the lot .
if there is a difference in test results of more than numf for temperature num for air numd nume num num change no .
num content or num pounds per square inch for compressive strength the representative will immediately review the testing procedures equipment and personnel used in the acceptance testing and implement corrective measures to ensure the tests are performed within the prescribed tolerances .
the representative will record the acceptance test results the verification test results and applicable corrective measures in the concrete inspectors daily record book form csnum .
num .
qa testing .
the cmd qa personnel will obtain qa samples as part of the operation review process according to the qa manual publication num .
qa personnel will select concrete to be sampled .
obtain samples of fresh concrete at the point of placement according to ptm no .
num .
perform concrete temperature tests adjacent to those conducted by qa personnel .
perform air content tests according to aashto t num or t num with the air meter used for acceptance testing and the backup air meter .
immediately report all test results to the qa personnel .
reject all concrete not conforming to the specification requirements at the point of placement .
qa personnel will immediately perform an independent assurance evaluation of the temperature and air content test results .
if the difference in test results is more than numf for temperature or num for air content the representative will immediately review the testing procedures equipment and personnel used in the acceptance testing and implement corrective measures to ensure the tests are performed within the prescribed tolerances .
mold five qa cylinders from the selected sample according to ptm no .
num .
field cure the qa cylinders according to ptm no .
num section num for the specified curing period for the structural element the cylinders represent .
after curing of the inplace concrete is discontinued qa cylinders may be relocated to a preapproved acceptable secure area to protect them from damage .
provide maintenance and security for the area at no additional cost to the department .
the secure area must be easily accessible for inspection at all times .
continue to provide the same field cure and protection from the elements on all surfaces of the cylinders as that provided for the inplace concrete the cylinders represent until the cylinders are tested for numday compressive strength .
conduct numday compressive strength testing on two qa cylinders according to ptm no .
num using the same equipment used for acceptance and verification testing .
the representative will forward the remaining three qa cylinders to the lts for numday compressive strength testing according to ptm no .
num and hardened air content testing according to ptm no .
num .
furnish packaging material and package cylinders under the direction and supervision of the representative .
place the cylinders in individual containers cushioned with suitable material to prevent damage during shipment .
the total weight of each container cylinder and cushioning material must not exceed num pounds .
qa personnel will perform an independent assurance evaluation of the numday compressive strength test results .
if the difference between the test results of the cylinders tested at the project site and the cylinders tested at the lts is more than num pounds per square inch the representative will immediately review the testing procedures equipment and personnel used in the acceptance testing and implement corrective measures to ensure the tests are performed within the prescribed tolerances .
e measurement of material .
num .
cement .
aashto m num and as follows for plant and truck mixed concrete measure by weight .
the contractor may measure the weight of the cement separately in an enclosed compartment in the aggregate hopper .
the contractor may measure the weight of the cement and discharge it simultaneously with the aggregates except as specified in section numc .
for volumetric mixed concrete measure by volume .
num .
aggregates .
aashto m num and as follows for plant or truck mixed concrete measure by weight unless otherwise allowed .
base measurements on the material weightvolume relationship as specified in section numbnum .
for volumetric mixed concrete measure by volume .
num .
water .
aashto m num except as follows use watermeasuring systems capable of discharging the total quantity of measured water into the plant or truck mixer drum in a time not greater than onefourth of the specified mixing time .
for truck mixed concrete do not add water from the truck water system .
add water only from the plant water measuring system .
num .
admixtures .
incorporate the airentraining admixture solution into the batch with the mixing water using a suitable visual measuring device .
if another type of admixture is used with an airentraining admixture add it in nume numg num num change no .
num solution to another portion of the mix water as directed by an additional suitable visual measuring device except high range water reducing and antiwashout admixtures will be added according to the manufacturers recommendations .
equip the measuring device with interlocks to prevent discharging during the charge cycle and to prevent charging during the discharging cycle .
provide a means to calibrate the measuring device to within num .
dispense the airentraining admixture solution into the batch from a bulk supply tank .
for paving and if directed provide a bulk supply tank containing sufficient solution for the entire days concreting operations .
on the dispensing system provide devices capable of detecting and indicating the presence or absence of admixture flow .
agitate admixtures as required to insure consistency of the solution .
num .
pozzolan .
if the use of pozzolan is allowed by the specification add separately and measure cumulatively as specified in section numenum .
f mixing conditions .
num .
during cool and cold weather .
if concrete is to be placed at air temperatures below numf or if the local weather bureau forecasts air temperatures to descend to numf or lower at any time during the numhour period following concrete placement use an acceptable method to ensure that the aggregate is free of frozen lumps and at a temperature of not less than numf or more than numf at the time of charging into the mixer .
heat mixing water if necessary but do not exceed numf .
do not allow water with a temperature above numf to come in contact with the cement until the cement has been mixed with the aggregates .
num .
during hot weather .
in hot weather cool the aggregates and the mixing water as necessary to maintain the concrete temperature from numf to numf at the time of placement .
for bridge deck concrete placement maintain the concrete temperature from numf to numf at the time of placement .
for accelerated concrete placement maintain the concrete temperature from numf to numf at the time of placement .
num .
retarding admixtures .
the contractor may use retarding admixtures or may be directed to use retarding admixtures when any of the following conditions are anticipated rapid drying of the concrete as a result of low humidity high winds high air temperatures introduce the retarder into the concrete mixture as specified in section numenum .
adjust the proportions of the design as necessary but do not use the retarder to replace any portion of the specified volume of cement .
use a retarder that is available in sufficient quantities to provide the required degree of retardation under the prevailing weather conditions at the time of concrete placement .
g mix designs using potentially reactive aggregate .
num .
definition of terms .
num.a alkalis .
oxides of sodium and potassium generally derived from portland cement but may also be available to concrete from other sources such as admixtures deicing salts and in rare instances aggregates .
alkalis are calculated according to aashto m num .
num.b pozzolan .
a siliceous or siliceous and aluminous material that possesses little or no cementitious value but will in finely divided form and in the presence of moisture chemically react with calcium hydroxide at ordinary temperatures to form compounds possessing cementitious properties .
the term pozzolan includes flyash ground granulated blastfurnace slag and silica fume .
num.c alkaliaggregate reaction .
a chemical reaction in concrete between alkalis and certain constituents of some aggregates .
the products of this reaction under certain conditions may cause deleterious expansion within the concrete .
numg numg num num change no .
num num.d alkalisilica reaction .
an alkaliaggregate reaction involving certain siliceous aggregates and some calcareous aggregates containing certain forms of silica.num note numsiliceous substances that are known to react with alkalis are as follows opal chalcedony as a constituent of chert in carbonate rock or sand and gravel particles tridymite and christobalite which are high temperature forms of silica found in andesite or rhyolite acid glasses containing more than num silica or intermediate glasses containing between num and num silica .
other siliceous substances that are potentially reactive with alkalis are strained quartz as a constituent of granite or granite gneiss and clay minerals as a constituent of graywackes argillites phyllites and siltstones .
num .
aggregate evaluation .
the lts will test aggregates according to aashto t num and list the results in bulletin num .
aggregates that develop expansion greater than num after num days in solution num days age of bar are considered potentially reactive with cement alkalis .
the contractor may test aggregates according to astm cnum to confirm potential reactivity of fine or coarse aggregate but not to classify an aggregate as nonreactive .
if astm cnum mortar bars are made with cement having an alkali content greater than num aggregates are considered to be reactive if expansion is greater than num at num months or greater than num at num months .
if the expansion result for a coarse aggregate size is not listed in bulletin num use of the expansion result from another coarse aggregate size listed in bulletin num from the same source will be acceptable .
use aggregates that are deemed potentially reactive only with cements or cementpozzolan combinations as specified in section numgnum .
if one or both of the aggregates coarse or fine used in a mix is reactive mitigation is required as specified in section numgnum .
this requirement applies to all concrete used in paving or permanent structures on department projects including latex modified overlays and precast and prestress concrete products .
num .
cementcementpozzolan requirements .
for use with aggregate deemed potentially reactive as specified in section numgnum provide portland cement blended hydraulic cement or portland cementpozzolan combinations conforming to the requirements of section numb and the following num.a portland cement .
conforming to the optional chemical requirement in aashto m num for a maximum alkali content of num .
num.b blended hydraulic cement .
type is or ip astm cnum .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
num.c portland cementpozzolan combination .
furnish a combination of portland cement with an alkali content no greater than num and flyash ground granulated blast furnace slag or silica fume tested and qualified by the lts as follows flyashfurnish flyash that conforms to the optional chemical requirement in aashto m num for a maximum alkali content of num and that produces a num minimum reduction in mortar expansion when tested by the lts according to astm cnum .
use a quantity of flyash equal to a minimum of num by weight of the total cementitious material .
if flyash is added to reduce alkalisilica reactivity use a quantity of flyash between num and num by weight of the total cementitious material .
if aggregate expansion when tested according to aashto t num is greater than num use a quantity of flyash equal to a minimum of num by weight of the total cementitious material .
flyash may replace no more than num of the portland cement the remaining flyash is to replace the fine aggregate .
ground granulated blast furnace slagfurnish slag producing a num minimum reduction in mortar expansion when tested by the lts according to astm cnum .
use a quantity of slag between num and num by weight of the total cementitious material .
if aggregate expansion when tested according to aashto t num is greater than num use a quantity of ground granulated blast furnace slag equal to a minimum of num by weight of the total cementitious material .
silica fumeuse a quantity of silica fume between num and num by weight of the total cementitious material .
use of silica fume will be allowed on an experimental basis only numg numa num num change no .
num until sufficient experience is gained .
mechanically modified pozzolancement combinations .
use a quantity equal to or greater than that required for the base pozzolan as specified above but not greater than num by weight of the total cementitous material .
the department may waive flyash or ground granulated blast furnace slag requirements if the contractor presents test results from an independent laboratory showing that a lesser amount of pozzolan will mitigate asr expansion to below num when tested according to aashto t num .
num .
admixture requirements .
furnish accelerators or other chemical admixtures as specified in section num .
num .
exceptions .
if a service record of nonreactivity can be documented the department may exempt aggregates classified as potentially reactive as specified in section numgnum from the cementcementpozzolan requirements of section numgnum .
the service record must include a minimum of num structures each over num years of age which have been exposed to moisture in service and contain high alkali content cement more than num .
include the following documentation in the service record a report on the visual examination of each structure for cracking and expansion at joints .
petrographic analysis of cores according to astm cnum to determine the presence or absence of alkalisilica gel formations and associated microcracking .
determination of the aggregate classification according to astm cnum .
h extra cement concrete .
if num extra cement is required as specified in section numknum.a the extra cement may be replaced with other cementitious material in the same proportions as established in the mix design or section numc .
up to num of the water dose for the extra cementitious material based on the water cement ratio of the mix being utilized may be added .
add additional admixtures as required .
num plant and truck mixed cement concrete a batching plant .
proportion cement aggregates water and admixtures in a plant conforming to the requirements of aashto m num for batching plants .
install a moisture meter to accurately and continuously indicate the variability of the fine aggregate moisture content .
if approved automatic moisture compensating probes for fine and coarse aggregate may be used to control the amount of batched water .
calibrate moisture probes according to the reviewed qc plan .
provide scales with graduation increments no greater than num of the total scale capacity to measure the weight of aggregates or cement .
increments of less than num pounds are not required .
provide scales with capacities approximately equal to the hopper capacity or the central mixer capacity under normal proportioning conditions .
provide a minimum of ten numpound weights at the plant for checking the scales accuracy .
store the weights in a manner to maintain their weightcalibration accuracy .
check the accuracy of the bin scales according to ptm no .
num .
provide the plant with the following equipment for developing the concrete design and to control the quality of aggregates used and the concrete produced number of each equipment num sample splitter for fine aggregate having an even number of equal width chutes that discharge alternately to each side of the splitter .
a minimum of num total chutes is required .
the minimum width of the individual chutes is to be at least num larger than the largest particles in the sample and the maximum width of the individual chutes is to be num inch .
include two receptacles to hold the samples following splitting .
splitter design must allow samples to flow smoothly without restriction or loss of material .
num sample splitter for course aggregate having an even number of equal width chutes that discharge alternately to each side of the splitter .
a minimum of eight total chutes is numa numc num num change no .
num required .
the minimum width of the individual chutes is to be at least num larger than the largest particles in the sample .
include two receptacles to hold the samples following splitting .
splitter design must allow samples to flow smoothly without restriction or loss of material .
or num adjustable sample splitter for both course aggregate and fine aggregate having an even number of equal width chutes that discharge alternately to each side of the splitter .
a minimum of num total chutes is required .
for course aggregate the minimum width of the individual chutes is to be at least num larger than the largest particles in the sample .
for fine aggregate the minimum width of the individual chutes is to be at least num larger than the largest particles in the sample and the maximum width of the individual chutes is to be num inch .
include two receptacles to hold the samples following splitting .
splitter design must allow samples to flow smoothly without restriction or loss of material .
num mechanical sieve shaker with timerptm no .
num num set each standard sieves for fine and coarse aggregateaashto m num num oven capable of maintaining a uniform temperature of numf numfptm no .
num num calculating machine num cylindrical metal measure num cubic foot aashto t num and t num astm cnum num air meter acceptable type aashto t num and t num num slump cone aashto t num num cylinder compression machineptm no .
num num curing tankptm no .
num num capping deviceptm no .
num num balance conforming to the requirements of aashto m num for the class of general purpose scale required for the principle sample weight of the sample being testedptm no .
num .
num platform scale conforming to the requirements of aashto m num for the class of general purpose scale required for the principle sample weight of the sample being testedptm no .
num and aashto t num and astm cnum sufficient numinch by numinch cylinder moldsptm no .
num necessary incidental equipment num maturity meterptm no .
num if used sufficient temperature sensorsptm no .
num if used note numequipment requirements may be waived provided that arrangements for testing have been made at the producers central facility or at a commercial testing laboratory that participates in the aashto accreditation program in the area of concrete testing .
commercial testing laboratories are to conform to astm enum for concrete inspection and testing except for the equipment listed above .
note numequipment requirements may be waived provided that after num hours num hours specimens made for checking the strength of trial mixes are properly transported to a central facility or commercial testing laboratory for curing according to ptm no .
num .
provide the plant with proper laboratory equipment space and utilities as specified in section num. b mixers and agitators .
aashto m num .
if directed test air content of individual mixed concrete samples taken approximately at the beginning the midpoint and the end of the batch .
if the air content varies by more than num discontinue the use of the mixer or agitator until the condition is corrected .
if mixing in truck mixers at the plant use inclinedaxis revolvingdrum type mixers or horizontalaxis revolving drum highdischarge type mixers .
c mixing and delivery .
maintain concrete temperature after mixing between numf and numf for general concrete and between numf and numf for bridge deck concrete .
do not ship concrete exceeding these temperature ranges .
maintain adequate twoway communications between the concrete plant and the work site to provide both uniformity and control of the concrete mixture .
for each truck furnish a plant delivery slip signed at the plant by the technician or other designated person .
include the following information on the delivery slip numc num num num change no .
num contract number complete state project number or purchase order number .
the concrete plant supplier code .
method of concrete mixing i.e .
central or truck .
class of concrete jmf number and trial mix number i.e .
trial num num etc ..
number of cubic yards .
time of completion of mixing .
truck number .
number of mixing revolutions if applicable .
total amount of batch water used in each truck pounds .
the total weight in pounds of the total cementitious materials .
the types of additives used in each truck i.e .
water reducer aea retarder etc ..
submit the plant delivery slip and batchermixer slip as specified in aashto m num to the inspectorincharge .
do not use any concrete until it is approved for use by the inspectorincharge .
comply with the requirements of aashto m num except as follows if mixing in a plant mix for not less than num seconds or more than num seconds for normal strength concrete and not less than num seconds for hes concrete .
if mixing in the truck drum at the plant mix for not less than num or more than num truckdrum revolutions at a mixing speed of not less than num truckdrum revolutions per minute rpm nor more than num truckdrum rpm .
upon completion of the designated number of mixing revolutions reduce the truckdrum speed to not less than num rpm or more than num rpm .
do not exceed a total of num truckdrum revolutions .
deliver the mixed concrete to the work site and discharge within num hours after completion of mixing .
agitate but do not mix the concrete enroute to the work site .
in hot weather under conditions contributing to quick concrete stiffening or if the concrete temperature is numf or above do not allow the time between completion of mixing and discharge to exceed num hour .
as an alternative to maintaining the concrete temperature below numf use an approved set retarding admixture to extend the initial set time and enable the mix to remain workable for the full num hours of allowable mixing time .
if using mixer or agitator trucks agitate concrete for at least num revolutions immediately before placement .
do not use concrete that has exceeded num minutes without agitation .
if wash water is used to clean the truck drum completely discharge this wash water before the introduction of the succeeding batch .
do not allow concrete to come in contact with aluminum unless the aluminum is coated with an acceptable coating delivery of concrete in an aluminum truck bed is allowed .
num volumetric mixed cement concrete numa numd num num change no .
num a general .
use a plant inspected and listed in bulletin num .
make trial mixtures with a calibrated mixing plant .
provide plant equipment facilities and a concrete technicians as specified in section num .
do not begin production until the mixing plant and all equipment and facilities necessary for performing the work have been inspected and accepted .
mixing plants may be truck mounted .
b usage .
volumetric mixing plants may be used to produce concrete for endwalls inlets manholes end anchors sign posts and similar miscellaneous structures requiring small quantities of concrete .
if allowed by the district executive in writing volumetric mixing plants may also be used for pavement patching and structures .
approved plants may produce concrete for precast items .
c equipment .
prominently attach a permanent metal plates to the plant plainly marking the gross volume in terms of mixed concrete the operating speed the plant auger mixing angle and the plant weightcalibrated cement constant in terms of a revolution counter or other output indicator all as rated by the manufacturer .
num .
compartments .
provide separate compartments to carry the ingredients .
cover the aggregate bins and prevent contamination and intermixing of the fine and coarse aggregates during loading and transporting .
keep the cement bins free of moisture and contamination .
provide suitable means to carry water and additives and to incorporate the additives with the mixing water in the mix num .
feed system .
provide a feeder system mounted under the compartment bins to deliver the ingredients to the mixing unit .
equip each bin with an accurately controlled individual gate to form an orifice for volumetrically measuring the material drawn from the bin compartment .
do not charge aggregate bins more than num hours before mixing .
set the cement bin feeding mechanism to discharge a given volumetric weight equivalent of cement at a continuous and uniform rate during the concrete mixing operation .
coordinate the coarse and fine aggregate feeding mechanisms with the cement feeding mechanisms to deliver the required proportions .
num .
mixing unit .
provide an augertype mixer incorporated in the plants discharge chute or another suitable mixing mechanism that produces concrete of uniform consistency and discharges the mix without segregation .
examine the mixing screw daily and clean as necessary to prevent the buildup of mortar or concrete .
num .
dials and measuring devices .
equip the plant with accurate revolutioncounter indicators that allow the volumetric weight equivalent of cement fine aggregate and coarse aggregate discharged to be read during the concretemixing operation .
equip the counter with a ticket printout to record this quantity .
equip the plant with a water flow meter or gauge to indicate the discharge rate of water by volume entering the mix and a water meter to register the total amount of water discharged during the mixing operation .
also equip the plant with suitable gauges for checking the rate of flow of any additive entering the mix .
coordinate the water and additive flow meters with the cement and aggregate feeding mechanisms .
equip the flow meters with scales appropriate for the type and amount of material being measured .
mount a tachometer indicating the drive shaft speed on the plant .
place gauges dials and other devices that indicate the accuracy of concrete proportioning and mixing in full view so that the operator can accurately read or readjust them while concrete is being produced .
provide the operator convenient access to all controls .
d calibration .
use a unit constructed to allow convenient calibration of the gate openings and meters .
conduct a calibration once a year in the presence of department representatives .
make satisfactory arrangements with the department at least num week in advance of calibration .
during the yearly calibration calibrate the cement meter according to the manufacturers recommendation and check the aggregate gate settings against the calibration data for the plant .
maintain the calibration data in the plant and submit the data to the district .
after performing the yearly calibration and before starting work provide a mix design for review and acceptance and run a yield test to verify the design .
adjustments to correct for yield may require recalibration or a design change .
conduct a recalibration if there is a change in the source of fine or coarse aggregate or cement .
conduct additional calibrations if directed .
provide each plant with data on the accepted recalibration .
if hydraulic drive units are used perform the following additional calibration procedure at the beginning of the actual batching operation check the cement meter against the count and time used for the cement during the calibration of the individual materials .
if a discrepancy occurs adjust the belt speed of the unit so that the actual cement meter numd nume num num change no .
num count does not vary from the calibrated meter count by more than two counts per num seconds .
e mixing and delivery .
proportion measure and batch cement and aggregates by a weight equivalent method .
the measuring and batching mechanism is required to produce the specified proportions of each ingredient within the following tolerances cement weight num to num fine aggregate weight num coarse aggregate weight num admixtures weight or volume num water weight or volume num the tolerances are based on a volumeweight relationship established during the calibration of the measuring devices .
during mixing maintain the drive shaft speed as indicated by the tachometer within num rpm of the operating speed .
set the auger mixer angle in the range determined by the manufacturer .
do not exceed num hour between the continuous placing of succeeding batches .
num .
testing .
conduct slump and air content tests according to ptm no .
num .
conduct the unit weight test the concrete uniformity test and the output meter calibration test according to aashto t num astm cnum aashto m num and ptm no .
num .
if there is any doubt in the uniformity of the concrete perform further testing as directed .
num .
recording .
provide a batcher mixer slip with each load of ingredients .
include the following information on the batcher mixer slip aggregate gradation and moisture information .
class of concrete and the corresponding dial setting as determined in the design .
water discharge rate limitations .
use a separate batcher mixer slip for each class of concrete .
deliver the batcher mixer slip to the inspectorin charge at the work site .
do not use the concrete until the inspectorincharge verifies the data noted on the slip complies with the specifications .
num numa num num change no .
num section numjoint material num premolded expansion joint fillerfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num provide cork or sponge rubber or fiber joint fillers conforming to the following requirements a general .
as shown on the standard drawings or as indicated .
when used for transverse joints in reinforced or plain cement concrete pavement furnish lengths equal to the width of the traffic lane ramp or taper with a minimum thickness of num inch .
also provide a smooth top surface and holes punched for dowel bars to provide a snug fit without loss in thickness of the material .
when used for longitudinal joints in concrete base courses furnish pieces at least num feet in length and join securely .
when used for joints in structures furnish pieces at least num feet in length or as otherwise indicated and join securely .
b cork or preformed rubber .
aashto m num and as follows joint filler modified to include polyurethane bonded recycled rubber consisting of preformed strips of a durable composite of ground recycled rubber from automobile tires bonded together with polyurethane adhesive is allowed .
c fiber .
aashto m num except that a specimen at least num inches on a side with a minimum area of num square inches is necessary for the compression test .
for glass fiber tested for compression the applied force may be less than the minimum num pounds per square inch .
d certification .
section numbnum .
num longitudinal joint materialfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and as shown on the standard drawings or as indicated .
use tie bars tiebolts and key formers conforming to the following requirements a tie bars .
num .
deformed tie bars .
section numanum numbnum numdnum or nume and epoxy coated as specified in section numc .
num .
deformed bent tie bars .
section numanum numbnum numdnum or nume and epoxy coated as specified in section numc .
b tiebolts .
certify as specified in section numbnum and as follows manufactured from mild steel .
a numinch diameter bar with rolled threads or a numinch diameter bar with cut threads with a threaded sleeve nut .
for the nut steel pipe or hexagonal steel bar num num inches diameter by num num inches long or a high strength steel bar numinch diameter by num inches long .
for the assembled tiebolt a minimum yielding load of num pounds is necessary .
epoxy coated or galvanized excluding threads as specified in section numc or nums .
c key former .
manufactured of a material that does not deform during concrete placement .
num forcetransfer units for reinforced and plain cement concrete pavements a general .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows numa numa num num change no .
num num .
coated dowel bars and supporting members .
section numanum .
provide bars with their free end a true circle and having no burrs .
num .
alternate shaped coated dowel bars .
bars with properties equivalent to conventional round steelcoated dowel bars may be used when accepted by the lts .
num .
bondbreaking requirements .
aashto m num num.a type a .
coating material develops sufficiently low bond strength with concrete so that a bondbreaker is not necessary .
num.b type b .
coating material develops bond strength with concrete so that a bondbreaker is necessary .
shop applied bondbreakers are to conform to the pullout load requirements of aashto m num. b dowel bar coating .
aashto m num modified as follows provide fusionbonded epoxy coating as a type b coating with a nonabraded thickness of num mils to num mils .
no more than num holidays per linear foot average as detected with a num v holiday detector are allowed .
repair areas damaged during shipment handling fabrication or placement .
the sum of all damaged areas to be repaired per linear foot may not exceed num of the bar surface area per linear foot .
repair any visible signs of rust and any visible defects .
repair is accomplished by means of a mechanical wire brush cleaning or another acceptable procedure followed by application of an approved epoxy paint utilizing the paint manufacturers recommended procedure .
do not cover in excess of num of the total bar surface area with patching material .
c mechanically galvanized dowel bars .
provide galvanizing as specified in section nums astm bnum and bnum .
coating thickness to be not less than num mils num ounces per square foot .
d stainless steel dowel bars .
when specified provide stainless steel dowel bars and stainless steel dowel baskets meeting the requirements of astm anumanumm as defined in section numf for stainless steel reinforcement num .
storage .
section numinum .
e uncoated corrosionresistant dowel bars .
when specified provide steel dowel bars meeting the requirements of aashto mp nummmp num as defined in section numg for uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement .
f certification .
section numbnum num joint sealing material a silicone joint sealing material .
low modulus nonsagsilicone sealing material in a nonacidcuring one part formulation which requires tooling from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
furnish silicone joint sealing material conforming to the following physical requirements tensile stress at num elongation psi max .
astm dnum die c numday cure at numf numf and num to num relative humidity num elongation at maximum tensile strength min .
astm dnum die c num extrusion rate gramsminute min .
numf to numf test for extrusion using an airpowered caulking gun having a numinch orifice at num psi num numa numd num num change no .
num specific gravity astm dnum method a num to num durometer hardness shore a astm dnum numday cure at numf numf and num to num relative humidity .
num to num numf shelf life days min .
from date of manufacture .
num ozone and ultraviolet resistance astm cnum no chalking cracking or bond loss after num hours .
flow mil s num nil bond to cement mortar psi min .
primed if required .
mold three cement mortar briquets according to aashto t num and moisture cure for at least num days .
saw briquets in half clean and oven dry to a constant weight in an oven at num c num c. after cooling bond halves together with approximately num mils of silicone sealant cure num days at numf numf and num to num relative humidity and test using clips conforming to aashto t num .
test specimens in tension at loading rate of num inchminute .
num tack free time minutes max .
astm cnum num movement capability and adhesion astm cnum cyclic movement num num extensioncompression no adhesive or cohesive failure after num cycles numf b rubberized joint sealing material .
astm dnumtype ii from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. c rubberized joint sealing material .
astm dnumtype i from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. d preformed neoprene compression seals and strip seals and lubricant adhesive .
num .
physical requirements .
aashto m num and astm dnum movement range for pavement seals astm dnum for bridge seals and as follows num.a seals .
free of pin holes and uncured areas and uniform in all dimensions .
function properly at temperatures between numf and numf .
misalign the walls by not more than num inch when the pavement seal is in a compressed condition .
exceed nominal width by not more than num inch for seals up to num num inches num inch for seals greater than num num inches up to num num inches num inch for seals greater than num num inches up to num inches and num inch for seals greater than num inches .
allow no negative tolerance from nominal width .
vary from nominal height by not more than num inch if pavement seals are used and num inch if bridge seals are used .
numd numf num num change no .
num allow no tolerance in the movement range for initial qualification samples .
allow up to a num tolerance in the movement range for routine production samples .
allow no negative tolerance on the movement classification for bridge seals .
the movement classification for each bridge seal configuration is determined by rounding the movement range criterion down to the nearest numinch increment .
pavement seals have a minimum seal recovery as follows temperature percent recovery plant verification samples pv field samples qa dqa fv etc .
numf num num numf num num numf num num based on nominal width seal size minimum movement num inch num inch num num inches num inch pavement seals have a minimum side wall bearing pressure of num pounds per square inch at num nominal width .
num.b lubricant adhesive .
astm dnum and as follows of suitable viscosity at installation temperature and compatible with application equipment .
do not use lubricant adhesive more than nine months after date of manufacture .
num .
acceptance .
before using each lot of seal obtain the ecamms generated laboratory test report with the automated statement of approval or rejection .
a seal lot is a continuous production not exceeding num linear feet for pavement seals and not exceeding num linear feet for bridge seals .
num .
marking and shipping .
as follows num.a seals .
clearly and permanently mark the top of each seal with appropriate line characters of not less than num inch in height in increments not exceeding num feet .
the line characters must designate the lot or batch number the curedate code and the type of seal designation .
also mark the top of each pavement seal at num foot num inch intervals in a manner clear and durable to enable stretchcompression determinations of the seal .
num.b lubricant adhesive .
label each container with the code or type designation the plant place lot number and manufacture date .
e preformed closed cell polyethylene joint filler .
astm dnum type i and as follows compressibility pressure necessary to compress test specimen by num min .
num pounds per square inch pressure necessary to compress test specimen by num max .
num pounds per square inch f preformed polyurethane foam joint filler .
a semiopen flexible polyurethane foam that is molded to a crosssectional shape and easily installed in a pavement joint with parallel sides and is sufficiently selflocking to prevent the material from floating out of the joint .
furnish joint filler from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and as follows numf numc num num change no .
num num .
dimensions .
lengthminimum numfoot lengths widthnum num inches to num num inches depthnum num inches to num inches num .
properties .
determine using a skinless sample .
density lbscu .
in .
num compressive deflection astm dnum pressure load necessary to compress the test specimen num min .
num psi pressure load necessary to compress the test specimen num max .
num psi recover of original min .
num deflection calculated after num seconds of relaxation form deflection return .
num water absorption max .
num vol .
g asphalt rubber sealing compound .
astm dnum from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. h certification .
section numbnum num gaskets and waterstopsfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements a shipment and certification .
label shipments with style or code number lot or batch number plant place and manufacture date .
certify materials as specified in section numbnum .
b gaskets .
num .
elastomeric .
astm cnum for rubber gaskets and astm cnum for neoprene gaskets .
num .
preformed flexible joint sealant butyl rubber sealant .
astm cnum with the following exceptions flash point cleveland open cup c.o.c .
min .
f num fire point c.o.c .
min .
f num num .
resilient connectors between inletsmanholes and pipes .
storm water systems astm cnum sanitary sewer systems astm cnum c waterstops .
num .
metal .
astm bnum .
copper sheets used for waterstops of a weight indicated and containing a minimum copper mass of num .
numc num num num change no .
num num .
polyvinyl chloride .
num.a physical requirements .
manufactured from virgin polyvinyl chloride resin with the addition of only those plasticizers stabilizers and other materials necessary to ensure aging stability and inplace durability .
not factory scrap or reclaimed polyvinyl chloride .
brittleness temperature astm dnum numf max .
modulus of flexure astm dnum lbssq .
in .
num min .
tensile strength astm dnum die c original lbssq .
in .
across job splice lbssq .
in .
num min .
num min .
elongation original percent across job splice percent num min .
num min .
tear strength astm dnum die b original lbsin .
num min .
oven aging astm dnum num hours at numf change in tensile strength percent change change in elongation percent change num max .
num max .
numday extraction numfnumf change in tensile strength percent change change in elongation percent change num max .
num max .
num.b marking .
permanently label with the manufacturers name and style or code number at intervals not exceeding num feet .
num.c acceptance .
material shipped is subject to inspection at the delivery point .
if directed provide samples selected at random from the shipment consisting of one portion num feet long and another portion from a job splice consisting of a minimum of num inches of splice within num inches of unspliced material on each side .
submit samples to the lts for material confirmation and compliance .
num graphite lubricantfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
consisting of flaked graphite and a vehicle conforming to the following requirements percent by weight flaked graphitenum vehicle type minimum maximum minimum maximum graphite pastenum num num num num premixed graphite lubricantnum num num num num note numvehicle containing not less than num of fixed oils with the vehicle remainder of volatile thinners and dryers .
thoroughly mix the paste .
note numvehicle containing not less than num vehicle solids with the vehicle remainder of volatile num num num num change no .
num thinners and dryers .
note numflaked graphite composition percent by weight minimum maximum graphite carbon num graphite carbon passing num m no .
num sieve num num graphite carbon passing num m no .
num sieve num num num mortarmix mortar in an acceptable type of mixer unless otherwise allowed .
do not use retempered mortar or mortar mixed for more than num hour unless otherwise specified .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
a for pipe joints .
num .
jobmixed mortar .
mix one part cement two parts fine aggregate and sufficient water to form a plastic composition .
use materials conforming to the following requirements cementsection num fine aggregatesection num type c watersection num b for masonry joints and horizontal joints between precast components in manholes and inlets .
astm cnum type n num caulking compoundcertify as specified in section numbnum .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements a for caulking pipe joints and horizontal joints between precast components in manholes and inlets .
astm d num b for other caulking .
astm cnum or cnum num joint backing materialexpanded lowdensity polyethylene foam from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the requirements of astm dnum .
certify each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
when indicated the foam may be used as a bond breaker between joint filler material and joint sealer .
num num num num initial edition section numconcrete bonding compound num epoxybonding compoundprovide an epoxy bonding compound conforming to astm c num and specify type and grade as per operation .
obtain compound from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
submit a copy of the manufacturers recommendations for proper application to the representative .
apply the compound according to the manufacturers recommendations .
a general .
if epoxybonding compounds are used the type and grade of epoxy must be specified for each specific operation .
use the following classifications in conjunction with bulletin num num .
applicationoperation specific types .
type ifor use in nonload bearing applications bonding hardened concrete num days or older to hardened concrete surfaces .
type iifor use in nonload bearing applications bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete .
type iiifor use in bonding skidresistant materials to hardened concrete and as a binder in epoxy mortars or epoxy concretes used on traffic bearing surfaces or surfaces subject to thermal or mechanical movements .
type vfor use in load bearing applications bonding fresh concrete to hardened concrete .
num .
grades .
flow characteristics .
grade numlow viscosity grade nummedium viscosity grade numnonsagging consistency num .
classes .
temperature use range .
class afor use below numf to the lowest allowable temperature defined by the manufacturer .
class bfor use between numf and numf class cfor use above numf to the highest allowable temperature defined by the manufacturer .
num other bonding compoundprovide a bonding compound with a minimum numday bond strength of num pounds per square inch as tested according to astm c num .
obtain compound from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
submit a copy of the manufacturers recommendations for proper application to the representative .
apply the compound according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num numc num num change no .
num section numreinforcement steel num reinforcement barsas indicated from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements a billetsteel bars .
num .
deformed .
aashto m num astm anum grade num .
where aashto m num astm anum grade num is indicated nonbridge items only grade num may be substituted on a bartobar basis at no additional cost to the department .
if using deformed bent tie bars in pavement structures use only grade num .
num .
plain .
aashto m num astm anum or aashto m num astm anum grades num num or num .
aashto m num astm anum grades num or num. b railsteel bars .
num .
deformed .
aashto m num astm anum grade num including supplementary requirements .
do not weld or bend .
num .
plain .
aashto m num astm anum grades num or num including supplementary requirements .
do not weld or bend .
c epoxy coating where indicated .
num .
coating .
coat bars according to astm anum modified as follows section nummaterials subsection num .
maintain the certification for the powder coating material at the applicators site .
provide only a light colored coating that will reveal rusted or undercoated areas of steel .
subsection num .
revise as follows provide written certification in accordance with pennsylvania department of transportation publication num section num that the powder supplied meets the requirements of annex anum of this specification .
section numrequirements for coated steel reinforcing bars .
subsection num .
revise the first sentence as follows for acceptance purposes num of all recorded coating thickness measurements shall not be less than the specified minimum thickness or more than the specified maximum thickness .
subsection num add a second sentence as follows for department verification purposes after shipment a hand held numv num num ohm wetsponge type direct current holiday detector or equivalent method will be used to test plant or project samples consisting of an approximate num ft. length of bar cut from a full production bar or cut from a bar shipped to a project .
subsection num .
add a third sentence as follows for quality control and quality assurance purposes the average applies to the full production length of a bar or to a department verification sample consisting of an approximate num ft. length of bar cut from a full production length bar or cut from a bar shipped to a project .
num .
fabrication .
num.a qc .
section numanum .
submit a qc plan to the cmd .
numc numf num num change no .
num num.b repair all sheared or cut ends andor damaged areas with epoxy patching material according to the qc plan and astm dnum modified as follows section numcoating repair materials subsection num .
add the following sentences provide verification that the material has been tested and conforms to annex num .
certify each shipment of this material as specified in pennsylvania department of transportation publication num section numbnum .
section numrepairs subsection num coat shearedcut ends with approved patch material to have a minimum coating thickness of num mils .
control repair of damaged epoxy coating and shearedcut ends according to astm anum section num .
furnish patching or repair material that is compatible with the coating as approved and listed in bulletin num .
furnish patching or repair material that is inert in concrete .
furnish patching or repair material that can be satisfactorily used at the coating application facility at the bar fabrication facility or at a project location in the field .
the patching or repair material must be compatible with the coating inert in concrete and feasible for repairs at the applicator fabricator or in the field .
control repair of damaged epoxy coating and shearedcut ends according to astm anum section num modified as follows .
section numpermissible amount of damaged coating and repair of damaged coating subsection num .
furnish patching or repair material that is compatible with the coating as approved and listed in bulletin num .
furnish patching or repair material that is inert in concrete .
furnish patching or repair material that can be satisfactorily used at the coating application facility at the bar fabrication facility or at a project location in the field .
subsection num .
coat shearedcut ends with approved patch material to have a minimum coating thickness of num mils .
handle and store coated bars at the fabricators facility according to the requirements of astm dnum .
d lowalloy steel bars .
num .
deformed .
astm anum grade num. e galvanized reinforcement bars .
galvanized reinforcement bars may be substituted for epoxy coated reinforcement bars .
separate bundled pieces before pickling .
galvanize straight bars only in accordance with astm anum .
where bent bars are indicated bending may be performed only after galvanizing is performed .
provide a class num coating weight conforming to the requirements given in table num .
ensure that each piece is completely galvanized .
during galvanization use methods that prevent bars from becoming stuck together .
immediately quench the galvanized reinforcement bars in the chromate bath specified in astm anum .
repair all sheared or cut ends andor damaged areas as defined in astm anum in accordance with astm anum .
cracking flaking tears or spikes in the zinc coating at bend areas is considered to be damaged .
test galvanized reinforcement bars for embrittlement after galvanizing by bend testing samples of the galvanized reinforcement bars in accordance with astm anum .
reject any lots found to be embrittled .
f stainless steel reinforcement bars .
when indicated or specified provide hot rolled deformed stainless steel reinforcement bars in accordance with astm anum grade num meeting one of the following uns designations snum snum snum or snum numg numb num num change no .
num g uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars .
uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars may be substituted for epoxy coated reinforcement bars on a bartobar basis .
substitutions other than on a bar tobar basis may only be pursued through the value engineering ve process for substructure units only which includes the submission of a substructure design utilizing the higher strength available from uncoated corrosion resistant reinforcement bars .
the ve must be approved and accepted in writing by the department before any substructure bar substitutions are allowed .
provide steel reinforcement bars conforming to aashto mp num modified as follows section numfinish subsection num .
seams and surface irregularities shall not be cause for rejection provided the weight dimensions crosssectional area and tensile properties are not less than the requirements of this specification .
visible mill scale oxidation or corrosion deposits are cause for rejection .
num bar matssteel bars section num assembled into mats as shown on the standard drawings by rigidly welding or clipping the bars at joints or points of intersection .
a clips .
for mechanical assembly use no .
num gage steel wire of sufficient ductility to prevent clip fracture in mat fabrication .
for manual assembly use no .
num gage spring steel wire of high elastic limit conforming to the following chemical analysis percent element min .
max .
carbon num num manganese num num sulfur num num phosphorus num num silicon num num b method of assembly using clips .
hold the bars in close contact by clips designed to exert constant pressure .
assemble at the point of manufacture using clips of acceptable design and fasten by mechanical means .
use doublelatching type clips for manual assembly .
use some form of locking device on the clips free or latching ends so that when the clips are latched in place no creeping occurs that would allow the bars to be easily moved from their necessary positions .
provide approximately a numinch spread of the clips at intersections for necessary leverage to hold bars at right angles .
latch each alternate clip at right angles to the adjacent clips to ensure maximum rigidity .
use clips of a length so the material is not stressed beyond the elastic limit during the latching process .
a minimum length of num num inches is necessary for no .
num to no .
num bars .
other types of clips that ensure equal rigidity may be submitted for acceptance .
c acceptance of design .
submit designs for acceptance before use .
num steel welded wire fabricastm anum grade num .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num rigidly welded at joints and points of intersection to form a fabric reinforcement and as shown on the standard drawings .
a epoxy coating where indicated .
astm anum type num class a. b galvanized welded wire fabric .
galvanized welded wire fabric may be substituted for epoxy coated welded wire fabric .
galvanize in accordance with astm anum with a coating grade consistent with the measured wire diameter of the fabric .
chromate in accordance with astm anum section num .
num num num num change no .
num num deformed welded wire fabricastm anum grade num .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and as shown on the standard drawings .
a epoxy coating where indicated .
section numa .
b galvanized welded wire fabric .
galvanized deformed wire fabric may be substituted for epoxy coated deformed wire fabric .
galvanize according to astm anum with a coating grade consistent with the measured wire diameter of the fabric .
chromate in accordance with astm anum section num .
num certificationcertify as specified in section numbnum and conforming to the following requirements .
identify the appropriate specification on the certification and include the grade of steel .
forward a copy to the project with the shipment of steel .
epoxy coaters or galvanizers of reinforcement steel must complete and maintain the original copy of form csnumc in addition to the original csnum and all component certifications at the epoxy coaters or galvanizers location for a period of not less than num years from the date of the last shipment to a project distributor supplier private label company fabricator or precast plant .
make files available for inspection and verification by a department representative .
submit a copy of forms cs num and csnumc with each shipment of epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcement steel to a project distributor supplier private label company fabricator or precast plant .
form csnumc does not have to be completed if the fabrication of epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcement steel is performed at the same location as listed in bulletin num .
fabricators of epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcement steel must complete and maintain the original copy of form csnumf in addition to the csnumc when applicable and all component certifications at the fabricators location for a period of not less than num years from the date of the last shipment to a project distributor supplier private label company or precast plant .
make files available for inspection and verification by a department representative .
submit a copy of forms cs num and csnumf with each shipment of epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcement steel to a project distributor supplier private label company or precast plant .
num nume num num initial edition section numconcrete curing material and admixtures num curing and protecting covers a white polyethylene sheeting .
aashto m num except minimum tensile strength requirements are as follows machine direction cross machine direction num lbslin .
in .
num lbslin .
in .
b white polyethylene sheetingburlapbacked .
num .
white polyethylene sheetingnatural burlap backed .
aashto m num .
num .
white polyethylene sheetingsynthetic burlap backed .
aashto m num except weight of synthetic burlap backed white polyethylene sheeting is num ounces per square yard .
c white polypropylene sheetingpolypropylene fiber backed .
num .
white polypropylene sheetingpolypropylene fiber backed with maximum moisture loss of num pounds per num square feet in num hours when testing according to astm c num .
num .
daylight reflectance of white polypropylene sheeting is at least num when measured according to astm e num .
num .
white polypropylene sheetingpolypropylene fiber backed weighing not less than num ounces per square yard .
num .
a white sheeting layer with a nominal thickness of num inch and not less than num inch .
num .
minimum strength requirements are as follows grab tensile strength grab tensile elongation puncture num lbs num num lbs astm d num astm d num astm d num d burlap .
aashto m num class num. e insulating mats .
treated new wood fibers rock wool or glass fibers completely enclosed on all sides within weatherproof covers of asphaltsaturated kraft crepe or polyethylene sheeting and conforming to the following requirements asphaltsaturated crepe covers manufactured from extra heavy twoply kraft crepe totaling not less than num pounds per num square feet on the weather side and of kraft paper or kraft crepe of not less than num pounds per num square feet on the reverse side .
polyethylene covers manufactured from sheeting of not less than num mils normal thickness on the weather side and of not less than num mils normal thickness on the reverse side .
fiber bonded to the covers of insulating mats over num inches in width to prevent bunching of the mats during storage shipping or handling .
numf numb num num initial edition f foam insulation .
molded extruded or sprayapplied polyurethane or molded or extruded polystyrene forming closedcell foam insulation with the cells uniformly distributed and conforming to the following requirements water absorption percent by volume tested according to astm d num max .
density lbscu .
ft. tested according to astm d num num g certification .
section numbnum num curing compounds a liquid membraneforming curing compound clear or white .
astm c num type numd clear or translucent and containing a red fugitive dye type num white pigmented .
the rate of application for testing untextured specimens is num square foot per gallon .
type i cement from lafarge bath plant in ontario and ottawa astm graded sand are used in the mortar for testing .
the curing compound must be manufactured to remain sprayable at temperatures above numf control sagging pigmented settling leveling and deemulsification maintain the specified properties for at least num year settlement of pigment must be a thoroughly wetted soft mushy mass allowing the complete and easy vertical penetration of paddle .
settled pigment must be easily predisposed with minimum resistance to the sideways manual motion of the paddle across the bottom of the container to form a smooth uniform product of the proper consistency .
do not dilute or alter the curing compound after manufacture .
package the curing compound in clean numgallon totes numgallon barrels or numgallon pails or supply curing compound from a suitable storage tank located at the job site .
the containers must comply with num cfr num .
provide numgallon totes and numgallon barrels with removable lids and airtight fasteners .
the numgallon pails must be round and have standard full open head and bail .
do not use lids with bungholes .
fill containers in a way that prevents skinning .
line steel containers and lids with a coating that prevents destructive action by the compound or chemical agents in the air space above the compound .
the coating must not come off the container or lid as skins .
plastic containers and lids must not react with the curing compound .
label each curing compound container with manufacturers name astm c num classification lot number volume date of manufacture shelf life volatile organic compound content warning that curing compound containing pigment must be well stirred before using with no dilution introduction of air or other foreign substances into the curing compound precautions concerning the handling and application of curing compound statement that the contents fully comply with state air pollution control rules and regulations use the curing compound within num months from the date of manufacture or before the expiration of the product shelf live whichever occurs first .
b liquid membraneforming curing compound white polyalphamethylstyrene pams .
astm c num type num class b as modified below total solids by weight of compound to be used as a reference numb nume num num initial edition reflectance in num hours astm e num num minimum loss of water pounds per square foot in num hours astm c num num maximum voc content pounds per gallon num maximum infrared spectrum vehicle num alpha methylstyrene the rate of application for testing untextured specimens in num square feet per gallon .
type i cement from lafarge bath plant in ontario and ottawa astm graded sand are used in the mortar for testing .
the curing compound must be manufactured to remain sprayable at temperatures above numf control sagging pigmented settling leveling and deemulsification maintain the specified properties for at least num year settlement of pigment must be a thoroughly wetted soft mushy mass allowing the complete and easy vertical penetration of paddle .
settled pigment must be easily predisposed with minimum resistance to the sideways manual motion of the paddle across the bottom of the container to form a smooth uniform product of the proper consistency .
do not dilute or alter the curing compound after manufacture .
package the curing compound in clean numgallon totes numgallon barrels or numgallon pails or supply curing compound from a suitable storage tank located at the job site .
the containers must comply with num cfr num .
provide numgallon totes and numgallon barrels with removable lids and airtight fasteners .
the numgallon pails must be round and have standard full open head and bail .
do not use lids with bungholes .
fill containers in a way that prevents skinning .
line steel containers and lids with a coating that prevents destructive action by the compound or chemical agents in the air space above the compound .
the coating must not come off the container or lid as skins .
plastic containers and lids must not react with the curing compound .
label each curing compound container with manufacturers name astm c num classification lot number volume date of manufacture shelf life volatile organic compound content warning that curing compound containing pigment must be well stirred before using with no dilution introduction of air or other foreign substances into the curing compound precautions concerning the handling and application of curing compound statement that the contents fully comply with state air pollution control rules and regulations use the curing compound within num months from the date of manufacture or before the expiration of the product shelf live whichever occurs first .
c liquid membraneforming curing compound black .
emulsified asphalt class enum bulletin num or cutback asphalt class rcnum astm d num both conforming to the performance requirements of astm c num for type num. d bridge deck intermediate curing compound .
a monomolecular film composed of a filmforming fatty alcohol capable of retarding moisture evaporation from concrete .
use material from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. e certification .
section numbnum including the date of manufacture and the product shelf life on form cs num .
num numh num num initial edition num concrete admixturesof an approved type from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements a general .
if tested by precipitation the chloride ion content is not to exceed the following num by weight of the admixture for use in conventional reinforced cement concrete num by weight of the admixture for use in prestressed concrete b certification .
section numbnum c shipment .
ship and deliver in drums in bulk or in bags .
mark or tag each drum or bag with the batch or lot number and date of manufacture .
forward a bill of lading with each bulk shipment bearing the same information as necessary for drums .
each shipment will be subject to sampling and testing at any time .
d air entraining admixtures .
aashto m num e latex emulsion admixture .
a nontoxic filmforming polymeric emulsion in water to which all stabilizers have been added at the point of manufacture and homogeneous and uniform in composition .
conform to the prequalification requirements specified in report fhwardnum styrenebutadiene latex modifiers for bridge deck overlay concrete april num. f other admixtures .
aashto m num g fibers for plastic shrinkage cracking .
monofilament or collated fibrillated synthetic fiber complying with astm c num numtype iii .
provide test report complying with icc evaluation services icces acnum acceptance criteria for concrete with synthetic fibers section num from an independent certified laboratory .
provide a method of adding the fibers to the mix such that the fibers are dispersed during mixing and no clumps of fibers are present at the end of a mix cycle .
h pigment for internally colored concrete .
colored or white pigments in powder form complying with astm c num .
provide test report complying with astm c num from an independent certified laboratory .
the maximum prescribed dosage rate of the pigment must be less than num by weight of the cement .
num numd num num change no .
num section nummasonry units num brick a sewer brick .
astm cnum grade ss except with a maximum water absorption of num for the average of num bricks and num for individual bricks .
b building brick .
astm cnum grade sw c certification .
section numbnum num precast concrete blocksas listed in bulletin num conforming to the applicable requirements of astm c num and as follows a general .
machine made blocks with a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch when tested according to astm cnum .
do not use liquid membraneforming compounds for curing .
certify each shipment of precast concrete blocks according to section numbnum .
b material .
cementsection num fine aggregate type asection num coarse aggregate type asection num watersection num pozzolansection num the gradation of aggregates does not apply .
c acceptance .
prepare a qc plan as specified in section numanum.a and submit it for review at the start of the project .
provide two samples for each lot number or as directed .
a lot may represent each days production .
acceptance will be based on the results of compression tests made on these samples and on inspection of the finished product to determine conformance with specifications and lack of defects .
d rejection .
blocks exhibiting any of the following conditions will be considered defective and will not be accepted defects that indicate imperfect proportioning mixing and molding surface defects such as honeycombing or open texture or areas damaged beyond satisfactory repair .
num num num num change no .
num section numprecast concrete products num general requirementsas shown on the contract drawings andor standard drawings and as follows a description .
precast concrete units are those cast in other than their permanent location by a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. b shop drawings .
as accepted .
standard precise elements may be fabricated as shown on the standard drawings without submitting shop drawings to the bureau of project delivery for acceptance unless otherwise indicated .
for deviations or modifications of the standards submit shop drawings for acceptance .
num precast concrete unitsapproved plants may fabricate any of the following items concrete barrier manholes inlet boxes concrete top units for inlet boxes junction boxes median barrier endwalls sound barrier posts and panels num material storage of materialsection num cement concretesection num except sections numdnum .
numdnum .
numdnum .
and numdnum .
requirements for remediation of a potential alkalisilica reaction do not apply for cement concrete used in the fabrication of precast concrete barrier that is to be used in temporary installations only as specified in section num and indicated as such as specified in section numd .
coarse aggregate type a no .
num no .
num or no .
numsection num fine aggregate type asection num concrete curing materialsections num and numa type numd translucent with red fugitive dye .
reinforcement steelsection num .
epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcement bars or epoxy coated or galvanized welded wire fabric are not required for the fabrication of precast concrete barrier that is to be used in temporary installations only as specified in section num and indicated as such as specified in section numd .
steel anchor boltssection numc metal unitssections numa and b num numa num num change no .
num manhole stepssection numc protective coating boiled linseed oilsection num num plant acceptance a general .
do not begin fabrication before the chief structural materials engineers inspection and acceptance of the plant .
provide a permanent building offered for the departments acceptance .
material equipment test procedures methods of fabrication handling storage and transportation are subject to inspection .
register and certify the plant under either the prestressed concrete institute pci or national precast concrete association npca plant certification program .
submit an annual endorsed copy to the chief structural materials engineer for continued qualification .
b qc .
num .
general .
establish a level of qc based on uniform production practices .
submit the plants qc plan and mix designs to the chief structural materials engineer bridge design technology division structural materials section for review and approval .
include with the qc plan a company organizational chart indicating a separate chain of command from the qc manager to the ownerplant manager independent of the production manager .
resubmit the qc plan mix design and organizational chart when required by the chief structural materials engineer due to changes in processes materials or personnel .
num .
qc manager .
provide a qc manager who has overall responsibility for the adequacy of production facilities qc sampling and testing and fabrication of the product and who will ensure that items are fabricated as shown on the standard drawings .
num .
qc personnel .
assign sufficient qualified personnel with precast concrete experience to be responsible for qc and sampling and testing during the complete fabrication process storage and shipment .
technicians responsible for concrete sampling and testing are required to provide written evidence that they successfully completed certification requirements for an aci grade i field technician certification or have approval from the chief structural materials engineer as a technicianintraining .
do not proceed with production until qualified personnel are present and approved by the department .
after initially obtaining the aci certification technicians are not required to obtain recertification unless there has been more than a num month interval where actual plastic concrete testing has not been performed by the technician .
num plants and plant sites a description .
provide adequate and acceptable lighting for operations not completed in the daylight .
provide a drainage system as needed for the removal of rainfall and curing water .
provide a stabilized area for product storage .
furnish necessary facilities for the inspection of material and workmanship .
allow inspectors employed by the department unrestricted access to the premises during plant working hours .
the necessary facilities for inspection include a plant office conforming to the following minimum requirements number of each requirements num floor space square feet yes airconditionedheated num desk and chair num plan rack num work table num twodrawer fire resistant dlabel metal file cabinet adequate number chair and stools num individual access phone line numa numa num num change no .
num num internet service for structural materials plants a proprietary or mid market internet service that provides for highspeed access via a digital subscriber line dsl .
cable or other broadband connection .
for plant mixed hotmix asphalt warmmix asphalt and readymix concrete plants or where high speed access is not available provide a dial up internet service with access to the account by means of a local telephone number .
num telephone business and emergency calls only and answering machine or voicemail num sanitary electric water cooler num fire extinguisher adequate number cupboards closets lockers num firstaid kit osha numd and num appendix a compliant num fabrication a general .
plants must produce a sample element to verify their competency before receiving approval to produce a new product type .
b bars mesh reinforcement inserts and chairs .
fabricate and place bar and mesh reinforcement as indicated within specified tolerances .
secure reinforcing in beds and forms using chairs or blocking so the reinforcing maintains its position during placement and vibration of concrete .
bars may be fabricated into cages by tying and tack welding .
do not tack weld epoxy coated galvanized uncoated corrosionresistant stainless steel or grade num reinforcement bars .
use acceptable chairs or ties for support .
when bar spacing is greater than or equal to num inches tie all intersections with annealed iron wire or metal clips .
when bar spacing is less than num inches either tie all intersections or tie alternate intersections with annealed iron wire or metal clips in each direction to provide a staggered tie layout prohibit movement of reinforcement bars during manufacturing .
for epoxycoated reinforcement or galvanized reinforcement provide plasticcoated tie wire epoxy coated tie wire metal clips or plastic clips .
c beds and forms .
support casting beds or forms on unyielding foundations .
use forms adequate for the manufacture of products within tolerances according to approved drawings and specifications .
clean forms after each use to prevent accumulation of coatings .
d marking .
mark the manufacturers name or trademark and the date of manufacture on one side or end of each precast unit as soon as possible after stripping using permanent marking system .
for inlets manholes and junction boxes also provide the type identification .
identify barrier meeting nchrp num by indenting the top section of each barrier section with minimum numinch block lettering as follows t num for temporary barrier and p num for permanent barrier .
num concrete a testing .
verify the minimum curing strength and the numday minimum concrete strength specified in section num for each lot .
if the test results of the acceptance cylinders fail to meet the required numday minimum compressive strength the disposition of the products will be resolved as specified in section num .
num .
traditional nonself consolidating mixtures .
select an appropriate slump value that provides a workable mix for the precast concrete units .
at no time is the slump upper limit to exceed num inches for mixes without water reducing admixtures num num inches for mixes with waterreducing admixtures and num inches for mixes with high range waterreducing admixtures superplasticizers .
if the upper limit is exceeded on any slump test the plants technician must reject the cement concrete .
maintain the cement concrete consistency within num num inches on either side of the selected value .
num .
self consolidating concrete mixtures scc .
perform slump flow testing in accordance with astm cnum .
evaluate the visual stability index vsi of the mixture when the slump flow is measured during testing .
reject mixtures with a vsinum .
conduct jring testing in accordance with astm cnum whenever the slump flow test is numa num num num change no .
num performed .
establish a slump flow target for production of not less than num inches nor more than num inches and maintain the slump flow within a range of num inches of the target .
reject the concrete if the upper specification limit is exceeded .
if the slump flow test result is less than the lower production range limit or the difference between the slump flow test result and jring test result is greater than num inches reject the concrete mixture unless the mixture has been approved for vibration and is subsequently vibrated .
take immediate corrective action whenever the slump flow limits or action points are exceeded and test succeeding batches until material control has been reestablished .
b mixture .
for traditional nonself consolidating mixes furnish concrete meeting the class indicated and as specified in section num .
for scc mixes furnish concrete meeting the class indicated and as specified in section num except provide concrete with a plastic air content of num num .
in addition perform the following additional qualification tests before production column segregation test astm cnum num maximum freeze thaw resistance astm cnum procedure a or b minimum durability factor of num c placing concrete .
place concrete without segregation .
deposit concrete in its final position in each part of the form .
methods of placement are subject to acceptance .
do not work or flow concrete along the forms from the point of deposit .
work concrete under and around reinforcement .
place concrete batches in form within one half hour of each other .
consolidate the plastic concrete by internal andor external vibration .
do not consolidate scc mixtures without approval and unless the mixture was qualified within num inches of the upper production slump flow limit during the trail batching and evaluation phase .
production will be restricted to periods where air temperatures within the work area are above numf .
d lot size .
lot size is one shifts production .
mold a minimum of four concrete test cylinders for each lot cast .
mold additional test cylinders for department acceptance testing if directed .
mold cylinders according to ptm no .
num .
cure cylinders the same as the product .
test cylinders according to ptm no .
num .
matchmark test cylinders with the lot represented .
record test results and give records to the department representative .
e finishing .
make concrete surfaces true and even and free from rough open or honeycombed areas depressions or projections .
do not add water to the concrete to facilitate finishing .
f patching .
patch and repair manufacturing defects and minor damage in accordance with publication num .
submit repairs beyond the scope of publication num to the chief structural materials engineer for evaluation and disposition .
num curing and protective coating a curing .
cure and protect concrete according to the approved qc plan .
develop the qc plan using aci num as a guideline .
set stripping time based on the inherent characteristics of the product .
accomplish secondary curing by approved methods .
maintain precast concrete units after stripping and during secondary curing in a minimum numf environment until they have reached a compressive strength of num of the numday minimum compressive strength for the product as indicated on the shop drawing .
do not place units in an environment of less than numf after the secondary cure unless the differential between the units and the air temperature is less than numf .
store units until the numday minimum compressive strength is obtained .
b protective coating .
apply protective coating to concrete barrier and inlet tops before shipment .
use boiled linseed oil and apply as specified in section numb or use a penetrating sealer from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num applied according to the manufacturers specifications .
penetrating sealer must not discolor the concrete .
if curing compound is used for secondary curing wait num days before applying the protective coating .
barriers for temporary use need not receive a protective coating .
num tolerancesas shown on the standard drawings or according to aci num section num except as follows num num num num change no .
num length of membernum inch per num feet with a minimum of num inch and a maximum of num inch crosssectional dimensions numinch numinch numinch numinch num handling and storagehandle and move products to the storage yard when they have gained adequate strength to be moved without causing damage .
maintain adequate support when handling and storing the product .
store the product until shipment in areas accessible for inspection .
num transportationprovide numhour advance notice of loading and shipping schedule .
do not ship unapproved items .
include form csnum with each shipment .
observe hauling restrictions .
ensure that supports bracing and shipping methods dampen vibration .
provide adequate padding material between the tie chains or cables to prevent concrete chipping .
num disputesin matters of disputes over products the chief structural materials engineer bdtd structural materials section or the designated onsite representative have the final word on acceptability of the product .
num certificationsection numbnum and as further directed by the chief structural materials engineer bdtd structural materials section .
num num num num initial edition section numwater num water for mixing or curing cement concrete mortar or groutuse water reasonably clean free from vegetable matter oil acid alkali sugar or other substances injurious to the finished product .
if the hydrogen ion concentration of the water as determined either electrometrically or colorimetrically in conjunction with the necessary indicator is less than ph num or more than ph num test the water according to aashto t num .
compressive strength not less than num of that developed from similar samples made with potable water needs to be achieved .
num water for use other than in mixing or curing cement concrete mortar or groutsuitable clean water may be used without testing .
if the water source is relatively shallow enclose the intake to exclude silt mud grass or other undesirable foreign material .
num num num num initial edition section numcalcium chloride num generalas listed in bulletin num and conforming to the requirements of aashto m num type s grade num class a or b. certify as specified in section numbnum .
num num num num initial edition section numsodium chloride num generalfurnish sodium chloride from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the requirements of aashto m num or astm d num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num materialsodium chloride type num grade num .
num num num num initial edition section numhydrated lime num generalastm c num type n. legibly mark the manufacturers name the lot number and the approximate net weight on each container or in the case of bulk shipment on the shipping notice .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num numa num num initial edition section numpozzolans num generalfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
legibly mark the name of the manufacturer the lot number and the approximate net mass on each container or in case of bulk shipment on the shipping invoice .
supply sources desiring approval must write the lts stating their present qc program as specified in section numanum .
the material is subject to assurance sampling and testing by the lts .
materials not conforming to the requirements may result in suspension of source approval .
the supply source may reapply for approval after making corrections necessary to ensure that any sampled or tested material test meets all applicable specifications .
obtain material from a single source unless otherwise allowed in writing .
separate material of different types and from different sources .
use each type and source in continuous segregated portions of the project .
if possible limit material used in an individual structure to a single type or source .
if this is not possible use one type and source for footers piers and abutments and one source for superstructures if allowed .
num flyash a for use with lime .
astm c num tested according to aashto t num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b for use with cement concrete .
aashto m num class c f or n except limit loss on ignition to a maximum of num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num ground granulated blast furnace slag a for use with cement concrete .
aashto m num astm c num grade num or num .
do not use ground granulated blast furnace slag with a material temperature exceeding numf at time of delivery to the mixer unless permitted in writing .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num silica fume a for use with cement concrete .
aashto m num except percent retained on the no .
num sieve .
if the percent retained on the no .
num sieve is greater than num test the material retained for contamination .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num mechanically modified pozzolancement combinations a for use with cement concrete .
interground mechanically modified pozzolancement combinations which contain a minimum of num pozzolan by weight and which meet the requirements of section numb when replacing num cement by weight in cement concrete mixtures .
test according to the aashto standard for the base pozzolan as indicated in sections numb or numa .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num num num num initial edition section numlime pozzolan num generalsubmit samples to the lts for testing a minimum of num days before anticipated use .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements total calcium and magnesium oxides nonvolatile basismin .
num available calcium oxide rapid sugar test astm c num plus total mgo content calculated to be equivalent caohnummin .
num as received loss on ignition carbon dioxide plus moisture combined and freemax .
num free water asreceived basismax .
num residuethe sieve analysis of the byproduct lime shall be as follows sieve maximum percent retained no .
num num no .
num num num num num num initial edition section numbituminous paper num generalimpregnated with asphalt or tar and conforming to the following requirements english oneply twoply weight per square foot ounces num num permissible variation num num num numd num num change no .
num section numgeotextiles num generalfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements a fabric .
use fabric consisting of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns such as polyethylene polyamide polyvinyledenechloride polypropylene or polyester formed into a stable network so that the filaments or yarns retain their relative position to each other .
use fabric structures as noted in table a. slit film woven fabrics may only be used for class num geotextiles .
nonwoven chemicallybonded or thermallybonded fabrics are not allowed for any class of geotextile .
use fabric inert to commonly encountered construction chemicals or substances .
during periods of shipment and storage protect the fabric from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays temperatures greater than numf mud dirt dust and debris .
to the extent possible wrap the fabric in a heavyduty covering or shield from direct sunlight .
geotextiles will be rejected at the time of installation if any defects deterioration or damage was incurred during manufacture transportation or storage .
b physical requirements .
table a for the indicated construction class and type .
c acceptance .
acceptance of the geotextile will be based on certified test data submitted by the manufacturer and on testing by lts .
d certification .
certify each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
visibly label all shipments on the fabric or its container with the manufacturers name fabric type or trade name lot number and material quantity .
numd numd num num change no .
num table a geotextile physical requirementsnum fabric properties test method construction class class num class num class num subsurface drainage sediment control separation and erosion control stabilization and grs abutment reinforcement type a type bnum type a type c fabric structure na woven monofilament woven slit film woven slit film nonwoven needle punched woven polypropylene weight ozsy astm d num na na na num min na grab tensile strength lbs .
astm d num num x num minnum num min num min num min na grab tensile elongation astm d num num to num x num to num num maxnum num maxnum num minnum na ultimate wide width tensile strength lbft astm d num na na na na num minnum wide width tensile elongation astm d num na na na na num maxnum puncture lbs .
numin flat end rod astm d num num min num min num min num min num min trapezoid tear strength lbs .
astm d num num x num minnum num min num min num min num minnum apparent opening size aos sieve no .
astm d num no .
num to no .
num no .
num to no .
num no .
num to no .
num no .
num to no .
num no .
num to no .
num percent open area cwnum num to num na na na na permittivity secnum astm d num num min num min num min num min num to num water flow rate gminsf astm d num num min na na na num to num ultraviolet resistance strength retention astm d num num num hrs min num num hrs min num num hrs min num num hrs min num num hrs min num the numerical values indicate average roll values .
num average roll values for class num material in machine direction md only .
num class num type b geotextiles used for silt fence must be supported by mesh .
num minimum strengths for machine direction by cross machine direction md x cd .
num range of allowable elongations upon reaching required tensile strength for machine direction by cross machine direction md x cd .
num minimum strengths for both machine direction md and cross machine direction cd .
num maximum allowable elongation upon reaching required tensile strength .
num minimum required elongation upon reaching required tensile strength .
num numd num num initial edition section numgeomembrane num generalfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements a geomembrane .
fabricated from highdensity polyethylene hdpe .
b physical requirements .
density num pounds per cubic foot minimum astm d num uv stabilization num carbon black astm d num sheet thickness num mils minimum astm d num tear resistance num pounds astm d num resistance soil burial num retained strength astm d num minimum roll width num feet minimum c acceptance .
acceptance of the geomembrane will be based on certified test data submitted by the manufacturer and on testing by lts .
d certification .
certify each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
visibly label all shipments on the geomembrane or its container with the manufacturers name geomembrane type model or trade name lot number and material quantity .
num numb num num initial edition section numgeocell num generalfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements a physical requirements .
provide geocell of cell geometric characteristics listed in table a and meeting one of the depths listed in table b as indicated .
sheet material highdensity polyethylene hdpe uv stabilization num num carbon black astm d num environmental stress crack resistance num hours minimum astm d num sheet surface sheet perforated or nonperforated smooth or textured sheet density num pounds per cubic foot minimum astm d num nominal sheet thickness num mils minimum astm d num cell wall seams assemble each seam with numinch maximum melt pools using continuous or uniformly spaced ultrasonic spot welding .
space welded seams conforming to the requirements of table a for the type of geocell .
cell seam peel strength conform to the requirements of table b when tested according to ptm num .
table a cell characteristics per geocell type type nominal cell dimensions in .
nominal cell area in.num avg .
no .
cells per yd.num weld spacing in .
a numxnum num num num num b numxnum num num num num c numxnum num num num num for informational purposes only .
in unexpanded configuration .
table b required cell seam peel strength depth in .
cell seam peel strength lbs .
num num num num num num num num num num num num b certification .
certify each shipment as specified in section numbnum .
visibly label all shipments on the geocell or its container with the manufacturers name and model number or trade name .
num numb num num change no .
num section numgeogrids num polymer requirements a general .
provide geogrid listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements .
geogrids must be manufactured from either pvc coated polyester pet high density polyethylene hdpe or polypropylene pp polymer according to the class indicated .
no postconsumer recycled material is allowed in polymer resins used in the manufacturing of geogrid products .
requirements for the polymers are indicated in table a .
table anum requirements for geogrid polymers all values minimums unless indicated otherwise property units test method pet hdpe pp carboxyl end group ceg content of pet yarns mmolkg griggnum num na na number average molecular weight mn of pet yarns griggnum num na na pvc coating except for manufacturing selvedge edges the pvc coating for pet geogrids must be continuous with no more than num of the surface area having uncoated unbound fiber bundles as determined according to astm dnum .
na na carbon black contentnum astm dnum or astm dnum na num to num num to num melt flow index gnum min astm dnum using conditionnum for hdpe and condition num for pp na num num density gcmnum astm dnum or astm dnum na num num oxidative induction time min astm dnum na num num resistance to uv degradationnum astm dnum and astm dnum method b na num num notes num .
all values are minimum average roll values marv except for ceg for pet polymer which is a maximum average roll value .
the maximum average roll value is determined mathematically the same as a marv except the value is a maximum .
num .
gri is a reference for the geosynthetic institute formerly known as the geosynthetic research institute .
num .
for buried applications only .
do not use geogrids with longterm exposure to uv radiation .
num .
a sample is exposed to num hours of uv radiation according to astm d num .
the sample is then tested to determine the ultimate tensile strength in the machine direction md for uniaxial geogrids and both the machine and cross machine directions md and xd for biaxial geogrids .
the value is calculated by dividing ultimate tensile strength of the uv exposed material by the ultimate tensile strength of the virgin material and multiplying by num .
ultimate tensile strengths of all samples are determined according to astm dnum method b .
for biaxial geogrids the minimum required value must be met in both the md and xd .
num class num geogrids uniaxial geogrid reinforcement a general .
for use in geosynthetic reinforced soil grs slopes or geosynthetic reinforced mechanically stabilized earth mse walls .
b physical requirements .
required values and test methods for geogrid properties are indicated in table b .
sample materials in accordance with astm dnum .
numb numb num num change no .
num table b requirements class num geogrids uniaxial geogrid reinforcement all values minimums unless indicated otherwise design parameter units test method type a type b polymer type na pvc coated pet integrally formednum hdpe ultimate tensile strength lbsft astm dnum method b design specific tensile strength at num percent elongation tnum lbsft astm dnum method b design specific creep reduction factor rfcnum determined for a num year design life aashto r num astm dnum and astm dnum num num installation damage reduction factor rfidnum num griggnum method a or b as appropriate astm dnum and astm dnum num num durability reduction factor rfdnum na num num overall minimum required reduction factor rfovnum num num na num num machine direction md aperture size in .
na num to num num cross machine direction xd aperture size in .
na num num rib section area rationum na num num percent open area na num num notes num .
value indicated is the minimum required reduction factor .
if product specific data values are higher the product specific data values must be used .
num .
installation damage reduction factor rfid is valid for a maximum aggregate particle size of num inch .
num .
rfov rfc x rfid x rfd num .
rib section area ratio minimum xd rib section area minimum md rib section area num .
manufactured by a puncheddrawn process .
num .
maximum allowable strain of the geogrid is five percent for the num year design live when applying the minimum required overall reduction factor rfov .
num .
tensile strength at num percent elongation tnum .
determine tensile strength at num percent elongation based upon minimum average roll values marv determined in accordance with astm dnum method b .
if num percent elongation can not be achieved before reaching the ultimate strength then use the ultimate strength as the num percent value specifying the percent elongation at failure .
num .
creep reduction factor rfc .
determine the geogrid creep reduction factor rfc in accordance with aashto r num astm dnum and astm dnum .
test samples unconfined in the direction in which the load will be applied .
use the ratio of ultimate strength to creep limiting strength to calculate the creep reduction factor .
if the calculated creep reduction factor is greater than the creep reduction factor indicated in table b use the calculated creep reduction factor .
num .
installation damage reduction factor rfid .
evaluate installation damage on geogrid tensile strength from the results of full scale installation damage tests in accordance with wsdot tnum appendix a except as follows use a single drum vibratory smooth steel drum roller operated in dynamic vibratory mode having a minimum static drum axle load of num pounds per inch drum static axle load divided by drum width and a minimum centrifugal force of num pounds per inch drum centrifugal force divided by drum width .
operate the vibratory roller at a speed not exceeding num foot per second .
numb numb num num change no .
num place and compact two lifts each lift approximately num inches loose num inches compacted of aashto no .
num coarse aggregate meeting the requirements of section num type a material .
place the aashto no .
num coarse aggregate on a flat level and firm foundation .
compact each lift of the aashto no .
num coarse aggregate with a minimum of five passes of the roller assuring full coverage with five passes is obtained for the entire test area full footprint of the geogrid .
place the geogrid on top of the two compacted lifts of aashto no .
num coarse aggregate .
pull the geogrid taught with no wrinkles or folds .
place and compact a lift approximately num inches loose num inches compacted of aashto no .
num coarse aggregate over the geogrid using the type of spreading equipment typically used in full scale construction .
if necessary pin the geogrid to maintain its position as the aashto no .
num coarse aggregate is placed over the geogrid .
compact the aashto no .
num coarse aggregate with a minimum of five passes of the roller assuring full coverage with five passes is obtained for the entire test area full footprint of the geogrid .
test samples subjected to installation damage for tensile strength in accordance with astm dnum method b .
the number of specimens tested must be in accordance with d num method b .
compare test results from damaged specimens to tensile test results obtained from undamaged i.e .
not exposed to installation conditions specimens taken from the same roll of geogrid as the damaged specimens .
determine the installation damage reduction factor rfid except as follows rfid tun tdam where tun lesser of tnum of undamaged samples from the same roll or the tnum for the manufacturers minimum average roll value marv .
determine the tnum of the undamaged samples with the same number of test samples used to determine tdam .
determine both the tnum of the undamaged samples and the tnum for the manufacturers marv according to astm dnum method b. rfid must never be less than num .
num .
durability reduction factor rfd .
use the minimum reduction factor for durability rfd indicated in table b unless project specific conditions or a specific geogrid indicates a higher value .
num .
allowable geosynthetic tensile strength tl .
determine allowable tensile strength of the geogrid using the individual reduction factors to account for installation damage durability and creep .
the overall reduction factor is the product of the individual reduction factors .
determine the allowable long term geogrid strength tl from tl tnum rfov rfov rfc x rfid x rfd tl td where tl longterm allowable geogrid tensile strength lbsft .
tnum tensile strength at num percent elongation lbsft when tult occurs at an elongation less than num percent set tnum tult .
rfov overall reduction factor dimensionless .
rfc creep reduction factor dimensionless .
ratio of tult to creeplimiting strength determined according to aashto r num .
use the minimum value indicated in table b unless product specific values are greater use the higher product specific value .
rfid installation damage reduction factor dimensionless .
use the minimum value indicated in table b .
if product specific value is higher use the product specific value .
rfd durability reduction factor dimensionless .
use the minimum value indicated in table b numb num num num change no .
num unless project specific conditions or specific geogrid indicate a higher value .
td required design tensile strength of geogrid reinforcement lbsft .
num class num and num biaxial geogrids a general for use in a foundation load distribution pad subgrade or subbase stabilization or similar applications .
b physical requirements provide geogrid consisting of a regular network of integrally connected longitudinal and transverse polymer tensile elements having aperture geometry sufficient to permit mechanical interlock with the surrounding material .
provide biaxial geogrid conforming to the properties indicated in table c. table c required properties for class num and num biaxial geogrids all values are minimums unless indicated otherwise property units test method class num class num type a type b type a type b polymer type hdpe pp hdpe pp aperture sizenum num in num to num num to num aperture open areanum innum num to num num to num percent open area num num ultimate tensile strengthnum num lbsft astm dnum num num elongation at ultimate tensile strengthnum astm dnum num to num num to num junction efficiencynum astm dnum and astm dnum num num resistance to installation damagenum griggnum astm dnum and astm dnum num num notes num .
both machine direction md and cross machine direction xd .
num .
the value is the size of the opening in each direction .
num .
the value is the product of the aperture openings in the md and xd .
num .
values indicated are minimum average roll values marv .
num .
calculate by dividing junction strength as determined by astm dnum by the ultimate tensile strength as determined by astm dnum and multiplying by num .
num .
conduct installation damage testing in accordance with section numbnum except use penndot no .
numa coarse aggregate .
calculate the resistance to installation damage by dividing the ultimate tensile strength of the geogrid as determined by astm dnum after it is exhumed from the compacted penndot no .
numa coarse aggregate by the ultimate tensile strength of the geogrid before placement and multiplying by num .
num handling and storageat a minimum follow astm dnum for identification storage and handling of geogrid .
provide clear identification to every roll of geogrid that provides identification of product designation the manufacturers name lot number material quantity and clearly differentiates between rolls of similar geogrid .
protect the geogrid from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays temperature greater than numf mud dirt dust and debris .
num certificationcertify each shipment as specified in section num bnum .
num num num num initial edition section num roadside development section numstockpiling topsoil or topsoil mixture num descriptionthis work is separation and salvaging of topsoil or topsoil mixture encountered in grading the project and depositing it in stockpiles at locations within the right of way .
num material a topsoil .
acceptable friable loam that is reasonably free of subsoil clay lumps brush roots weeds other objectionable vegetation stones other foreign material larger than num inches in any dimension litter andor other material unsuitable or harmful to plant growth .
b topsoil mixture .
designated top num inches to num inches of existing soil collected and combined with organic plant matter such as vegetative slashings consisting of crushed or shredded branches stems bark leaves seeds and roots .
num construction a topsoil .
after clearing and grubbing the area and before starting other construction operations remove topsoil from areas as indicated or directed .
adjust equipment and methods of operation to avoid mixing subsoil with topsoil .
separate the topsoil from other excavated material and stockpile at acceptable locations within the right of way .
do not compact and do not stockpile topsoil in a wet or frozen condition .
satisfactorily and uniformly grade stockpiled topsoil not required for the project .
apply seeding and soil supplements to these stockpiles using the formula as directed and apply as specified in section num .
apply mulch of the type directed on the stockpiles as specified in section num. b topsoil mixture .
during clearing and grubbing operations and before other construction operations shred all designated vegetation under num inches caliper in size using a crawler or loader mounted self powered land clearing shredder capable of shredding vegetation to a desired maximum rough size of num inches long and num inches in diameter .
collect and mix the organic slashings with the top num inches to num inches of soil to be salvaged as indicated or directed .
stockpile topsoil mixture at acceptable locations within the right of way .
do not compact material .
periodically water stockpile as directed .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard measured in its final position as specified in section numanum .
stockpiled topsoil and topsoil mixture is incidental to clearing and grubbing excavation and borrow excavation .
num num num num initial edition section numtopsoil furnished and placed num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and placing of topsoil from outside the project as indicated .
num materialsection num and containing not less than num nor more than num organic matter as determined according to aashto t num .
provide topsoil meeting the following grading analysis sieve minimum percent passing num inches num no .
num num no .
num num sand silt and clay material passing the no .
num sieve as defined by aashto t num and within the following ranges minimum percent maximum percent sand num num silt num num clay num num provide independent testing to confirm that the topsoil meets the above requirements .
independent testing must be less than num months old at the time topsoil is furnished to the project .
submit for projectspecific local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section numanum.c .
obtain topsoil from outside the right of way where the soil quality has proven ability to grow crops .
before topsoil removal obtain acceptance for the quality of the source for the depth of the topsoil to be removed and for the method of removal .
recondition areas from which topsoil was obtained as specified in section num .
num construction a preparation of areas to be topsoiled .
grade the areas to be covered by topsoil .
using acceptable methods loosen soil to a depth of num inches before placing the topsoil .
remove stones and other foreign material num inches or larger in any dimension .
remove and satisfactorily dispose of unsuitable and surplus material .
b placing and spreading topsoil .
place topsoil on the prepared areas and unless otherwise indicated spread and compact to a numinch uniform depth num num inches .
compact with a roller having a weight not over num pounds per foot width of roller or by other acceptable methods as directed .
remove overdepth topsoil unless otherwise agreed upon in writing .
do not place topsoil in a wet or frozen condition .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard or ton measured in the hauling vehicle at the delivery point as specified in section numb .
the contractor may leave overdepth topsoil in place at no cost to the department .
num num num num initial edition section numplacing stockpiled topsoil or topsoil mixture num descriptionthis work is the preparation of indicated areas and the placement of topsoil or topsoil mixture on the prepared areas using topsoil or topsoil mixture removed from stockpiles located on the project or from other indicated areas .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a topsoil .
remove topsoil from stockpiles using an acceptable method which does not mix the topsoil with foreign materials .
b topsoil mixture .
scarify and loosen soil surfaces to a depth of num inches lateral to the slope face .
moisten loosened soil if dry to optimum moisture content as directed .
remove debris and any other foreign material num inches or larger in any dimension .
place stockpiled topsoil mixture to a depth of num inches num inch measured in place after compaction .
consolidate topsoil mixture and bond to soil surfaces using a sheepsfoot roller and provide a firm stable rough textured surface .
compact areas not accessible to the sheepsfoot roller with a roller having a weight not over num pounds per foot width of roller or by other acceptable methods .
do not place topsoil mixture in a frozen or wet condition .
c unused material .
return unused topsoil or topsoil mixture to stockpiles and grade uniformly .
condition remaining stockpiles and stockpile areas as specified in section num .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard measured in the hauling vehicle at the delivery point as specified in section numb .
num numa num num initial edition section numseeding and soil supplements num descriptionthis work is furnishing and placing of seed and soil supplements of the type indicated the application of herbicides and mowing requirements .
the following definitions apply a certified seed .
seed of known genetic identity that has been field and laboratory inspected and tested during its period of growth to provide a source of high quality ground cover and ensure genetic identity and purity .
seeds are certified by recognized certifying agencies that conform to the certification laws and regulations of pennsylvania or other states .
certification identification is indicated on all seed lot tags or labels .
b germination .
the emergence and development from the seed embryo of essential plant structures that can produce a normal plant under favorable conditions and is represented by a percentage of an identified seed quantity exclusive of hardseed .
c hardseed .
unscarified seed that remains hard or has not germinated at the end of a prescribed test period because the seed has not absorbed water due to an impermeable seed coat .
d pure live seed pls .
a term that defines the planting quality of seed exclusive of inert matter and all other seeds not of the seed type being analyzed as determined by inspection and testing regulations .
pls is often used where seed industry standards have not been established for minimum acceptable purity and germination limits .
e purity .
the genetic identity of a seed that will produce a known plant and is represented by a percentage of an identified seed quantity or seed lot .
f seed formula .
a seed mixture of more than one variety of a seed kind in excess of num by weight of the whole .
g seed lot .
a definite quantity of seed identified by an assigned number or mark which is uniform throughout for all seed quality factors stated on the lot label or are within permitted tolerances .
h seed mixture .
a seed batch that consists of more than one kind of seed when each kind is present in excess of num of the whole .
i variety .
a plant subdivision that can be differentiated from other plants of the same kind by growth yield fruit color seed or other identifying characteristics .
j weed seed .
seed producing plant generally recognized as a weed by the pennsylvania department of agriculture which includes the seed of prohibited and restricted noxious weeds .
num materialthe department may require pretesting reports from the pennsylvania department of agriculture for verification of analysis and legality of labeling in addition to control of materials as specified in section num. a soil supplements .
num .
pulverized agricultural limestone .
conforming to the requirements of the agricultural liming materials act of num p.l .
num no .
num as amended the agricultural liming materials rules and regulations title numpart v num pa code chapter num for labeling requirements and as follows total oxides total calcium oxide and magnesium oxide equivalent num astm c num calcium carbonate equivalent by weight astm c num num numa numb num num initial edition fineness minimum by weight material passing no .
num sieve num material passing no .
num sieve num material passing no .
num sieve num furnish material having an effective neutralizing value env of not less than num when calculated according to num pa code chapter num as follows by weight passing num mesh passing num mesh x num a by weight passing num mesh passing num mesh x num b by weight passing num mesh x num c minimum calcium carbonate equivalent cce by weight of calcium carbonate a b c x cce divided by num env num .
commercial fertilizer .
conforming to the requirements of the pennsylvania soil conditioner and plant growth substance law act of december num num p.l .
num no .
num nump.s.num as amended .
use dry formulations of num analysis for seeded and sodded areas .
use dry formulations of num and num analysis controlled release for tree shrub and vine type planting operations .
use dry formulations of num analysis controlled release for herbaceous wetland planting operations .
use other analysis as indicated or specified in the proposal .
num .
slowrelease nitrogen fertilizer .
conforming to the requirements of the pennsylvania soil conditioner and plant growth substance law act of december num num p.l .
num no .
num nump.s.num as amended .
use dry formulations of either num ureaform num to num sulfur coated urea num ibdu or another analysis as indicated and conform to the following requirements num ureaform total nitrogen tn num minimum cold water insoluble nitrogen win num minimum activity index ai num minimum urea nitrogen num minimum num to num sulfur coated urea with a numday dissolution range of num to num num ibdu coarse grade num mils to num mils water insoluble nitrogen win num minimum b seed .
num .
general .
seed conforming to the regulations of chapter num seed of the pennsylvania seed act num of num effective january num num and amendments .
meet other applicable regulations of the seed testing and certification programs of the pennsylvania department of agriculture pda bureau of plant industry .
provide seeds that have been tested and approved for the specified seed formulas purity germination and weed seed analysis limits and other applicable pda rules for seed testing .
provide certified seed for all kentucky bluegrass perennial ryegrass creeping red fescue chewings fescue and hard fescue varieties submitted for each seed formula .
provide premixed seed mixtures from a licensed seed distributorseed mixing company located within the state and mixed under the supervision of the pda for the designated table a seed formulas .
use only seed that has numb numf num num initial edition an approved seed inspectors tag or label signed by a pda inspector sewn or stapled to the outside of each seed bag or other container in a conspicuous place .
pressure sensitive labels may be used on paper or plastic containers .
seed mixtures may also be mixed to project specifications at the project site for special seed formulas or mixtures not specified in table a if all specified seed species have been previously inspected tested and approved by pda for the designated purity germination weed seed limits or pure live seed analysis .
mix the seed species to the designated formula or mixture specifications under department supervision .
do not use seed from containers that have not been properly sealed .
do not use seed that has a sellby date of more than num months from the date of the inspection test exclusive of the month of the test .
the department may reject or request retesting for any questionable seed delivered to the project .
num .
standard seed formulas .
see table a .
num .
special seed formulas and pure live seed .
seed for special seed formulas consisting mainly of warmseason grasses forbs or wildflowers may be required to be provided in quantities based on specified pure live seed application rates .
application rates for the special seed formulas may vary .
the pls seed application rate is a method of adjusting the amount of seed required to compensate for low seed purity and low germination percentages .
the normal amount of seed to be provided for each seed type is higher and based on each seeds pls analysis .
provide pls seed calculation amounts based on the seed label for all designated pls seed formula types for verification and approval before application .
the specified pls seeding rate for each seed type divided by the percentage pls value of the proposed seed type will determine the amount of seed required to be provided for that seed type .
note seed with a purity of num and num germination rate would equal a pls of num num x num divided by num .
a specified rate of num poundsacre of pls seed would therefore require num pounds quantity of seed to be provided for that seed type .
c inoculant .
standard acceptable commercial product for treating leguminous seed .
a product consisting of a suitable carrier containing a culture of nitrogenfixing bacteria specific for the seed to be inoculated .
keep lids on containers when not in use to avoid contamination .
store containers at moderate temperature .
do not use inoculant after the expiration date shown on the container .
d herbicides .
conforming to all applicable federal and state pesticide acts and registration requirements and as specified in pcid no .
num herbicides weed and brush control issued by the pennsylvania department of general services bureau of purchases quality assurance division for the appropriate type .
furnish herbicide in manufacturers labeled container as follows num .
selective control in seeded areas .
in areas seeded with formula b or d use type num class cnum numd liquid amine salt formulations dimethylamine listed in pcid no .
num for controlling broadleaf weeds .
e mulch .
section numanum .
for the type indicated .
f water .
section num numf numf num num initial edition table a seeding requirements formula and species by weight minimum max weed seed seeding rate lbnum ydnum purity germination formula b mix perennial ryegrass mixture lolium perenne .
a combination of improved certified varieties with no one variety exceeding num of the total ryegrass component .
num num num num num total num creeping red fescue or chewings fescue festuca rubra or ssp commutate improved and certified num num num num num kentucky bluegrass mixture poa pratensis .
a combination of improved certified varieties with no one variety exceeding num of the total bluegrass component .
num num num num num formula c conservation mix crownvetch coronilla varia num num num num num total num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num num num num formula d conservation mix tall fescue festuca arundinacea var .
kentucky num num num num num num total num creeping red fescue or chewings fescue festuca rubra or ssp commutate improved and certified num num num num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num num num num formula e annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num num num num total num formula l mix hard fescue mixture festuca longifolia .
a combination of improved certified varieties with no one variety exceeding num of the total hard fescue component num num num num num total num creeping red fescue festuca rubra improved and certified num num num num num annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum num num num num num numf numa num num initial edition formula n conservation mix hard fescue mixture festuca longifolia .
a combination of improved certified varieties with no one variety exceeding num of the total hard fescue component creeping red fescue festuca rubra improved and certified little bluestem andropogon scoparius canada wild rye elymus canadeis virginia wild rye elymus virginicus indiangrass sorghastrum nutans annual ryegrass lolium multiflorum black eyed susan rudbeckia hirta new england aster symphyotrichum novaeanglie oxeye sunflower heliopsis helianthoides num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num total num num num num num num num num num num formula w wetland conservation mix tall fescue festuca arundinacea var .
kentucky num num num num num num total num birdsfoot trefoil lotus corniculatus .
num num num num num redtop agrostis alba num num num num num virginia wild rye elymus virginicus num num num num num tioga deertongue panicum clandestinum num num num num num fox sedge carex vulpinoides num num num num num including hardseed and normal seedlings .
num construction a general .
spread seeds where indicated and at the rates specified in table a or as otherwise indicated .
spread seeds within the following dates or as otherwise indicated or directed .
formula b d and l march num to june num august num to october num formula c ryegrass portion march num to october num crownvetch portion anytime except september and october formula e march num to october num formula n march num to october num formula w april num to june num august num to september num numa numh num num initial edition extend seeding dates where project conditions warrant .
apply full treatment or apply only num of the permanent seeding and soil supplements and apply the remaining num within the next seeding dates as directed in writing .
use tillage and soil supplements before permanent seeding on topsoiled areas where temporary seeding or mulching has been applied .
the contractor may apply permanent seed andor soil supplements without tilling on untopsoiled areas where temporary seeding or mulching has been applied .
b tillage .
on topsoiled areas num and flatter loosen the surface to a depth of at least num inches by disking harrowing or other acceptable methods until the tillage is satisfactory .
on untopsoiled areas num and flatter till only as directed .
also till or scarify areas if the surface is glazed or crusted .
correct surface irregularities by filling depressions and leveling rough or uneven areas .
remove metal objects stones larger than num inches in any dimension and other debris or objects deemed detrimental to maintenance operations .
c soil supplements .
prepare areas for seeding by uniformly applying supplements except in areas that will receive formula e seed .
document bulk delivery as specified in section numanum .
blend the initial soil supplements into the soil at least num inches on topsoiled areas by raking disking harrowing or other acceptable methods .
blend the supplements into the soil during tillage operations .
apply slowrelease nitrogen fertilizer to the surface of formula b d l and w seeded areas before project completion .
do not apply slowrelease nitrogen fertilizer supplement to formula c seeded areas .
apply soil supplements as follows unless otherwise indicated pulverized agricultural limestone num lbnum ydnum num analysis commercial fertilizer num lbnum ydnum num ureaform fertilizer num lbnum ydnum or num to num sulfur coated urea fertilizer num lbnum ydnum to num lbnum ydnum as directed or num ibdu fertilizer num lbnum ydnum d inoculating legumes .
inoculate leguminous seed such as crownvetch and birdsfoot trefoil with proper cultures according to the manufacturers directions .
protect inoculated seed from prolonged exposure to sunlight before sowing .
reinoculate seed not sown within num hours .
if using hydraulic seeders use inoculant four times the manufacturers recommended rate .
if inoculated seed is held in a slurry with fertilizers for more than num hour reinoculate or apply legumes separately .
e seeding .
at the rates specified in table a sow seeds uniformly on the prepared areas by the helicopter hydraulic placement broadcasting drilling or hand seeding methods .
inspect seeding equipment and adjust the equipment if required to ensure the specified application rates .
periodically perform a check on the rate and uniformity of application as directed .
prior to seed application of each designated seed formula thoroughly cleanout seed tank by rinsing with clean water to prevent contamination from one seed formula to the next .
repeat rinsing cycle until tank is clean .
collect all nonapplied seed derived from each cleanout event and remove as waste from the project .
f rolling .
after seeding roll topsoiled areas that are to be mowed .
use a roller with a weight not more than num pounds per foot .
if soil is wet or frozen roll only when directed .
g mulching .
apply as specified in section numa .
h herbicides .
apply herbicides as directed to areas that are to be mowed and where weed growth is prominent .
numh numk num num initial edition the representative will designate existing plants or groups of plants to be saved within these areas before herbicide application .
if directed more than one application may be required to control undesirable growth .
apply material with application personnel certified by the department of agriculture and with equipment specified in section numc .
i liability and rejection .
final acceptance of seeding and soil supplement materials and installation are subject to the results of official sampling and testing as specified before use and installation and the resultant establishment of the specified vegetation .
remove nonapproved materials from the project .
num .
liability .
reseed rejected areas with additional applications of the specified seed and soil supplement materials .
redress soil surfaces when directed .
perform reapplication of seed and soil supplements within the next applicable seeding date if necessary or as directed .
when directed reseed areas damaged by herbicide applications and mowing operations .
note reseeded areas will also require the application of appropriate mulch as specified in section num .
num .
rejection criteria .
seeded areas may be rejected based on the lack of actual grass seedling establishment exhibited in the area for the specified seed formula .
num.a table a seed formulas .
table a formula seeded areas that exhibit less than num surface area coverage with the specified germinated grass seedlings after num days of growth may be rejected upon visual inspection .
the seed germination and growth period is determined from the date of the seeding operation for the area when these operations are performed within the specified seeding dates .
num.b special seed formulas .
special seed formula planted areas seed mixtures not indicated in table a may be rejected based on the lack of the specified seed germination and growth of less than num seedlingssquare yard after num days of growth determined by visual inspection .
the seed germination and growth period is determined from the date of the seeding operation of the area when these operations are performed within the specified seeding dates .
num.c eroded areas .
seeded areas exhibiting soil surface erosion rills or gullies deeper than numinch may be rejected upon visual inspection .
redress and reseed designated eroded areas with specified materials and application rates as directed .
j maintenance .
maintain grass and legume ground cover areas within the grading limits until the entire project has been completed .
mow as specified in section numk .
control any noxious weed growth found within the right of way by herbicide spraying and cutting .
these plants are defined by the pennsylvania weed control act of num p.l .
num no .
num and as amended by further legislation .
submit for approval a schedule of work and list of herbicide material to be used before starting this operation .
if a slope failure occurs on a slope previously completed and requires further excavation and redressing to reestablish the slope reapply the seeding and soil supplement work as specified for the original slope .
k mowing .
maintain turf grass areas within the grading limits by mowing with approved equipment until the entire project has been completed .
submit a proposed schedule of mowing operations that covers the length of the construction project for approval .
num .
roadside turf areas .
turf grass areas established with formula d requires a different degree of mowing maintenance than areas established with formulas b and l. three mowing cycles per year scheduled between april and october are anticipated for mowing areas seeded with formula d. the number of cycles may be adjusted based on the degree of turf establishment project length weather conditions or other factors .
consult the district roadside manager for schedule safety requirements and mowing equipment approvals .
schedule the first mowing cycle early in the growth flush period before all seed heads have emerged .
schedule the second mowing approximately num to num weeks after the first cut to remove the remaining seed heads .
schedule the last mowing cycle in the fall as directed .
do not mow grass shorter than num inches to allow a low growing competitive ground cover .
do not mow under the following conditions when soil and grass blades are wet .
numk nume num num initial edition during drought conditions or during summer months when the temperatures are consistently over numf and when the grass exhibits dormancy .
within num days of any scheduled herbicide application or num days after a herbicide treatment .
num .
lawn turf areas .
maintain formula b and l turf grass areas at a desired height of num inches .
initiate mowing operations when grass seedlings reach a height of num inches .
continue mowing operations during the active growing season throughout the length of the project .
follow the nonmow requirements indicated for formula d grass .
mow at a normal frequency when the grass reaches the numinch height unless directed otherwise .
num measurements and payment a seeding and soil supplements .
pound measured by the number of pounds of seed or actual pls rated seed utilized in the work for designated seed formula and soil supplement applications .
do not use bulk weight of pls rated seed packages for seed payment .
the department will pay for reseeding and reapplying soil supplements on slopes that fail due to weather conditions as specified in section numj at the contract unit price in addition to the original accepted application of seeding and soil supplements .
the department will not pay for reseeding and reapplying soil supplements on seeded areas that are rejected due to failure of seed germination and growth as specified in section numi .
when indicated the cost of the mulch will be incidental to the seeding and soil supplements item of work and will not be paid for separately .
b seeding .
pound measured by the number of pounds of seed or actual pls rated seed utilized in the work for the designated seed formula .
do not use bulk weight of pls rated seed packages for seed payment .
the department will pay for reseeding on slopes that fail due to weather conditions as specified in section numj at the contract unit price in addition to the original accepted application of seeding .
the department will not pay for reseeding on seeded areas that are rejected due to failure of seed germination and growth as specified in section numi .
when indicated the cost of the mulch will be incidental to the seeding item of work and will not be paid for separately .
c herbicides .
num m gallons for the type indicated .
d mowing .
acre e mulch .
section numa num numa num num change no .
num section nummulching num descriptionthis work is the furnishing placing anchoring and maintaining of mulch of the type indicated .
num material a mulches .
free from foreign material coarse stems mold substances toxic to plant growth and mature seed bearing stalks or roots of prohibited and noxious weeds as defined by law .
num .
seeded areas .
either one or a combination of the following as specified num.a hay .
timothy hay mixed clover and timothy hay or other acceptable native or forage grasses wellcured to less than num moisture content by weight .
num.b straw .
either wheat or oat straw reasonably free of viable seed well cured to less than num moisture content by weight .
num.c wood fiber .
specially prepared biodegradable airdried wood fibers manufactured from num wood chips or bark from lumber mill processing operations tinted with nontoxic green dye and containing an organic tackifier approved for use with wood fibers manufactured to be applied with hydraulic seeding equipment and conforming to the following requirements moisture content num maximum organic matter num minimum ovendried basis water holding capacity num minimum grams of water per num grams of fiber tackifier content num to num by weight submit a certified physical analysis of the product for approval before application .
num.d pellet mulch .
a biodegradable waterabsorbing paperbased pellet that when wetted loses its pellet shape breaks down and adheres to other pellets forming a thin protective mulch mat and meeting the following requirements paper content num fertilizer num polyacrylater num to num moisture content num to num dimensions numinch diameter num inch to num inch length absorption potential minimum num times dry weight numa numa num num change no .
num num.e bonded fiber matrix bfm .
specially prepared water soluble biodegradable hydraulically applied system of long strand wood fibers held together by a bonding agent which adheres to the soil surface and upon drying forms a continuous insoluble three dimensional nondispersible protective crustlike soil covering .
num.e.num polymer or hydrocolloid binder matrix .
num.e.num.a wood fiber .
specially prepared long strand min .
num numinch length airdried wood fibers num to num by weight manufactured from wood chips bark or clean wood waste products and conforming to the following requirements moisture content num maximum water holding capacity num minimum grams of water per num grams of fiber num.e.num.b bonding agent .
highstrength tackifier of powdered polysaccharide guar gum blended hydrocolloidbased binder hydrophyllic or copolymer material num to num by weight .
num.e.num.c synthetic fiber .
system may contain up to num by weight of crimped polyester fibers or other synthetic fibers with wetting and dispersion agents manufactured for use in mulching applications .
num.e.num.d dye .
system may contain a nontoxic water soluble colored dye to aid in the visual application coverage of the matrix .
num.e.num.e activator .
system may contain up to num by weight of organic and mineral fertilizers .
num.e.num gypsum binder matrix .
num.e.num.a wood fiber .
specially prepared long strand min .
num numinch length airdried wood fibers manufactured from wood chips bark or clean wood waste products and conforming to the following requirements moisture content num maximum water holding capacity num minimum grams of water per num grams of fiber num.e.num.b bonding agent .
naturally occurring high purity processed hemihydrate gypsum with manufacturers system additives which when combined with water will form a cementitious binder that will produce a crustlike soil covering within num to num hours after application .
material that has become partially air set lumpy or caked before use is not acceptable for use .
num.e.num.c synthetic fiber .
synthetic fibers manufactured for use in mulching applications coated with wetting and dispersion agents .
num.e.num.d dye .
system may contain a nontoxic water soluble colored dye to aid in the visual application coverage of the matrix .
num .
planting and other areas .
one of the following num.a tanbark .
suitable fibrous shredded ground or chunked aged tanbark derived as a byproduct of the tannin extraction process free from insect life not decomposed and between num inch and num inches in any dimension .
num.b shredded bark .
suitable shredded chunked or ground pieces of predominantly aged but not decomposed hardwood or pinewood tree bark produced from lumber mill processing operations free of excessively fine particles and having a general size range of num inch to num inches in any dimension .
num.c washed gravel .
uncrushed washed no .
num as specified in section numanum .
numa numb num num change no .
num num.d coarse aggregate .
no .
num type c as specified in section numanum .
num.e sewage sludge compost .
a blend of secondary dewatered sewage sludge and wood chips aerobically composted at a dep bureau of waste management permitted site for at least num days and cured for num to num days to ensure pathogen destruction .
free of foreign material and substances toxic to plant growth nonburning weed free screened and conforming to the following requirements minimum of num organic matter oven dry basis minimum of num water holding capacity particle sizenum inch to num inches phnum minimum heavy metals and toxic compounds based on sewage sludge content maximum ppm cadmium num chromium num copper num lead num mercury num nickel num zinc num pcbs num submit a certified laboratory analysis with each shipment .
num.f wood chips .
suitable chipped or ground wood material produced from predominantly live or non decayed trees logs brush including leaves or postconsumer lumber having a general size range of num inch to num inches in any dimension and free of excessively fine or stringy particles .
chips produced and stockpiled during clearing and grubbing operations or aged chips at least num months old from lumber mill operations of the desired size and free from foreign debris will also be accepted .
num.g spent mushroom soil compost .
organic substrate used in mushroom production that has been steam sterilized then composted for a minimum of num days in wellmanaged windrows and on a properly surfaced and protected composting pad and blended with ground brush yard waste recycled wood andor composted bark .
conforms to the requirements specified in section numfnum except as follows minimum organic matter oven dry basisnum moisture contentnum maximum particle sizenum inch to num inches soluble salt concentrationnum ds maximum b mulch binders .
other acceptable binder materials manufactured for this purpose or the following .
num .
recycled cellulose fiber .
specifically prepared biodegradable shredded paper particles comprised of recycled newsprint or other recycled wood cellulose fiber containing a surfactant and nontoxic green dye manufactured to be applied with hydraulic seeding equipment and conforming to the following requirements moisture content num maximum numb numd num num change no .
num organic matter num minimum ovendried basis water holding capacity num minimum grams of water per num grams of fiber num .
wood fiber .
section numanum.c num .
nonasphaltic emulsion .
either water soluble natural vegetable gum blended with gelling and hardening agents or a water soluble blend of hydrophyllic polymers viscosifiers sticking aids and gums .
num .
polyvinyl acetate .
emulsion resin containing num num total solids by weight .
num .
recycled cellulose fiberwood fiber mixture .
specially prepared mixture of biodegradable airdried wood fiber manufactured from wood chips or bark and shredded paper particles comprised of recycled newsprint or other recycled cellulose fiber combined with a surfactant and a nontoxic green dye manufactured to be applied with hydraulic seeding equipment and conforming to the following requirements wood fiber num to num recycled cellulose fiber num to num moisture content num maximum organic matter num minimum ovendried basis water holding capacity num minimum grams of water per num grams of fiber c mulch control netting .
one of the following num .
plastic .
a uniformly extruded rectangular plastic mesh conforming to the following requirements weight num ounce per square yard minimum mesh opening nominal numinch by numinch num .
coconut coir .
undyed biodegradable coconut coir yarn woven into a mesh conforming to the following requirements weight num ounces per square yard minimum mesh opening nominal numinch by numinch maximum d weed barrier and weed control mats .
num .
weed barrier mat .
stable evenly distributed permeable network of polymeric woven nonwoven or a wovennonwoven combination of polypropylene or polyester filaments or yarns manufactured for weed barriersoil separator use inert to commonly encountered construction chemicals or substances and conforming to the following physical requirements type marv property woven or combination num secnum permittivity flow rate numd numa num num change no .
num nonwoven fabric num secnum astm d num woven or combination num cmsec permeability coefficient nonwoven fabric num galminsq .
ft. permeability flux astm d num falling head test all fabric num lbs .
puncture strength numinch flat head rod astm d num all fabric num after num hours ultraviolet resistance strength retention astm d num minimum average roll value num of the fabric in a lot will meet or exceed the minimum requirements .
certify as specified in section numb .
num .
weed control mat .
stable permeable network of spunbonded long chain synthetic polyolefins minimum num by weight filaments or yarns with nodules of trifluralin carbon black and polyethylene compounded together utilizing timerelease characteristics permanently attached to the fabric on num numinch centers and conforming to the following requirements .
physical property marv trifluralin nodule num puncture strength numinch flat head rod astm d num num lbs .
permittivity astm d num num secnum ultraviolet resistance strength retention astm d num num after num hours minimum average roll value num of the fabric in a lot will meet or exceed the minimum requirement .
certify as specified in section numb .
e staples .
section numcnum f wood stakes .
section numcnum .
num construction a mulching seeded areas .
place mulch of the type indicated immediately after seeding or within num hours after seeding is completed .
unless otherwise indicated place only straw or wood fiber over topsoiled areas .
use hay straw or wood fiber in other areas as indicated or specified .
place hay or straw uniformly in a continuous blanket at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square yards or as otherwise indicated .
if directed increase the rate of application depending upon the material used season soil conditions or method of application .
an acceptable mechanical blower may be used to apply mulch .
do not use machines that cut mulch into short pieces .
anchor mulch with specified mulch binders applied at the following rates numa nume num num change no .
num recycled cellulose fibernum pounds per num square yards wood fibernum pounds per num square yards nonasphaltic emulsionat manufacturers recommended rate polyvinyl acetateat manufacturers recommended rate recycled cellulose fiberwood fiber mixturenum pounds per num square yards the mulch binder application is incidental to the application of straw and hay mulch .
apply wood fiber mulch hydraulically according to the manufacturers tankmixing instructions .
it may be incorporated as an integral part of the slurry after the seed and soil supplements have been thoroughly mixed .
apply uniformly at the rate of num pounds per num square yards unless otherwise indicated .
mulch temporary seeded areas with hay .
num .
median areas .
on slopes num or flatter place pellet mulch by hand or using a mechanical spreader immediately after seeding .
apply uniformly at application rate of num pounds per num square yards .
thoroughly wet pellet mulch with water without dislodging mulch .
b mulch control netting .
num .
plastic .
install netting over designated mulch surface .
staple upslope ends edges bottom and overlaps at numinch intervals .
overlap adjacent fabric to outside edges .
secure remaining fabric areas by putting in approximately num staple per num square yard of area .
num .
coconut coir .
install netting over designated mulch surface .
stretch fabric tightly and anchor with wood stakes along all edges at numfoot maximum interval .
overlap adjacent fabric widths by not less than num inches .
c mulching planted areas .
num .
individual plant pits .
uniformly apply a designated mulch specified in section numanum to the entire plant pit to a loose depth of num inches and as shown on the standard drawing .
apply mulch within num hours after completion of the planting operation .
num .
planting beds .
cover designated shrub beds with mulch or mulch and weed barrier mat or mulch and weed control mat as indicated .
cut mat around the plant stem to ensure mat will not extend above the mulch .
secure mat to the soil surface with staples or other approved anchoring devices at a maximum interval spacing of num feet and along all edges and overlaps .
overlap mat edge with numinch minimum .
uniformly apply a designated mulch specified in section numanum over the entire bed area to a loose depth of num inches .
redistribute excessive mulch depth .
taper mulch depth at plant pit as shown on the standard drawing .
apply mat and mulch within num hours after completion of the planting operation .
d maintenance .
properly maintain mulched areas until the entire project has been completed .
promptly reapply mulch materials which become dislodged or lost due to wind rain or other causes at initial or modified rates as directed .
after mulching work on a slope has been satisfactorily completed if a slope failure occurs one that requires redressing excavation or the establishment of a new slope replace the mulch as directed .
e bonded fiber matrix .
num .
general .
prepare surfaces as specified in section numb .
scarify all slopes greater than num to ensure a rough texture for lodging of seed and bfm .
apply seed at twice the rate specified in section numbnum table a .
apply soil supplements as specified in section numc .
num .
application .
apply bonded fiber matrix components hydraulically with hydromulching hydroseed nume numg num num change no .
num equipment manufactured for this purpose .
follow manufacturers mixing and application instructions .
the bonded fiber matrix components may be incorporated as an integral part of the seeding and soil supplement application if seeding and soil supplements are applied hydraulically .
apply polymer binder or hydrocolloid binder matrixes at an application rate of num pounds per acre or as indicated to provide a uniform soil surface coverage thickness of num inch maximum after drying .
test application procedures to ensure a uniform application rate .
do not apply within num hours of anticipated rainfall .
mix gypsum binder matrix components in a homogenous slurry in the following proportions for each num gallons of water gypsum bindernum pounds wood fibernum pounds and synthetic fibernum pounds .
apply gypsum binder matrix at an application rate of num pounds per acre or as indicated so that the soil surface is covered uniformly .
do not apply within num hours of anticipated rainfall .
place bfm material at least num inches beyond the toe and top of all slopes .
apply material in at least two different directions to provide as much uniform coverage with no gaps or spaces greater than num inch .
num measurement and payment a seeded areas .
ton for the type indicated .
measured by the number of tons of mulch actually incorporated into the work at the specified rates .
b planted areas .
square yard for the type indicated .
c mulch replacement .
the department will pay for replacing mulch on failed slope areas as specified in section numc at the contract unit price in addition to the original accepted mulch application .
d mulching and weed barrier mat .
square yard for the type indicated .
e mulching and weed control mat .
square yard for the type indicated .
f mulching bonded fiber matrix .
square yard g mulch control netting .
square yard num numa num num change no .
num section numrolled erosion control products num descriptionthis work is furnishing placement and maintenance of temporary and permanent rolled erosion control products of the types indicated .
num material a temporary rolled erosion control products temporary recps .
ultra shortterm shortterm extended term and longterm temporary recps meeting the requirements of tables a b c and d respectively and having a functional longevity of sufficient duration to allow establishment of permanent vegetation before recp degradation .
provide manufacturers recp specifications product data sheets and drawings .
submit for local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section numanum.c .
numa numa num num change no .
num table a ultra shortterm temporary recp num month functional longevity type product and material description slope applications channel applications minimum tensile strength lbftnum minimum seed germination enhancement percentnum minimum weight per unit area ozydnum maximum slope hv maximum allowable c factor at maximum slopenum maximum shear stress lbftnum num.a mulch control netting a photodegradable synthetic mesh or woven biodegradable natural fiber netting .
num num num no requirement num num num.b erosion control blanket without a net natural andor polymer fibers mechanically interlocked andor chemically adhered together .
num num num no requirement num num num.c single net erosion control blanket and open weave textile processed degradable natural andor polymer fibers mechanically bound together by one rapidly degrading synthetic or natural fiber net or an open weave textile composed of rapidly degrading natural or polymer yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
num num num num num num num.d double net erosion control blanket processed degradable natural andor polymer fibers mechanically bound together between two rapidly degrading synthetic or natural fiber nets .
num num num num num num num tensile strength machine direction as per astm dnum .
num the channel applications maximum shear stress that an recp unvegetated area can sustain without physical damage or excessive erosion num inch soil loss during a num minute flow event in largescale testing .
an acceptable large scale test method is astm dnum .
num seed germination enhancement as per astm dnum .
num weight per unit area astm dnum for temporary erosion control blankets .
num coverfactor cfactor measured in accordance with the requirements in astm dnum .
numa numa num num change no .
num table b shortterm temporary recp num month functional longevity type product and material description slope applications channel applications minimum tensile strength lbftnum minimum seed germination enhancement percentnum minimum weight per unit area ozydnum maximum slope hv maximum allowable c factor at maximum slopenum maximum shear stress lbftnum num.a mulch control netting a photodegradable synthetic mesh or woven biodegradable natural fiber netting .
num num num no requirement num num num.b erosion control blanket without a net natural andor polymer fibers mechanically interlocked andor chemically adhered together .
num num num no requirement num num num.c single net erosion control blanket and open weave textile processed degradable natural andor polymer fibers mechanically bound together by one rapidly degrading synthetic or natural fiber net or an open weave textile composed of rapidly degrading natural or polymer yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
num num num num num num num.d double net erosion control blanket processed degradable natural andor polymer fibers mechanically bound together between two rapidly degrading synthetic or natural fiber nets .
num num num num num num num tensile strength machine direction as per astm dnum .
num the channel applications maximum shear stress that an recp unvegetated area can sustain without physical damage or excessive erosion num inch soil loss during a num minute flow event in largescale testing .
an acceptable large scale test method is astm dnum .
num seed germination enhancement as per astm dnum .
num weight per unit area astm dnum for temporary erosion control blankets .
num coverfactor cfactor measured in accordance with the requirements in astm dnum .
numa numa num num change no .
num table c extendedterm temporary recp num month functional longevity type product and material description slope applications channel applications minimum tensile strength lbftnum minimum seed germination enhancement percentnum minimum weight per unit area ozydnum maximum slope hv maximum allowable c factor at maximum slopenum maximum shear stress lbftnum num.a mulch control netting a slowly degrading synthetic mesh or a woven natural fiber netting .
num num num num num num num.b erosion control blanket and open weave textile an erosion control blanket composed of slowly degrading polymer or natural fibers mechanically bound together between two slowly degrading synthetic or fiber nets to form a continuous matrix or an open weave textile composed of processed slow degrading polymer or natural yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
num num num num num num num tensile strength machine direction as per astm dnum .
num the channel applications maximum shear stress that an recp unvegetated area can sustain without physical damage or excessive erosion num inch soil loss during a num minute flow event in largescale testing .
an acceptable large scale test method is astm dnum .
num seed germination enhancement as per astm dnum .
num weight per unit area astm dnum for temporary erosion control blankets .
num coverfactor cfactor measured in accordance with the requirements in astm dnum .
numa numa num num change no .
num table d longterm temporary recp num month functional longevity type product and material description slope applications channel applications minimum tensile strength lbftnum minimum seed germination enhancement percentnum minimum weight per unit area ozydnum maximum slope hv maximum allowable c factor at maximum slopenum maximum shear stress lbftnum num erosion control blanket and open weave textile an erosion control blanket composed of slowly degrading polymer or natural fibers mechanically bound together between two slowly degrading synthetic or fiber nets to form a continuous matrix or an open weave textile composed of processed slow degrading polymer or natural yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
num num num num num num num tensile strength machine direction as per astm dnum .
num the channel applications maximum shear stress that an recp unvegetated area can sustain without physical damage or excessive erosion num inch soil loss during a num minute flow event in largescale testing .
an acceptable large scale test method is astm dnum .
num seed germination enhancement as per astm dnum .
num weight per unit area astm dnum for temporary erosion control blankets .
num coverfactor cfactor measured in accordance with the requirements in astm dnum .
numb numb num num change no .
num b permanent rolled erosion control products permanent recps .
permanent recps meeting the requirements of table e and capable of permanently reinforcing vegetation in applications where vegetation alone can not provide sufficient protection against erosive forces .
provide manufacturers recp specifications product data sheets and drawings .
submit for local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section numanum.c .
numb numb num num change no .
num table e permanent recpnum type product and material description slope applications maximum slope hv channel applications maximum shear stress lbftnum minimum tensile strength lbftnum minimum seed germination enhancement percentnum minimum weight per unit area ozydnum num.a turf reinforcement mat composed of nondegradable synthetic fibers filaments nets wire mesh andor other materials processed into a threedimensional matrix .
num num num num num num.b num num num num num num.c num num num num num num tensile strength machine direction as per astm dnum .
num the channel applications maximum shear stress for a recp unvegetated area can sustain without physical damage or excessive erosion num inch soil loss during a num minute flow event in largescale testing .
an acceptable large scale test method is astm dnum .
num seed germination enhancement as per astm dnum .
num weight per unit area astm dnum for permanent erosion control blankets .
num uv stability for permanent erosion control blankets num per astm dnum num hours .
numc numb num num change no .
num c anchoring devices .
num .
staples .
no .
num gage steel wire bent ushaped or square top with a throat width of num inch to num inches with an effective minimum driving depth of num inches .
num .
metal pin .
carbon steel pin numinch shank diameter numinch length with attached num numinch minimum outside diameter steel washer head .
num .
wood stakes .
sound rough sawn approved hardwood numinch by numinch nominal stake tapered to a point throughout with a minimum length of num inches .
num .
substitutes .
submit other anchoring devices as recommended by the recp manufacturer for review and approval .
d seeding and soil supplements .
section num e mulch for seeded areas .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a temporary recps .
num .
site preparation .
prepare final graded and dressed soil surfaces to receive seeding as specified in section num .
soil surfaces to be free of rocks or other obstructions that prevent the recp from lying in direct contact with soil .
num .
seeding .
place designated seed formula mixture as specified in section num .
mulch application normally associated with seeding operation is not required for installation of temporary recps .
num .
recp installation .
unroll place and anchor the recp evenly and smoothly without stretching .
use appropriate anchoring devices and follow installation directions of manufacturer .
drive staples or anchoring pins flush with soil surface .
b permanent recps .
num .
site preparation .
prepare final graded and dressed soil surfaces to receive permanent seeding or the recp placement as specified in section num .
soil surfaces to be free of rocks or other obstructions that prevent the recp from lying in direct contact with soil .
num .
seeding .
follow the recp manufacturers instructions for the correct sequence of seed and recp placement .
when seeding is required before recp placement place designated seed formula mixture as specified in section num .
mulch application normally associated with seeding operation is not required for installation of permanent recps .
num .
recp installation .
unroll place and anchor the recp evenly and smoothly without stretching to conform to the shape of and be in uniform contact with the soil surface .
use appropriate anchoring devices and follow installation directions of the recp manufacturer .
drive staples or anchoring pins flush with soil surface .
num .
topsoil placement .
when seeding is required after recp placement broadcast designated seed formula mixture into the recp matrix as specified in section num .
after seeding uniformly place num inch to num inch of approved topsoil on the recp .
work soil into recp voids to completely fill the recp matrix flush with top of the recp .
remove excess topsoil .
numc numd num num change no .
num c maintenance .
properly maintain designated recp until entire project is accepted .
if a protected slope swale or other soil surface failure occurs after installation of work redress affected soil areas and reinstall protection material as specified for original treatment unless directed otherwise .
num measurements and payment a temporary recps .
num .
ultra shortterm recp .
square yard for the type indicated .
num .
shortterm recp .
square yard for the type indicated .
num .
extendedterm recp .
square yard for the type indicated .
num .
longterm recp .
square yard for the type indicated .
b permanent recps .
square yard for the type indicated .
c seeding and soil supplements .
section numa for the type indicated .
d mulch .
section numa and c for the type indicated .
num numa num num initial edition section numplants planting and transplanting num descriptionthis work is the furnishing planting and transplanting of trees shrubs vines and other woody or herbaceous plants and includes shrubbed preparation .
num materialconforming to the current edition of american standard for nursery stock asns ansi znum of the american nursery and landscape association anla and as follows a plant stock .
conforming to the following requirements .
true to type and name according to the current edition of standardized plant names of the american joint committee on horticulture nomenclature each bundle or each plant if not bundled labeled with not less than the plants common name and size typical of the species or variety indicated free from disease and injurious insects according to state and federal laws free from mechanical injuries cutback leaders broken branches decay or other defects unless otherwise designated nurserygrown plants acclimated to pennsylvania soil and climatic conditions and dormant other than those specified as container grown .
num .
nursery stock .
grown in a licensed nursery for a period of at least one fullgrowing season .
the use of mechanical digging equipment at the nursery will be allowed only when its use is not detrimental to nursery stock survival .
pennsylvania is located within u.s. department of agriculture usda plant hardiness zones num and num with winter temperatures ranging from numf to numf for zone num and numf to numf for zone num .
provide plants that have been grown for a period of at least num year in a nursery located within the same usda plant hardiness zone or colder zone that exists at the location of the planting project .
submit for approval a complete and detailed source of supply for each plant item indicated in the contract at least num days before the anticipated start of the planting operations .
the department reserves the right to reject plants from nurseries that do not qualify for the usda hardiness zone growing requirement .
num .
collected plants .
plants collected from native or previously established plantings that have not been reestablished in a nursery row or grown under regular nursery cultural practices for at least two fullgrowing seasons .
designate collected plants as such .
num .
balled and burlapped bb plants .
firmly balled with the original and undisturbed soil in which the plant was growing .
wrapped with untreated biodegradable burlap or similar acceptable material then tightly laced with biodegradable lacing to hold the ball firm and intact .
plants delivered to the planting site with balls broken loose or manufactured will be rejected .
acceptable nursery trade root protection devices will be allowed in lieu of burlap wrap as approved .
numa numa num num initial edition num .
containergrown plants .
grown for at least one year but not more than num years in the same container so that the roots and soil ball held together and retained its shape when removed from the container .
the department will reject plants that exhibit a potbound condition with girdling and encircling primary roots .
only groundcover vinetype plants with roots exhibiting a potbound condition will be accepted .
num .
herbaceous plants .
num.a rhizome .
resilient underground propagule collected during dormant condition and exhibiting light colored buds or shoots .
num.b bulb or tuber .
firm underground propagule collected during dormant condition and exhibiting light colored buds or shoots .
num.c peat pot .
generally num numinch to num numinch square commercial peat pot filled with an approved potting soil mixture .
containing at least three nurserygrown plants each with a minimum active top growth of at least num inches and having roots sufficiently developed through the peat pot surface so as to be firmly contained .
num.d plug grasses rushes and sedges .
cubical or cylindrical plant extracts minimum of num inches wide by num inches deep cut from existing plant communities containing stems roots associated underground parts and soil .
keep plug moist and viable for planting .
plug may also be provided in num inches square nursery pots or num inch wide by num inch deep premolded plastic tubes tublings manufactured to encourage deep root development .
minimum active top growth development of num inches .
num.e starter plant .
bare root plants with developed root systems capable of being transplanted and generated from seed rhizome or rootstock .
starter plant may also be provided in num inches square nursery pots or num inch wide by num inch deep premolded plastic tubes tublings manufactured to encourage deep root development .
minimum active top growth development of num inches .
num .
bare root br plants .
plants that have been dug while dormant and have had the soil removed from the roots exhibiting a live moist and wellbranched fibrous root system characteristic of the species free from rot mold and damage .
roots dipped into and thoroughly covered with a gel comprised of water and a superconcentrated waterabsorbent nontoxic neutral ph starch graftacrylate copolymer insoluble material manufactured for this dipping purpose .
mix gel dip to manufacturers recommended rate .
num .
crownvetch plants .
num.a crowns .
no .
num whole fieldgrown crowns of certified variety at least one growing season old .
overall plant length of num inches to num inches including num inch of top growth .
measuring not less than num inch or more than num inch in caliper at a point num inch below the root collar .
num.b potted plants .
certified variety grown for a period of at least num days .
in num numinch or larger peat pots and potbound with a top growth of not less than num inches .
num .
storage packing and handling .
according to good nursery practice .
plants showing signs of improper storage packing or handling will be rejected .
num .
inspection and rejection .
plant materials will be inspected at the project planting site prior to planting .
complete form cs num plant material inspection report for each shipment .
when requested provide certification as specified in section numbnum .
a state nursery inspection certificate is required with each shipment invoice or order of plants to verify inspection for pest control as well as freedom from disease and insect pests before removal from the nursery or place of growth .
inspection at the project site is to ensure that plant stock is from an approved source is in healthy and undamaged condition and conforms to size type quantities and appropriate ansi znum standards .
plants exhibiting the following defects or damage may be rejected decayed tissue on plant trunk branches or twigs .
numa numd num num initial edition sunscald or sunburn resulting in cambium tissue or bark damage .
mechanical damagebark abrasions resulting in damage to cambium tissue .
frost cracks appearing as splits in bark or wood .
disease resulting in abnormal growth of leaves twigs fruit bark discoloration of leaves and bark or sap discharge .
insect damage appearing as borer holes into bark or wood or insect eggs or larvae .
other damage or injury such as branch and twig dieback dry buds or dead leaves .
improper pruning resulting in improper stubs left on trunk branches or twigs removal of excessive branches that leaves the plant asymmetrical or nonuniform in plant density and pruning wounds larger than num inch in diameter .
girdling roots appearing as roots growing in a damaging encircling configuration .
nonstandard growth patterns for single or multiple stem plants nontypical for their plant genus species or varieties .
sheared evergreen trees or shrubs not representative of fullfoliaged naturalgrowth plants .
evidence of undue damage to root ball structure causing broken root balls and plants loosened in the soil ball .
evidence of insufficient roots throughout the entire soil ball and with fewer than five undamaged viable balanced primary roots .
excessive top growth not in acceptable balance with the root system .
plant materials will be accepted subject to responsibility for latent defects as specified in section numb .
plants damaged during planting operations will also be rejected and require replacement with appropriate indicated plants .
segregate and remove rejected plants from the planting site within num hours or as directed .
num .
substitutions .
no substitutions will be allowed without authorization as provided in form cs num request for plant material substitution .
num .
shipment .
carefully pack the roots of barerooted stock in spaghnum moss moist straw or other suitable material that will ensure the plants arrival in acceptable condition .
for material shipped in open vehicles cover with securely fastened canvas burlap or other material to prevent wind burn or drying .
plant material that has heated or sweated by reason of tight packing or poor ventilation will be rejected .
for plants approved to be shipped during the active growing season treat plants with antidesiccant andor antitranspirant material applied by spraying or dipping to prevent excessive transpiration .
comply with local state and federal laws relative to plant material shipment .
b antidesiccantantitranspirant .
astm e num in liquid form .
c fertilizer .
num tablets num gram num packets and num fertilizers conforming to the requirements of section numanum .
when using packets use in numounce individual heatsealed polyethylene envelopes .
application rates are as shown on the standard drawings or as directed .
d mulch .
section numanum nume numf num num initial edition e backfill mix for planting or transplanting .
a uniform mixture of one part peat or compost material as specified in section numf and three parts soil by volume that was removed from the planting pit .
where it is determined by the representative that wet and poorly drained planting conditions exist backfill with soil removed from the planting pit .
the ratio of peat to soil for plants requiring an acid soil is one part peat to two parts soil by volume .
f soil amendments .
num .
peat .
shredded reedsedge peat or spaghnum moss peat or a combination of both from fresh water sites .
do not use peat material in an advanced stage of decay .
provide peat material conforming to the following requirements minimum of num organic matter .
maximum of num ash content .
minimum of num water holding capacity .
maximum delivered density of num pounds per cubic foot .
phnum to num use laboratory analysis to indicate the liming required .
oven dry basis .
submit a laboratory analysis of the peat intended for use .
do not ship peat material to the project until acceptance is received .
num .
paper mill compost .
a blend of fibrous bark fines and woodpulp fibers composted free of foreign material and substances toxic to plant growth and conforming to the following requirements minimum of num organic matter .
maximum of num ash content .
minimum of num water holding capacity .
particle sizenum inch maximum .
free of weeds .
phnum num .
oven dry basis .
submit a certified laboratory analysis with each shipment .
num .
sewage sludge compost .
a blend of composted sewage sludge and wood chips conforming to the requirements specified in section numanum.e except the maximum size particle is num inch .
num .
compost .
decomposed product derived from agricultural food and yard organic matter source .
composted at a dep bureau of waste management permitted site under industry standards and u.s. epa regulations to provide a stable weed free nontoxic soil amendment with a nonobjectionable odor and conforming to the following requirements moisture contentnum to num numf numf num num initial edition trace elements and heavy metalsmeet u.s. epa part num exceptional quality concentration limits particle sizepass numinch standard screen phnum to num soluble salt concentrationnum ds maximum manmade foreign matterless than num by weight for plants requiring an acid soil provide only compost that has not received the addition of liming agents or ash byproducts and having a ph value ranging from num to num .
num .
water absorbent polymer .
a synthetic nontoxic granular polymer polyacrylamide product manufactured to increase the water holding capacity of the soil .
dry free flowing granules capable of absorbing at least num times their weight in water and conforming to the following requirements materialcrosslinked modified acrylic polymer granular sizenum mils to num mils densitynum lbsftnum time to achieve num absorptionnum minutes absorptionminimum of num gg grams of water per gram of product deionized waterminimum of num gg grams of water per gram of product tap waterrated num mg naclliter of water num .
mycorrhizal inoculation .
num.a trees .
premeasured numounce packets containing live endo and ectomycorrhizal fungi plant biostimulants and water absorbent polymers conforming to the following typical requirements endomycorrhizal fungi minimum num live spores of vesicular arbuscular va fungi to include entrephospora columbiana glomus etunicatum glomus clarum and glomus species ectomycorrhizal fungi minimum num million live spores of pisolithus tinctorius biostimulants dry soluble yucca extract yucca schidigera soluble sea kelp extract ascophylum nodosum and humic acid leonardite humates water absorbent polymer num mm to num mm particles of crosslinked polyacrylamide copolymer with certified free acrylamide monomer level of less than num numf numg num num initial edition num.b br seedlings and transplants .
root dip material containing live endo and ectomycorrhizal fungi plant biostimulants and water absorbent polymers conforming to the following typical requirements endomycorrhizal fungi minimum num num live spores of va fungi per pound of product to include entrephospora columbiana glomus etunicatum glomus clarum and glomus species ectomycorrhizal fungi minimum num million live spores of pisolithus tinctorius per pound of product .
biostimulants dry soluble yucca extract yucca schidigera soluble sea kelp extract ascophylum nodosum and humic acids natural humates water absorbent polymer num to num mm sized particles of polyacrylamide copolymer num .
spent mushroom soil compost .
organic substrate used in mushroom production that has been steam sterilized then composted for a minimum of num days in wellmanaged windrows and on a properly surfaced and protected composting pad .
conforms to the requirements specified in section numfnum except the soluable salt content is num ds maximum and the moisture content is num maximum .
g stakes and collar strap attachments .
as shown on the standard drawings and conforming to the following requirements num .
wood stakes .
roughsawn red or white cedar southern yellow pine or other acceptable hardwoods .
provide stakes free from knots rot or other defects that impair strength or render them unfit for the intended purpose .
num .
steel stakes .
section numa num .
collar strap attachments .
num.a rubber collar strap .
a wide flexible rubber strip ranging in width from num num inches to num inches with minimum length ranging from num inches to num inches made from recycled tire inner tube with a numinch minimum diameter brass plated grommet on each end .
num.b fiber collar strap .
high tenacity flexible nonstretch polypropylene or heavyduty nylon fibers or natural cotton fibers woven into tubular or flat surfaced soft edged abrasion resistant straps with a minimum width of num inch manufactured for staking trees and conforming to the following requirements num .
straps made from a continuous roll of synthetic strap material cut to the appropriate length required to encircle the tree trunk and attach to the stake as specified in section numgnum .
num .
a manufactured synthetic strap with num brass grommets positioned num inch from each end and of an appropriate length to encircle the tree trunk and attach to the stake as specified in section numgnum .
num .
a manufactured synthetic strap with a numinch galvanized ribbed nail within a plastic retaining washer at one end of the strap and of an appropriate length to encircle the tree trunk and attach to the stake as specified in section numgnum .
num .
a manufactured natural cotton strap with num brass grommets positioned num inch from each end and of an appropriate length to encircle the tree trunk and attach to the stake as specified in section numgnum .
num.c strap tie .
allpurpose biodegradable num or numply nonstretch cotton hemp jute or sisal natural fiber twisted twine or rope that will pass through the grommet ends of the straps specified in section numgnum.b .
numh numd num num initial edition h water .
section num i timerelease water .
a nontoxic ph neutral poly cellulose gel form of water in a biodegradable carton that slowly liquefies in contact with soil microorganisms as its container decomposes and conforming to the following requirements num .
poly cellulose gel .
num water num vegetable gum and alum num .
carton .
biodegradable numquart standard size .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a plant protection and temporary storage .
untie and completely remove any binding materials from plants that were transported with bound branches .
protect plants at all times .
plants will be rejected if left out of the ground unprotected overnight left with roots exposed to wind or sun or left improperly protected during transit unloading storage or during the planting operation .
secure a suitable storage area near the planting site that is shaded if possible during the hottest times of the day .
protect root systems from undue exposure to sun and wind during planting operations as follows num .
bb and container plants .
place the root balls and plant containers close together at the storage area without damaging the plants .
cover root systems with wet burlap wet mulch wood chips straw or other approved materials to keep the roots moist .
keep cover material moist .
num .
br plants .
heelin plants by digging a shallow trench and placing roots in the trench .
cover root systems with wet burlap wet mulch wood chips straw or other approved materials to keep the roots moist .
keep cover material moist .
b layout of plantings .
delineate the plant pit locations plant bed and planting area outlines as indicated .
identify the plants to be placed at the delineated location .
do not start excavation or cultivation until the locations and outlines are accepted .
use shrub bed preparation in all shrub beds .
if rocks or other obstructions prevent planting at indicated locations the representative will determine alternate locations or deletions .
c shrub bed preparation .
for all shrub bed areas remove any existing sod or other vegetation growth from the bed areas .
add additional topsoil if required to reestablish grade .
uniformly spread approved peat or compost material to an numinch depth and thoroughly incorporate it into the soil to a depth of num inches .
remove and dispose of undesirable material larger than num inches in any dimension as directed .
d preparation of plant pits .
schedule digging operations particularly on slopes so that the actual planting operation occurs within num week of the digging unless a delay is approved .
prepare planting pits to the size shown on the standard drawing and as follows num .
trees .
dig pits with tapered sides and flat bottom so that the pit is wider at the top than at the root mass depth and large enough to accommodate the roots without crowding .
allow for the placement of at least num inches of backfill mix around all sides at the bottom of the root mass .
scarify loosen or roughen the tapered pit sides for any glazed or hardened soil surfaces immediately before planting .
num .
shrubs and seedling transplants .
dig pits except for slope plantings with tapered sides and flat bottom so that the pit is wider at the top than at the root mass depth and large enough to accommodate the roots without crowding .
allow for the placement of at least num inches of backfill mix around all sides at the bottom of the root mass .
numd numg num num initial edition scarify loosen or roughen the tapered pit sides for any glazed or hardened soil surfaces immediately before planting .
dig pits for slope plantings with vertical sides and flat bottom .
num .
vines .
dig pits of appropriate size with tapered sides to accommodate the roots without crowding for vine plants such as periwinkle pachysandra and ivy .
provide at least num inches of backfill mix beneath and around all sides of the root system .
e pruning .
num .
branches .
prune any dead dying broken or undesirable branches not adequately pruned at the nursery or damaged during transport or installation .
the removal of too many damaged branches that leaves an asymmetrical or nonuniform sided plant will be grounds for rejection of the plant .
prune according to best horticultural practice for the health of the plant and the natural or designed form and growth characteristics of the individual species .
num .
roots .
cut damaged or broken primary roots immediately above the damage with a clean oblique cut .
f transplanting existing plants .
relocate plant material designated for transplanting to areas indicated .
move plants while dormant unless otherwise approved .
apply an approved antidesiccantantitranspirant according to the manufacturers application recommendations to all evergreen plant material and any deciduous trees or shrubs in leaf before digging .
dig plants with root balls of sufficient diameter and depth to encompass enough fibrous and feeding roots for the full recovery of the plant .
root ball sizes and depths to correspond to the next largest size nursery grown stock listed in the asna standard for deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs .
dig root ball to have a flat bottom .
keep roots protected and moist at all times during transplanting procedures .
ball and burlap roots using tightly sewn untreated biodegradable burlap laced with heavy twine as specified in section numanum and approved nursery industry practices .
prune any damaged broken or diseased main roots as specified in section numenum .
carefully transport plants to the transplant site within num hours after digging .
handle plants only by the root ball .
pad trunks and major branches to prevent damage .
replant prune water and maintain transplanted material in the same manner as new stock .
as specified in section numa locate and prepare an acceptable secured temporary site for heeling in or above ground storage of all plants that can not be replanted within num hours at their designated transplant site due to construction sequencing .
keep all root balls moist during the storage period .
g planting .
plant when soil and climatic conditions are favorable according to the following schedule deciduous trees and shrubs october num to november num and april num to may num evergreen trees and crownvetch plants march num to may num and august num to september num seedlings and seedling transplants march num to may num rhizomes bulbs tubers and starter plants march num to may num plugs and peat pots march num to september num where local conditions warrant these dates may be extended if directed in writing by the district executive .
num .
placing plants .
set plants plumb and at the required depth as shown on the standard drawings and conforming to the following requirements num.a bb .
handle bb plants by the ball or other root protective device not by the stem or branches .
cut or untie the root ball lacing and lay back or cut off the burlap wrap from the top onethird of the root ball .
remove the top onethird of any root ball wire protective baskets .
num.b br .
carefully handle br plants by the main plant stem and any packaging material to avoid damage to the bark and roots .
form a raised soil mound in the planting pit of sufficient size to match the lateral spread numg numg num num initial edition of the root mass and to bring the plant up to the proper planting depth .
spread roots evenly over the mound before backfilling .
num.c container grown .
handle plants by the packing container not by the stem or branches .
remove the container from the root mass formed by the container .
separate and spread any compacted roots outward in the planting pit before backfilling .
num .
fertilizing and backfilling .
fertilize according to the fertilizer schedule and as detailed .
mix the specified quantity of water absorbent granules into the backfill material spread around the plant roots in the bottom half of the planting hole .
use num ounce of water absorbent polymer granules for each numinch width of root ball for shrubs and num ounces for each numinch caliper of trees .
cultivate and completely tamp backfill mix around the ball or roots in a manner that fills voids and eliminates air pockets .
avoid breaking or damaging roots during backfilling and tamping operations .
when backfilling is twothirds complete lay back or cut off and remove the top onethird of the root ball wrapping material on bb plants .
cut off and remove any wire root protection devices from the top one third of the root ball .
thoroughly water the backfill material around the roots .
complete backfilling and broadcast mycorrhizal fungi around the perimeter of the root ball and incorporate into the top num inches of the backfill mix .
thoroughly water again after the initial watering has been completely absorbed .
firm backfill material around the top of the planting hole and plant stem .
fill in any surface irregularities of the planting hole and level soil .
apply one fungi packet of material for each num inch of tree caliper measured num inches above the top of the root ball .
fungi application is not required for shrub or ground cover plants .
do not expose fungi packets to direct sunlight until ready to use at the planting pit .
provide documentation of delivery to planting site of approved fertilizers and fungi product .
certify that fertilizer and fungi requirements were installed as specified in the aforementioned paragraphs .
num .
crownvetch plants .
plant crownvetch crowns or plants using reforestation method a .
for areas planted with crownvetch plants treat the soil before planting with lime and fertilizer at the rates specified in section numc .
apply formula e seed at the rate of num pounds per num square yards .
mulch with hay as specified in section num .
num .
reforestation methods .
space and arrange plants as indicated or as directed .
puddle plants in a mud slurry immediately before planting .
num.a method acrownvetch plants .
make a vertical hole in the soil num inches to num inches deep but do not excessively loosen the soil .
insert the root in a vertical position in the hole with the root collar resting at the same depth as it grew originally .
firmly tamp to close the hole and exclude air pockets without damaging the plant .
thoroughly water the planted area after installation .
num.b method bseedling material and seedling transplants .
prepare plant pits as specified in section numd .
dig pits as large as necessary to accommodate plant root system and gel water carton .
dip all br seedling and transplant roots into the mycorrhizal fungi root dip inoculant gel immediately prior to planting .
thoroughly cover root surfaces .
insert plant in a vertical position in the plant pit with the root collar positioned at the same depth as it grew originally .
place fertilizer tablet or fertilizer contact packets and gel water cartons at but not below the root zone .
cut bottom of gel carton before installation to facilitate gel contact with the soil .
backfill the pit with excavation material from the plant pit .
thoroughly water the plant and firm soil around the plant root collar and gel carton to hold both in an upright position .
use one gel carton for plants up to num inches in height two cartons for plants from num inches to num inches in height and three cartons for plants from num inches to num inches in height .
num .
staking .
stake trees using either rubber or fiber collar straps immediately after completion of the backfilling operation of the tree pit as shown on the standard drawing and as follows num.a rubber collar strap .
use the size of collar strap shown on the standard drawings for the appropriate tree caliper size .
wrap straps around the tree trunk so that the rubber strap lies flat against the trunk .
securely fasten strap ends to stake with approved natural fiber twine or rope run through the grommet hole at each end of the strap and wrapped tightened and knotted around the stake .
numg numg num num initial edition num.b fiber collar strap .
wrap collar strap around the tree trunk so that the fiber material lies flat against the trunk .
follow the strap manufacturers attachment instructions for the type of collar strap used .
securely fasten the strap ends with either a tied knot approved natural fiber twine or rope run through the grommet holes at each end of the strap and wrapped tightened and knotted around the stake or nailed to the stake .
use polypropylene straps with grommets for trees numinch caliper and smaller .
use heavyduty nylon straps with grommets for trees over numinch caliper .
polypropylene straps without grommets can be used for all tree calipers num inches and smaller .
cotton straps can be used for trees numinch caliper and smaller .
num .
period of establishment .
maintain all plants in a living healthy condition until the entire project has been accepted .
plants are required to have been growing in place at least num days before project acceptance .
during this period of establishment perform the necessary watering weeding applying of acceptable insecticides or fungicides cultivating remulching to maintain a depth of num inches and adjusting stakes all as directed .
num .
watering .
water during the period of establishment as directed .
perform watering promptly with sufficient personnel and equipment to complete the watering requirements within num calendar days after having been directed .
apply water using an openend hose supplied by gravity or lowpressure pump rated less than num pounds per square inch .
allow water to thoroughly soak and percolate into the soil without runoff .
furnish measurements and capacities of water tanks used in this operation .
submit source of water and watering schedule for acceptance .
num .
cleanup .
remove and dispose of any subsoil rock debris and other undesirable planting excavation materials from the planting site .
leave planting sites with a clean and acceptable groundcover condition .
an acceptable groundcover condition may include seeding bare soil or damaged ground areas with formulas b d or l as directed and mulching with straw at rates typical for the affected areas .
num .
plant replacements .
num.a nursery stock .
plants not alive or showing declining health and having died back beyond a normal recognize pruning point at the time of final inspection will be rejected and require replacement within the next specified planting dates .
replace the rejected plants with plants of the same species size and quality as originally indicated and specified unless plant substitutions have been approved for these plants .
the representative will determine plants that are not acceptable .
remove unacceptable plants from the project and replace with approved plants within num days of official notification in writing from the district executive and before acceptance of the entire project .
make replacements at the beginning of the next planting season if directed or if agreed upon in writing the unacceptable material will be deleted from the contract .
only living healthy plants are accepted at the time of final inspection .
num.b transplanted material .
replace any dead or unhealthy transplanted material with approved nursery grown plants of the same species and general size before final acceptance of the project .
if directed make replacements at the beginning of the next planting season .
num .
mulching .
when indicated mulch the entire individual plant pit or the entire planting bed as specified in section numc .
use coarse aggregate mulch for all individual plant pits to be located in nonmaintained unmowed areas .
in maintained mowed areas use shredded bark tanbark wood chips or approved compost mulch for the individual plant pits .
num .
herbaceous plants .
num.a peat pots and plugs .
loosen soil to a depth of num inches .
wet peat pot surfaces and root masses to saturation before planting .
plant pot or plug approximately num inches deep in wet soil leaving the growing stems above the surrounding soil .
firm soil by hand around each plant .
water thoroughly .
num.b tubers bulbs and rhizomes roots .
loosen soil around each planting site to a depth of at least num inches .
push roots num inch to num inches into the soil and firm soil around each root .
when planting under standing water add sufficient weight such as num penny nails held with rubber bands or place several roots into a loose knit biodegradable mesh bag along with several small stones in order to submerge roots to bottom of planting site .
numg numd num num initial edition num.c fertilization .
side dress each plant with num ounce of num controlled release fertilizer at the time of planting .
apply fertilizer in furrow around each plant and cover with at least num inch of soil .
do not fertilize when planting under standing water .
num.d starter plants .
keep roots of plant moist during the planting operation .
loosen soil at planting site to a depth of at least num inches .
make a vertical hole in the soil deep enough to accommodate the root depth .
insert roots in a vertical position with the root collar at the proper soil depth .
firmly tamp soil to close the hole and expel air pockets .
water thoroughly .
num measurement and payment a plants planting and transplanting .
each the department will not pay for plants deleted from the contract by the representative .
b shrub bed preparation .
square yard c mulching .
num .
individual plant pits .
incidental to the planting operation .
num .
planting beds .
section numb d watering .
watering done at the time of planting or transplanting will be incidental to the planting or transplanting .
any subsequent watering indicated or directed to keep the plants alive will be measured and paid for by the num m gallons .
num numd num num initial edition section numsodding num descriptionthis work is furnishing placing and maintaining cultivated sod on designated areas .
num material a sod .
conforming to the current edition of the turfgrass producers internationals guideline specifications to turfgrass sodding and as follows certified sod cultivated of two or more approved kentucky bluegrass varieties .
containing not more than num of other fine turf grass species .
entirely free from weeds as defined in the pennsylvania seed act of num and amendments .
free from harmful insects disease and nematodes .
cultured in mineral soil .
certified by the pennsylvania department of agriculture or the department of agriculture of the state from which sod is obtained .
rectangular machine sections num inches to num inches wide num feet to num feet long with a uniform soil thickness of approximately num inch excluding top growth and thatch .
broken sections or sections having torn or uneven ends will not be accepted .
grass height maximum num num inches .
wellmoistened condition .
relatively free of thatch up to num inch uncompressed thickness acceptable .
net sod may be used after submitting a sample to obtain acceptance .
b lime .
section numanum c fertilizer .
section numanum d water .
section num num construction a sod .
place sod within num hours after having been cut .
b temporary storage .
for sod in temporary storage protect from drying due to sunlight or wind .
keep sod moist .
c site preparation .
before placing sod complete soil preparation or topsoiling as specified in section num .
provide a sod bed graded so that after placing the top of the sod is flush with the surrounding finished grade .
apply soil supplements as specified in section numc to areas to be sodded .
moisten soil before placing sod .
d placing sod .
place sod when soil moisture and temperature conditions are suitable .
do not cut or place sod if the temperature is lower than numf .
do not place frozen sod .
numd numb num num initial edition carefully place sod by hand with tight joints no overlap and in straight lines with rows placed parallel to and tight against each other .
break or stagger transverse joints .
do not use pitchforks or other tools that may damage the sod .
do not dump sod from vehicles .
immediately after placing saturate sod with water to its full depth .
after the initial watering tamp the sod to close joints and ensure close contact between the sod and sod bed .
tamp to obtain a smooth even sod surface free from bumps and depressions .
if directed use a roller having a weight not more than num pounds per foot of width to complete firming and smoothing the sod .
if placing sod in ditches place the strip with the longer dimension perpendicular to the flow of water .
at any point where water will start flowing over a sodded area turn the upper edge of the sod strips into the soil then place a layer of compacted earth over this juncture to conduct the water over the sod edge .
on slopes place sod with the long axis parallel to the contour starting at the bottom of the slope .
stagger sod joints .
in ditches and on slope areas num or greater stake each strip of sod securely using at least one wood stake for each num square feet of sod .
use stakes num inch by num inch and with a length of num inches to num inches to num inches .
drive stakes flush with the top of the sod with the wide face parallel to the slope contour. . e maintenance .
properly maintain sodded areas until the project has been accepted .
this may include repeated watering mowing and repairs or replacement of sod in areas that fail to show a uniform growth of grass or that are damaged in any way .
do not mow sodded areas until sod is firmly rooted and secured in place .
maintain grass height at num num inches unless otherwise directed .
num measurement and payment a sodding .
square yard b watering and mowing .
initial watering and mowing at the time of sodding is incidental to sodding .
the department will measure and pay for subsequent watering requested and required for grass survival or as otherwise directed by the num m gallons .
the department will measure and pay for subsequent directed mowing by the acre .
num numa num num change no .
num section numtree trimming and selective tree removal num descriptionthis work is the removal of selected trees and shrubs the trimming of trees and shrubs the treatment of tree injuries and the removal of stumps and debris .
num material stump or basal treatment herbicidetype num class b or c triclopyr liquid formulations .
use either class b butoxyethyl ester of triclopyr and inerts or class c butoxyethyl ester of triclopyr in ready to use form as specified in pcid no .
num herbicides weed and brush control issued by the pennsylvania department of general services bureau of purchases quality assurance division .
conform to all current federal and state pesticide acts and registration requirements .
furnish herbicides in the manufacturers labeled container .
num construction a tree and shrub removal .
living trees and shrubs to be removed will be designated either by separate marking marking in sample areas or as otherwise identified .
where sample marking is adopted do not disturb these sample areas until other areas are complete .
for designated live or dead trees and shrubs and stumps cut to the ground line or to a height of not more than num inches as directed .
fell trees and remove in a manner preventing injury to remaining vegetation .
in areas where felling is not permitted due to possible damage for any reason remove trees in sections .
b herbicide treatment .
treat live stumps of cut trees and shrubs with herbicide on the day of cutting .
apply herbicides according to the manufacturers recommendation .
repeat the herbicide treatment as directed if suckers or sprouts develop at any time before final inspection .
c tree trimming .
selected tree trimming will be designated by separate markings or otherwise identified and indicated .
trim living branches dead and dying limbs and branches num inch or more in diameter growing within the legal right of way growing on an adjacent property that overhang or encroach upon the legal right of way to the height indicated .
trim branches to the branch collar as shown on the standard drawing rcnumm .
provide skilled workers to perform cutting and trimming according to accepted arboricultural practices .
use acceptable tools and methods to perform the work .
do not use climbing spurs or spikes .
treat workrelated injuries to remaining trees and shrubs regardless of species according to accepted arboricultural practices at no additional cost to the department .
d surrender material .
trees and branches resulting from the removal andor trimming operation belong to the property owner .
surrender all such material to the abutting property owner or dispose of it if not accepted by the property owner .
transport wood chips to approved stockpile areas that will not interfere with construction operations obstruct drainage or cause water pollution .
e cleanup .
chip burn or dispose of brush and debris resulting from work .
burn as specified in section num .
do not burn within num feet of vegetation designated to remain .
as directed dispose of rubbish broken concrete litter and other objectionable material .
f maintenance .
until the project is completed properly maintain selective tree removal and trimming including retreatment of sucker growth the removal of windthrown trees and plants or parts of plants which die from any cause .
num measurement and payment a tree trimming .
lump sum or linear foot measured longitudinally along roadway .
numa numc num num change no .
num to a maximum height of num feet or to an unlimited height as indicated within the limit of work .
record all work completed on form mnum roadside activity report .
b selective tree removal .
lump sum or each c selective tree trimming .
each num num num num initial edition section numtemporary protective fence num descriptionthis work is furnishing installing and maintaining temporary protective fencing within the project limits for sedimentation traps and basins and for existing trees shrubs vegetated wetland areas and archaeological sites as indicated .
num material a fence .
acceptable undamaged standard picket snow fence or other acceptable highly visible weather resistant easily maintained fencing that provides a substantial barrier .
b posts .
high carbon channel bar steel num feet in length .
designed to drive satisfactorily into the ground and with at least ten fenceholding lugs of the rivet type .
the representative may accept other posts .
num constructionfence desirable wooded areas individual trees and shrubs designated for protection before beginning other general project work .
where directed fence other adjacent areas to be protected such as sedimentation traps and basins existing archaeological sites and existing vegetated wetland areas .
to verify extent of protection conduct a field observation before clearing and grubbing operations with the representative and if necessary the design project manager and the district environmental manager .
do not stockpile materials under or within protected vegetation areas .
prohibit construction traffic within protected areas .
place the fence at the dripline of trees or plants but avoid causing root damage when driving posts .
replace damaged fence in kind within num hours of damage as directed .
remove temporary protective fence when directed or after completion of project .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num numb num num initial edition section numunforeseen water pollution control num descriptionthis work is construction of temporary or permanent control measures as ordered during the contract life to control unforeseen pollution of surface water and groundwater .
num material as specified in applicable parts of sections num num and num .
erosion and sediment pollution control devicesas shown on the standard drawings .
other water pollution control measures and devices as directed .
num constructionas directed during construction provide water pollution control measures to prevent or abate unforeseen pollution of surface water and groundwater resources .
these measures are separate from those temporary and permanent water pollution control features designed for the project .
coordinate control measures with the erosion and sediment control plan and permanent features to ensure economical effective and continuous pollution control throughout the construction and postconstruction periods .
also comply with the requirements specified in section num .
if directed place pollution control measures for authorized construction areas outside the right of way .
comply with all applicable federal state and local laws rules or regulations .
num measurement and paymentdollar the proposal will include an item and a predetermined amount of money for unforeseen water pollution control .
the contract item will have a unit of measure of dollar a unit price of num and a quantity equal to the predetermined amount .
due to the contingent or unpredictable nature of the work being performed the provisions of section numd are not applicable to this item .
measured and paid for under the unforeseen water pollution control item as follows a contract items .
the department will pay for performance of work identified as having similar items listed in the contract at the contract unit price .
b noncontract items .
the department will pay for items of work not identified in the contract as follows num .
negotiated price .
at price agreed upon with the department before performing the work .
if applicable agreement is also required with fhwa .
num .
force account basis .
section numd num numb num num change no .
num section numrock construction entrance num descriptionthis work is construction maintenance and removal of a temporary rock construction entrance .
num material a aggregate .
aashto no .
num .
section num b geotextile .
class num type a .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows clear and grub the footprint of the rock construction entrance as specified in section num .
construct the rock construction entrance by excavating as specified in section num forming embankment as specified in section num .
place the geotextiles as specified in section numdnum .
provide satisfactory drainage through the rock construction entrance .
when directed place additional rock to satisfactorily maintain the rock construction entrance .
when the construction entrance is no longer needed as directed remove the entrance and restore the area as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a rock construction entrance .
each b material used basis .
num .
aggregate .
cubic yard num .
geotextile .
section numc num .
class num excavation .
section num num num num num change no .
num section numrock lining num descriptionthis work is construction of rock lining of the class indicated .
num material a rock .
num .
general .
acceptable quality sound free from structural defects and foreign substances such as soil shale and organic materials .
unless the rock comes from material providing an approved type a aggregate listed in bulletin num submit samples to the lts for petrographic examination for durability before use .
use rock conforming to the following requirements no shale seams .
hard and angular shaped rock with neither width nor thickness less than onethird its length .
minimum specific gravity of num as determined according to aashto t num bulksaturated but surfacedry basis .
each load of rock wellgraded from the smallest to the largest size .
num .
size and gradation .
percent passing square openings class size no .
ncsa rnum rnum rnum rnum rnum rnum rock size inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num nominal placement thickness inches num num num num num num maximum allowable rock size .
use class num type a geotextile acceptance of gradation will be based upon visual inspection and certification .
provide two samples of rock at least num tons each or each onehalf the total project quantity whichever is smaller .
provide one sample in place at the construction site and provide the other sample at the quarry .
the construction site sample may be incorporated into the work .
these samples will be used as a reference for judging the size and gradation of the rock supplied and placed .
certify as to gradation as specified in section numbnum .
b geotextiles .
class num type a for the type required .
section num .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows num numc num num change no .
num prepare the area required for placing the geotextile and rock .
this preparation may include but not be limited to excavating removing unsuitable material backfilling placing embankment and clearing and grubbing as specified in section num .
place the geotextiles as specified in section numdnum .
carefully place the rock on the geotextiles to produce an even distribution of pieces with a minimum of voids and without tearing the geotextile .
place the full course thickness in one operation in a manner to prevent segregation and to avoid displacement of the underlying material .
do not place rock in layers by dumping into chutes or by similar methods likely to cause segregation or geotextile damage .
rearrange individual rocks if necessary to ensure uniform distribution .
num measurement and payment a rock .
square yard or cubic yard b geotextile .
square yard section numc .
c excavation .
cubic yard section num or num for the class indicated .
num numd num num change no .
num section numoutlet protection rock num descriptionthis work is construction of a rock outlet protection of the type indicated .
num material rock class as requiredsection numa geotextiles class num type a for the type requiredsection num groutsection numc num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as specified in section num and as follows a rock basin .
excavate below final grade as required install geotextile and backfill with rock of the class indicated .
if required after rock is in place saturate the rock with water then completely fill the voids between pieces with grout for at least the top num inches and sweep the surface with a stiff broom .
do not place grout if the air temperature is below freezing .
in hot dry weather protect grouted rock from excessive heat and keep moist for at least num days after grouting using saturated burlap .
b rock energy dissipator .
excavate below final grade as required install geotextile and backfill with rock of the class indicated .
make appropriate connection to downstream receiving watercourse as indicated .
if required after rock is in place saturate the rock with water then completely fill the voids between pieces with grout for at least the top num inches and sweep the surface with a stiff broom .
do not place grout if the air temperature is below freezing .
in hot dry weather protect grouted rock from excessive heat and keep moist for at least num days after grouting using saturated burlap .
c rock apron .
excavate below final grade as required install geotextile and backfill with rock of the class indicated .
if required make appropriate connection to downstream receiving watercourse as indicated .
d riprap basin .
excavate below final grade as required install geotextile and backfill with rock of the class indicated .
make appropriate connection to downstream receiving watercourse as indicated .
num measurement and payment a rock basin .
each .
b rock energy dissipator .
each c rock apron .
square yard d riprap basin .
square yard num numb num num initial edition section numpaved energy dissipator num descriptionthis work is construction of a reinforced cement concrete channel with embedded stones or solid precast blocks .
num material class a cement concretesection num reinforcementsection num precast concrete blockssection numa joint sealing materialsection numb or c premolded expansion joint fillersection num bituminous papersection num stonessection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows excavate to the required paving depth .
remove unsuitable material below the bottom of the paving and replace with suitable material .
thoroughly compact and finish the entire foundation area to a firm even surface .
mix place finish and cure the concrete as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
hold the reinforcement firmly in position during the placing of concrete .
pave in uniform numfoot lengths or sections except where shorter sections are necessary for closures or curves .
form intermediate joints between sections with two thicknesses of oneply bituminous paper cut neatly to the paving cross section .
place premolded expansion joint filler num inch thick cut to conform to the paving cross section at the ends of curved sections at intervals of not more than num feet at the end of a days work and where paving is adjacent to a rigid structure .
use premolded expansion joint filler that has a depth of num inch less than the paving depth and press firmly against the adjacent concrete .
seal the joint top with jointsealing material .
protect paving from the elements flowing water or other disturbances until curing is completed .
num measurement and payment a paved energy dissipator .
cubic yard b excavation .
cubic yard for removal of unsuitable material of the same class of excavation for the ditch or channel above the paving .
num num num num change no .
num section numtemporary slope pipe num descriptionthis work is construction of a temporary slope drainage facility .
num material end sectionsection num pipe inlet and outletsection num fill slope pipeplastic metal or flexible rubber pipe of acceptable quality .
geotextiles class num type asection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows construct the berms of suitable compacted embankment material as specified in section num .
construct the inlet end to channel water into the temporary drain .
use a slope pipe that can easily be moved with the length varying as necessary to reach a suitable discharge area .
place the discharge end so the outlet water does not cause erosion .
place geotextiles class num type a at the discharge end of the pipe if necessary use rock to prevent erosion .
place fabric as specified in section numc .
remove and satisfactorily dispose of pipes and end sections if they are no longer required .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section numpumped water filter bag num description this work is furnishing installing maintaining and disposing of a pumped water filter bag as indicated .
num material a pumped water filter bag .
num .
construct bag from nonwoven geotextile material with the properties listed below property test method units value weight astm dnum ozsy num grab tensile strength astm dnum lbs num trapezoidal tear strength astm dnum lbs num puncture resistance astm dnum lbs num mullen burst strength astm dnum psi num uv resistance astm dnum num hrs num apparent opening size max astm dnum sieve no .
num num .
bag size num feet by num feet num inches .
num .
provide bags with a double num chain lock stitch or double needle stitch with a minimum strength of num pounds per inch as per astm dnum .
num .
provide an adjustable sewn in spout capable of handling a maximum hose size of num inches .
num .
label each bag indicating maximum flowrate of bag in gallons per minute .
b coarse aggregate .
aashto no .
num .
section num c lifting straps .
of sufficient strength to support load of bag .
d geotextile .
class num type a .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings at the location indicated or directed and as follows place bag on a well vegetated stabilized area such that discharge from bag will not flow over any disturbed areas or back into project area .
provide geotextile underlayment class num type a lined flow path if a stabilized flow path is not possible .
locate bag on level area .
when level area is not available place aashto no .
num coarse aggregate to level bag .
do not install bags in areas with slopes steeper than num .
do not exceed a pump rate of num gallons per minute or half the maximum specified by the manufacturer whichever is less .
insert hose into sewnin spout and double clamp bag firmly to pump discharge hose .
do not install more than one pump hose into a single bag .
monitor and evaluate entire pumping operation to assure that bag continues to function properly .
replace bag when contained silt reduces flow to approximately num of rate of initial bag discharge or when directed .
dispose of bag and sediment in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
do not cut open bags and seed .
restore area as specified in section num .
num measurement and paymenteach num numb num num initial edition section numrock barrier num descriptionthis work is construction of a rock barrier and filter blanket .
num material rock class rnumsection numa except petrographic examination by the lts is not required .
coarse aggregate no .
numsection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows determine the length required for the ditch or depression slope .
produce an even distribution of rock pieces with minimum voids .
construct coarse aggregate filter blanket as shown .
num measurement and payment a rock .
section numa b coarse aggregate .
cubic yard num num num num change no .
num section numconcrete block revetment systems num descriptionthis work is construction of an articulating system of interlocking precast concrete blocks or cableconnected precast concrete block mats for erosion protection of slopes and channels .
num material a blocks .
precast section num or if machinemade section num and having numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch and an absorption of num or less when tested according to astm cnum and a minimum durability factor of num when tested according to astm cnum procedure a freezing and thawing in water .
b stainless steel cable .
for connected block systems astm anum or milwnum .
c geotextile .
as specified by the system manufacturer and from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. d soil anchors .
conforming to the manufacturers recommendations .
e other material .
backfill .
num .
aggregate .
section num num .
topsoil .
section num seeding and soil supplementssection num mulchingsection num rolled erosion control productssection numa f hydraulic performance requirements .
provide documented evidence that the system being furnished meets hydraulic performance characteristics derived from tests conducted under controlled flow conditions and conforming to u.s. federal highway administration and u.s. bureau of reclamation testing protocol as documented in hydraulic stability of articulating concrete block revetment systems during overtopping flow report no .
fhwardnum .
g certification .
section numbnum h delivery storage and handling .
transport blocks in a manner that minimizes damage during shipping .
store and handle in a manner that protects them from damage by construction activities or traffic .
num .
constructionexcavate to allow placement of the geotextile and concrete blocks as indicated or directed .
remove obstructions such as tree roots projecting stones or other foreign matter to a depth of num inches below subgrade .
grade the slope to a smooth surface .
backfill voids or soft areas with suitable material and compact to nonmovement .
fine grade the area and hand dress where necessary before placing the geotextile .
place geotextile as specified in section numdnum .
place concrete blocks over a geotextile according to the system manufacturers instructions .
submit field samples to lts to verify that the manufacturers prescribed geotextile is installed .
secure cable connected concrete block systems to the slope with soil anchors as indicated or directed .
do not use unsound or damaged blocks .
minor cracks incidental to the usual methods of manufacturer or minor chipping resulting from shipment and delivery are not grounds for rejection unless the representative determines the material unacceptable .
after placing blocks backfill the open areas of the block with topsoil or aggregate as indicated to the top of the blocks .
complete backfilling within num days of placing the geotextile .
if using aggregate size aggregate according to the manufacturers recommendation .
if using topsoil seed the backfill area as specified in section num and mulch as specified in section num .
use rolled erosion control products recp as specified in section numa to establish vegetation in a wet weather channel num nume num num change no .
num as directed .
num measurement and payment a concrete block revetment system .
square yard aggregate backfill if used is incidental to the work .
b seeding and soil supplements .
section numa as indicated .
c mulching .
section num as indicated .
d rolled erosion control products .
section numa as indicated .
e topsoil .
section num as indicated .
num numc num num change no .
num section numgeocell confinement system num descriptionthis work is furnishing placement and maintenance of a geocell confinement system for slope erosion protection .
num materialuse geocell as specified in section num a stakes .
conforming to manufacturers recommendations and as indicated .
b fasteners .
heavyduty numinch steel wire staples clinched on the reverse side or no .
num hog rings .
c backfill .
num .
topsoil .
section num num .
coarse aggregate .
section num .
aashto no .
num or no .
numa as indicated .
d seeding and soil supplement .
section num e mulching .
section num f geotextile class num type a nonwoven .
section num num constructionconstruct as indicated and as follows a geotextile .
place geotextile as specified in section numa and dnum .
b geocell confinement system .
store and transport geocell confinement sections in an unexpanded configuration until ready to install .
place and expand the geocell sections on the geotextile with the longer dimension up and down parallel with the slope direction the side slope .
place geocell section flush or slightly lower than the adjacent terrain or final grade .
anchor as indicated .
mechanically fasten adjacent sections using wire staples or hog rings as shown on the shop drawings .
align abutting external cells at contact points and keep top edges flush before fastening .
place backfill material flush with the top of cells as indicated .
do not operate equipment on finished subgrade geotextile unfilled geocell sections or uncompacted backfill except compaction equipment .
c seeding and mulching .
as indicated and as follows num .
seeding and soil supplements .
section num num .
mulching .
section num. d maintenance .
properly maintain slope erosion protection systems until the entire project has been completed .
maintenance includes regrading of washedout areas and replacing fill material reseeding and mulching as directed as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a geocell confinement system .
square yard the unit price includes backfill as indicated .
b seeding and soil supplements .
section numa c mulching .
section num numd numd num num change no .
num d geotextile .
class num type a nonwoven section num b .
num numd num num change no .
num section numsedimentation pond num descriptionthis work is construction of a dam to impound water in a storage area .
num material a rock basin .
section num b other material .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows embankmentsection numa seeding and soil supplementssection num mulchsection num class a cement concretesection num corrugated metal pipesection numanum.b or num.c reinforcementsection num steel platesection num welding materialsection numt num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows as specified in section num clear and grub the storage area and embankment foundation area site .
excavate the key trench for the full length of the dam .
excavate the emergency spillway in natural ground .
install the pipe spillway with the antiseep collar attached at the location indicated .
construct the concrete footing for the riser pipe as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
construction of the embankment and trench before placing the pipe is not required .
do not use coarse aggregate as backfill material around the pipe .
backfill the pipe with suitable embankment material to prevent dam leakage along the pipe .
construct rock basin at outlet end of pipe as specified in section numa .
place the embankment material as specified in section num .
if required obtain borrow excavation for the formation of the embankment as specified in section num .
apply seeding and soil supplements as specified in section num .
mulch if required as specified in section num .
when the sedimentation dam is no longer required or if otherwise directed satisfactorily recondition the site by filling in excavated areas and by removing embankments riser pipe assemblies corrugated metal pipe and antiseep collars .
restore the areas as specified in section num .
satisfactorily dispose of removed materials .
num measurement and payment a class num excavation .
cubic yard section num. b riser pipe assembly .
lump sum c corrugated metal pipe .
linear foot section numa .
d antiseep collar .
each nume numi num num change no .
num e embankment .
section num f borrow excavation .
cubic yard section num. g seeding and soils supplements .
section num for the type indicated .
h mulch .
section num for the type indicated .
i rock basin .
section numa num numd num num change no .
num section numstorm inlet protection num descriptionthis work is the furnishing installing maintaining and removal of storm inlet protection of the type indicated .
num material a inlet filter bag .
num .
provide bag from woven polypropylene material with the properties listed below property test method units value grab tensile strength astm dnum lbs num grab tensile elongation astm dnum num seam strength astm dnum num puncture resistance astm dnum lbs num mullen burst strength astm dnum psi num trapezoidal tear strength astm dnum lbs num uv resistance astm dnum num hrs num apparent opening size astm dnum sieve no .
num flow rate astm dnum galminsf num permitivity astm dnum sec num num the numerical values indicate minimum average roll value marv .
num .
provide manufacturers inlet filter bag specifications product data sheets and drawings .
submit for project specific local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section numanum.c .
b concrete blockgravel inlet protection for type m s or c inlets .
num .
aggregate .
aashto no .
num .
section num num .
precast concrete block .
hollow cores section num num .
mesh .
num.a wire mesh galvanized no .
num gage num inch maximum opening .
section numcnum or num.b plastic mesh num inch maximum opening .
num .
wood stud .
sprucepinefir numinch x numinch nominal sizing construction grade c pipegravel inlet protection for type m s or c inlets .
num .
aggregate .
aashto no .
num .
section num num .
mesh .
num.a wire mesh galvanized no .
num gage num inch maximum opening .
section numcnum or num.b plastic mesh num inch maximum opening .
num .
pipe .
polyvinyl chloride numinch diameter astm dnum srdnum d other material .
as follows numd numc num num change no .
num embankmentsection numa sandbagsprovide sandbags as indicated directed and approved by the representative .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings at the location indicated or directed and as follows a inlet filter bag .
install bag in accordance with manufacturers recommendation .
construct downstream earthen or sandbag berm as indicated and directed .
inspect bag after each runoff event to ensure that the bag continues to function properly .
replace or remove and clean bag when sediment has accumulated to num full or when flow capacity has been reduced so as to cause flooding or bypassing of the inlet .
upon final stabilization of tributary area when directed remove bag and downstream earthen or sandbag berm in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
dispose of bag and sediment in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
b concrete blockgravel inlet protection .
install as indicated .
construct downstream earthen or sandbag berm as indicated and directed .
inspect inlet protection after each runoff event to ensure that it continues to function properly .
remove and replace aggregate when it is contaminated with sediment washed out or as directed .
upon final stabilization of tributary area when directed remove inlet protection and downstream earthen or sandbag berm in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
dispose of sediment and materials in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
c pipegravel inlet protection .
install as indicated .
construct downstream earthen or sandbag berm as indicated and directed .
inspect inlet protection after each runoff event to ensure that it continues to function properly .
remove and replace aggregate when it is contaminated with sediment washed out or as directed .
upon final stabilization of tributary area when directed remove inlet protection and downstream earthen or sandbag berm in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
dispose of sediment and materials in a manner satisfactory to the representative .
num measurement and payment a inlet filter bag .
each b concrete blockgravel inlet protection .
each c pipegravel inlet protection .
each num num num num initial edition section numcleaning sedimentation structures num descriptionthis work is removal and disposal of sediment deposited in erosion and sedimentation control structures andor devices .
num constructioninstall cleanout stakes near the center of sediment trap andor sediment basin as indicated or directed .
when sediment accumulation has reached the associated cleanout elevations indicated on plans and as directed remove and dispose of the sediment .
do not damage the structure or device .
maintain or replace cleanout stake as required as indicated or as directed .
num measurement and paymentcubic yard the sediment removed will normally be measured by the number of full loads hauled multiplied by the rated capacity of the hauling equipment in cubic yards .
crosssectional measurements will be used for large quantities and when not using hauling equipment .
num num num num initial edition section numdiversion ditch num descriptionthis work is construction of a ditch at the indicated locations to divert surface runoff water .
num material seeding and soil supplementssection num mulchsection num num constructionwindrow the excavated material on the low side of the ditch then satisfactorily compact with a heavy wheel load or other acceptable method .
on the entire ditch area apply soil supplements and sow formula d seed as specified in section num .
mulch with hay as specified in section num .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num numb num num initial edition section numsilt barrier fence num descriptionthis work is furnishing placement maintenance and removal of silt barrier fences of the height indicated .
num material a geotextile .
class num type a or b .
section num b mesh support .
metallic coated steel num gage wire mesh arranged in a maximum grid of num inches by num inches or an acceptable equivalent plastic mesh .
c posts .
of sufficient length for numinch embedment in the ground .
either wood nominal num inches square or steel numinch by numinch tsection or equivalent or acceptable plastic with an equivalent section .
d fasteners .
no .
num staples numinch long or tie wires num gage steel of appropriate length acceptably metallic coated .
e ground anchors .
numinch by numinch by numinch wooden stakes or steel equivalent to anchor guy wire as shown on the standard drawings .
f guy wires .
no .
num gage galvanized according to astm a num class ii .
install as directed .
g rock filter outlet .
num .
aashto no .
num coarse aggregate .
section num num .
aashto no .
num coarse aggregate .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings with or without mesh support fencing and as follows a installation .
excavate trench and install posts .
fasten the geotextile securely to the top of the mesh at a maximum spacing of num inches and to the posts .
keep sag to a minimum .
extend the geotextile a minimum of num inches vertically along the front face of the excavated trench and a minimum of num inches along the bottom of the excavated trench backfill the trench with the excavated soil and compact .
b maintenance .
after installation satisfactorily maintain the silt barrier fence .
periodically clean silt barrier fence by tapping the dry geotextile from the downstream side .
when directed provide rock filter outlets to replace undercut and overtopped sections of the silt barrier fence .
when the barrier fence is no longer needed remove the fence and restore the area as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a silt barrier fence .
linear foot b silt barrier fence replacement .
if silt barrier fence is required to be replaced the department will pay for it at the contract unit price for silt barrier fence .
num numb num num initial edition section numheavy duty silt barrier fence num descriptionthis work is furnishing placement maintenance and removal of heavy duty silt barrier fence .
num material a geotextile .
class num type a .
section num b posts .
of sufficient length for num inches embedment into the ground and num num inch diameter galvanized steel or aluminum c fasteners .
tie wires num gage steel of appropriate length acceptably metallic coated to fasten geotextile to wire fabric .
d wire fabric and components .
section numa e rock filter outlet .
num .
aashto no .
num coarse aggregate .
section num num .
aashto no .
num coarse aggregate .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows a installation .
excavate trench and install posts .
provide drive anchors when required or as directed by the representative .
fasten the geotextile securely to the top of the wire fabric at a maximum spacing of num inches and to the posts .
keep sag to a minimum .
extend the geotextile and wire fabric a minimum of num inches into the excavated trench backfill the trench with the excavated soil and compact .
b maintenance .
after installation satisfactorily maintain the heavy duty silt barrier fence .
periodically clean heavy duty silt barrier fence by tapping the dry geotextile from the downstream side .
when directed provide rock filter outlets to replace undercut and overtopped sections of the heavy duty silt barrier fence .
when the fence is no longer needed as directed remove the fence and restore the area as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a heavy duty silt barrier fence .
linear foot b heavy duty silt barrier fence replacement .
if silt barrier fence is required to be replaced the department will pay for it at the contract unit price for heavy duty silt barrier fence .
num numb num initial edition section numcompost filter sock num descriptionthis work is furnishing placement and maintenance of a compost filter sock erosion and sedimentation pollution control system .
num material a compost .
provide welldecomposed stable weedfree organic compost derived from agriculture food stump grindings and yard or woodbark organic matter sources aerobically composted with no objectionable odors .
the compost product should not resemble the raw material from which it was derived .
wood and bark chips ground construction debris or reprocessed wood products are not acceptable as the organic component of the mix .
provide compost meeting the compost standards for compost filter socks contained in the dep erosion and sediment pollution control program manual moisture content dry weight basis num num ph num num soluble salt concentration electrical conductivity num dsm maximum manmade inert contaminants dry weight basis less than num organic matter content dry weight basis num particle size passing num sieve dry weight basis num provide a written statement by the supplier certifying that the compost meets the above requirements .
submit for projectspecific local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section num.a b filter sock .
provide filter sock meeting the compost filter sock requirements of the dep erosion and sediment pollution control program manual as shown in the table below .
provide manufacturers filter sock specifications product date sheets and drawings .
submit for projectspecific location approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section numanum.c .
numb num num initial edition material type num mil hdpe num mil hdpe num mil hdpe multifilament polypropylene mfpp heavy duty multifilament polypropylene hdmfpp material characteristics photo degradable photo degradable bio degradable photo degradable photo degradable filter sock diameters in .
num and num num num num and num num num num and num num num num and num num num num and num mesh opening in .
num num num num num tensile strength psi na num num num num ultraviolet stability original strength astm gnum num at num hr .
num at num hr .
na num at num hr .
num at num hr .
minimum functional longevity num months num months num months num year num years num construction as shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows a installation .
fill filter sock with compost at the designated erosion control area or fill and transport to the project site .
fill filter sock with compost using pneumatic blower equipment or similar filter sock filling equipment to the length required .
place compost filter sock downslope of the earth disturbance on level contour as indicated .
extend both ends of the compost filter sock at least num feet upslope at num degrees to the main compost filter sock alignment .
for lengths greater than num feet use multiple compost filter sock sections and overlap ends at least num inches .
anchor compost filter socks placed on earthen slopes with stakes driven through the center of the compost filter sock or immediately downslope of the compost filter sock at num foot intervals consistent with the rc standard drawings and the dep erosion and sediment pollution control program manual .
use concrete blocks immediately downslope of the compost filter sock at the same intervals recommended for the stakes where compost filter socks are placed on paved surfaces .
do not place the compost filter sock where it will concentrate drainage runoff or channel water to another location .
b maintenance .
maintain compost filter sock until the project has been completed .
routinely inspect compost filter sock installation for damage that would make the compost filter sock nonfunctioning .
repair or replace damaged areas as directed .
replace compost filter socks after the minimum functional longevity time period identified in the section numb table for the type of filter sock material used .
remove builtup sediment retained by the compost filter sock when the sediment reaches num of the exposed height of the compost filter sock .
dispose of sediment as specified in the erosion sediment control plan .
upon stabilization of the area tributary to the compost filter sock remove the stakes .
remove compost filter sock or leave in place .
if left in place cut open the filter sock to expose the compost material completely and spread evenly to the contours of the site .
remove the filter sock unless the representative authorizes it to remain .
num measurement and payment linear foot for the specified filter sock diameter .
num numa num num change no .
num section numcompost blanket and compost filter berm num descriptionthis work is furnishing placement and maintenance of a compost blanket or compost filter berm erosion and sedimentation pollution control system .
num material a compost .
provide welldecomposed stable weedfree organic compost derived from agriculture food stump grindings and yard or woodbark organic matter sources aerobically composted with no objectionable odors .
the compost product should not resemble the raw material from which it was derived .
wood and bark chips ground construction debris or reprocessed wood products are not acceptable as the organic component of the mix .
provide compost meeting the compost standards for compost filter berm contained in the dep erosion and sediment pollution control program manual moisture content dry weight basis num num ph num to num soluble salt concentration electrical conductivity maximum num dsm manmade inert contaminants dry weight basis less than num organic matter content dry weight basis num particle size passing num inch size sieve dry weight basis num provide a written statement by the supplier certifying that the compost meets the above requirements .
submit for projectspecific local approval by the representative i.e .
at the district or project level as specified in section numanum.c .
b seed .
section num for the designated seed formula .
soil supplements are not required with these compost systems .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows a compost blanket .
num .
soil preparation .
roughenscarify soil surface with appropriate equipment .
remove and dispose of large unworkable soil clumps debris large rocks and undesirable woody matter such as stumps .
track soil surface before compost application with equipment capable of working perpendicular to the slope gradient in order to create soil indentations that will hold compost .
avoid excessive soil compaction during this operation .
num .
compost application .
uniformly apply compost to the specified depth with approved pneumatic blower units or other appropriate equipment designed to handle and distribute compost material .
do not apply compost in directflow drainage channels such as ditches or the centerline of swales .
apply compost approximately num feet beyond and overlapping all edges of the bare soil surfaces designated to receive the compost .
num.a application rate .
numa numc num num change no .
num surfaces to be seeded up to num slope num cubic yardsacre or num inches depth with num inch tolerance .
surfaces not to be seeded up to num slope num cubic yardsacre or num inches depth with num inch tolerance .
num .
seeding designated areas .
apply seed by injection of the appropriate seed formula into the compost flow stream during the compost application or apply the seed in a separate surface applied operation .
apply seed at twice the seeding rate indicated in section numbnum table a for the designated seed formula .
test and verify the specified application rates for the equipment used .
soil supplements and separate mulch application are not required .
num .
maintenance .
maintain compost blanket depth until the project has been completed or directed otherwise .
routinely inspect blanket for any material dislodgement .
replace and redress any dislodged material and reseed if necessary .
control any noxious weeds with approved herbicides meeting the applicable requirements of section numj .
leave compost blanket in place upon completion of the project .
b compost filter berm .
num .
installation .
apply approved compost using specially designed pneumatic blower equipment and a berm formingshaping device or other appropriate equipment designed to handle compost and form berms .
if blower is used blow compost directly at the soil surface to help settle compact and shape the berm .
construct compost filter berm to comply with the requirements of the dep erosion and sediment pollution control program manual .
construct berm downslope of the earth disturbance on level contour as indicated .
extend both ends of the berm at least num feet upslope at num degrees to the main berm alignment .
construct a trapezoidal shaped compost filter berm num feet high by num feet wide at the base with num side slopes .
position the berm around the designated disturbed soil areas and parallel to the slope base .
construct berm ends pointing upslope so that the ends are at a higher elevation than the berm body to prevent drainage water from flowing around the ends of the berm .
net or anchor the berm after installation .
num .
maintenance .
maintain filter berm in a functional condition .
routinely inspect berm and replace any dislodged compost or reshape any collapsed berm areas .
compost may be replaced by hand and tamped into place .
remove builtup sediment retained by the berm when the sediment reaches num of the height of the berm .
dispose of sediment as specified in the erosion sediment control plan .
replace any compost dislodged by this operation .
at completion of project or when directed leave compost in place by pushing over the berm and spreading the compost material evenly over the adjacent ground to match the contours of the site .
num measurement and payment a compost blanket seeded .
square yard for the designated seed formula .
b compost blanket unseeded .
square yard c compost filter berm .
linear foot num numb num num change no .
num section numsediment trap embankment num descriptionthis work is construction maintenance and removal of an embankment type sediment trap .
num material a aggregate .
aashto no .
num .
section num b rock .
class rnum section numa except petrographic examination by the lts is not required .
c plywood extensions .
where indicated .
posts .
numinch by numinch alkaline copper quat acq pressure treated sprucepinefir grade num minimum of the length required .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
plywood .
numinch thick alkaline copper quat acq pressure treated sprucepinefir .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
fasteners .
deck screws of adequate length and approved for use with alkaline copper quat acq pressure treated wood .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d geotextile .
section num e embankment .
section numa f seeding and soil supplements .
section num g mulch .
section num h cleanout stakes .
num inches by num inches sprucepinefir construction grade of the length required or other approved material of adequate size and length .
num constructionconstruct as shown on the standard drawings at the location indicated or directed as follows clear and grub the site as specified in section num .
construct the sediment trap by excavating as specified in section num forming embankments as specified in section num and placing aggregate or rock at the outlet as indicated .
if a plywood extension is required construct as indicated to the elevations indicated .
place geotextiles as specified in section num for the type indicated .
if required obtain borrow excavation for the formation of the embankment as specified in section num .
apply seeding and soils supplements as specified in section num .
mulch if required as specified in section num .
install and maintain cleanout stake as required as indicated or as directed .
inspect sediment trap after each runoff event .
remove accumulated sediment as specified in section num and replace aggregate when it is contaminated with sediment washed out or as directed .
when the tributary area to the sediment trap is stabilized or the sediment trap is no longer required or when directed recondition the site by filling in excavated areas by removing embankments plywood extension where required and aggregate and by restoring the area as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a class num excavation .
section num. b embankment .
section num numc numj num num change no .
num c aggregate .
cubic yard d borrow excavation .
cubic yard section num. e seeding and soil supplements .
section num for the type indicated .
f mulch .
section num for the type indicated .
g rock .
cubic yard section numa .
h geotextile .
section num for the type indicated .
i plywood extensions .
each j cleaning of sedimentation structures .
section num num num num num change no .
num section numsediment trap riser num descriptionthis work is the construction maintenance and removal andor conversion of riser type sediment trap to a permanent stormwater management facility .
num material a embankment .
section numa b pipe .
section num for the type indicated c outlet protection rock .
section num d temporary baffle wall .
section num e cleanout stake .
numinch by numinch sprucepinefir construction grade of the length required or other approved material of adequate size and length .
f temporary riser pipe assembly .
section num where indicated g concrete outlet structure .
section num where indicated h emergency spillway .
where indicated rock .
section numa geotextile .
class num type a .
section num i seeding and soil supplements .
section num j mulch .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings at the location indicated or directed and as follows as specified in section num clear and grub the storage area and embankment foundation area site .
excavate the key trench for the full length of the embankment when located in permanent stormwater management facility .
install the outlet protection outlet pipe with the antiseep collar attached where indicated and outlet structure at the location indicated .
when indicated construct the temporary riser pipe assembly as specified in section num .
when a concrete antiseep color is specified construct collar as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
when the sediment trap is located in a permanent stormwater management facility and a concrete outlet structure is indicated construct concrete outlet structure as specified in section num .
construction of the embankment before placing the pipe is not required .
do not use coarse aggregate as backfill material around the pipe .
backfill the pipe with suitable embankment material to prevent embankment leakage along the pipe .
construct outlet protection of the type indicated at outlet end of pipe as specified in section num .
place the embankment material as specified in section num .
when required obtain borrow excavation for the formation of the embankment as specified in section num .
apply seeding and soil supplements as specified in section num .
mulch if required as specified in section num .
install and maintain cleanout stake as required as indicated or as directed .
inspect sediment trap after each runoff event to assure that it continues to function properly .
remove accumulated sediment as specified in section num and repair as required or as directed .
when the tributary area to the sediment trap is stabilized or the sediment trap is no longer required or if otherwise directed satisfactorily recondition the site as follows temporary sediment trap fill in excavated areas removing embankments riser pipe assemblies outlet num numn num num change no .
num pipe and antiseep collars or as directed .
restore the areas as specified in section num .
satisfactorily dispose of removed materials .
sediment trap located in a permanent stormwater management basin area remove accumulated sediment and restore sediment trap to final basin contouring as indicated stabilize disturbed areas as indicated remove temporary orifice covers temporary stand pipes affix permanent stormwater management features as specified in section num as indicated or as directed .
satisfactorily dispose of removed materials .
num measurement and payment a class num excavation .
section num. b temporary riser pipe assembly .
section num c pipe .
section num for the type indicated .
d antiseep collar .
each .
for the type indicated .
e embankment .
section num f borrow excavation .
cubic yard section num. g seeding and soil supplements .
section num for the type indicated .
h mulch .
section num for the type indicated .
i concrete outlet structure .
section num j outlet protection rock .
section num for the type indicated .
k rock .
cubic yard section num l geotextile .
square yard section num m cleaning of sedimentation structures .
section num n temporary baffle wall .
section num num num num num change no .
num section numsediment basin num descriptionthis work is the construction maintenance removal andor conversion of a sediment basin to a permanent stormwater management facility .
num material a embankment .
section numa b pipe .
section num for the type indicated c outlet protection rock .
section num d temporary baffle wall .
section num e cleanout stake .
num inch by num inch sprucepinefir construction grade of the length required or other approved material of adequate size and length .
f temporary riser pipe assembly .
section num where indicated g concrete outlet structure .
section num where indicated h emergency spillway .
rock .
section numa geotextile .
class num type a .
section num i seeding and soil supplements .
section num j mulch .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings at the location indicated or directed and as follows as specified in section num clear and grub the storage area and embankment foundation area site .
excavate the key trench for the full length of the embankment .
excavate the emergency spillway as indicated .
install the outlet protection outlet pipe with the antiseep collar attached and outlet structure at the location indicated .
when indicated construct the temporary riser pipe assembly as specified in section num .
when concrete antiseep collar is specified construct collar as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
when the sediment basin is located in a permanent stormwater management facility and a concrete outlet structure is indicated construct concrete outlet structure as specified in section num .
construction of the embankment and trench before placing the pipe is not required .
do not use coarse aggregate as backfill material around the pipe .
backfill the pipe with suitable embankment material to prevent embankment leakage along the pipe .
construct outlet protection of the type indicated at outlet end of pipe as specified in section num .
place the embankment material as specified in section num .
if required obtain borrow excavation for the formation of the embankment as specified in section num .
apply seeding and soil supplements as specified in section num .
mulch if required as specified in section num .
install and maintain cleanout stake as required as indicated or as directed .
inspect sediment basin after each runoff event .
remove accumulated sediment as specified in section num and repair as required or as directed .
when the tributary area to the sediment basin is stabilized or the basin is no longer required or when directed satisfactorily recondition the site as follows temporary sediment basin fill in excavated areas removing embankments riser pipe assemblies corrugated metal pipe and antiseep collars or as directed .
restore the areas as specified in section num .
num numn num num change no .
num satisfactorily dispose of removed materials .
sediment basin located in a permanent stormwater management basin area remove accumulated sediment and restore basin to final contouring as indicated stabilize disturbed areas as indicated remove temporary orifice covers temporary stand pipes affix permanent stormwater management features as specified in section num as indicated or as directed .
satisfactorily dispose of removed materials .
num measurement and payment a class num excavation .
section num. b temporary riser pipe assembly .
section num c pipe .
section num for the type indicated .
d antiseep collar .
each for the type indicated .
e embankment .
section num f borrow excavation .
cubic yard section num. g seeding and soil supplements .
section num for the type indicated .
h mulch .
section num for the type indicated .
i concrete outlet structure .
section num j outlet protection rock .
section num for the type indicated .
k rock .
cubic yard section num l geotextile .
square yard section num m cleaning of sedimentation structures .
section num n temporary baffle wall .
section num num num num num initial edition section numtemporary baffle wall num descriptionthis work is construction maintenance and removal of a temporary baffle wall .
num material a posts .
numinch by numinch alkaline copper quat acq pressure treated sprucepinefir grade num minimum of the length required .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b plywood .
numinch thick alkaline copper quat acq pressure treated sprucepinefir .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
c fasteners .
deck screws of adequate length and approved for use with alkaline copper quat acq pressure treated wood .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows place the pressure treated posts and fasten plywood sheets as indicated and directed .
drive posts and plywood to minimum dimensions indicated to insure flow is diverted along the length of the baffle .
clean the baffle as necessary to insure adequate flow is maintained during all construction phases .
when no longer required satisfactorily remove .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot .
all necessary hardware is incidental .
num num num num initial edition section numtemporary riser pipe assembly num descriptionthis work is furnishing placement maintenance and removal of a temporary riser pipe assembly that functions as an outlet structure for a temporary sediment trap or sediment basin .
num material a riser and stub pipe .
pipe .
corrugated metal pipe section numanumd for the size indicated .
welding material .
steel shapes section numt b class a cement concrete .
section num c joint sealing material .
section num d trash rack and antivortex device .
reinforcement .
section num steel shapes .
section numanum welding material .
steel shapes section numt .
reinforcement aws dnum structural welding code reinforcing steel .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows fabricate riser and stub pipe as indicated .
fabricate trash rack and antivortex device as indicated .
excavate for temporary riser pipe assembly as required .
place concrete foundation and form bottom of riser pipe assembly with class a cement concrete to channel the flow toward the outlet pipe as indicated .
join the riser pipe assembly to the outlet pipe using acceptable connections .
seal connection in accordance with section numd and i. backfill using suitable embankment material .
attach trash rack to structure as indicated .
maintain as required or directed .
when indicated or directed remove temporary riser pipe assembly .
satisfactorily dispose of unsuitable and surplus material .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section numconcrete outlet structure num descriptionthis work is construction of a permanent concrete outlet structure for a stormwater management facility and where applicable the conversion to and from a temporary sediment trap or sediment basin .
num material a inlet .
standard box with type m top unit .
section num or section num b grate .
structural steel for top indicated .
section num c trash rack .
reinforcement .
section num steel shapes .
section numanum welding material .
steel shapes section numt .
reinforcement aws dnum structural welding code reinforcing steel .
galvanizing .
section nums anchors .
section numk .
bolts to be stainless steel or galvanized .
wire mesh .
steel wire no .
num gage with numinch square opening .
d temporary orifice plate cover .
where indicated plywood .
numinch thick alkaline copper quat acq pressure treated sprucepinefir .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
fasteners .
of the type indicated .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
sealant .
silicone .
section numa e class a cement concrete .
section num f mortar .
section num g zinc chromate primer .
federal specification ttpnum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows cement concrete structures as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
fabricate trash racks and galvanize as indicated .
excavate for concrete outlet structure as required .
place concrete foundations and walls monolithically except if otherwise indicated .
construct new concrete outlet structure walls and bottoms to accommodate the dimensions of outlet pipes weirs and orifices .
form bottom of new concrete outlet structure with class a cement concrete to channel the flow toward the outlet pipe as indicated .
attach trash racks to concrete outlet structure as indicated .
set frames and top units in full mortar beds .
num num num num initial edition set pipes flush with the inside structure face .
when constructing concrete outlet structures in conjunction with existing pipes provide for satisfactory connections as specified for new construction of a similar type .
backfill excavated spaces around the structure with acceptable embankment material as specified in section numbnum unless otherwise indicated .
satisfactorily dispose of unsuitable and surplus material .
coat all aluminum surfaces to be embedded in concrete with one coat of zinc chromate primer or a coat of bituminous paint .
allow to dry completely before placing concrete .
when concrete outlet structure is to be used for temporary sediment trap or sediment basin riser attach temporary orifice cover plates as indicated .
seal plate to concrete outlet structure such that it is leak tight .
do not install orifice trash racks until temporary orifice cover plates have been removed .
coredrill holes of the diameter and spacing indicated through concrete outlet structure andor temporary orifice cover plate .
when temporary orifice cover plates are no longer required satisfactorily remove plates fasteners and clean exterior face of structure .
satisfactorily dispose of materials .
seal all holes in structure that were installed for temporary purposes with nonshrinking mortar andor silicone sealant .
attach permanent trash racks as indicated .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num change no .
num section num traffic accommodation and control section nummaintenance and protection of traffic during construction num descriptionthis work is the furnishing installing maintaining and relocating of traffic control devices .
this work may include flagging and pilot car operation for guidance of traffic through the temporary traffic control zone and dust control .
all work shall be done as specified in these specifications the publication num publication num and the mutcd the special provisions standard drawings the approved traffic control plans tcp and as directed .
num materialfurnish material and traffic control devices necessary for maintenance and protection of traffic and conforming to the tcp publication num publication num and the mutcd and as follows temporary barriersection num temporary concrete barrier structure mountedsection num temporary concrete median barrier structure mountedsection num temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mountedsection num temporary impact attenuating devicessection num reset temporary barriersection num temporary concrete barrier structure mounted resetsection num temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted resetsection num temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted resetsection num reset temporary impact attenuating devicessection num painting traffic lines and markingssection num bituminous tack coatsection num superpave asphalt mixture design hma wearing course num mm srl lsection num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
superpave asphalt mixture design wma wearing course num mm srl lsection num and as follows pg num num million esals or as indicated or directed .
shadow vehiclea truck equipped with a flashing or revolving yellow light and as specified in publication num publication num and the mutcd .
truck mounted impact attenuator andor arrow panelinstalled on the shadow vehicle as required in publication num publication num and the mutcd .
num numb num num change no .
num adhesivesection numc temporary traffic control signalssection num temporary traffic control signals resetsection num when traffic line paint and glass beads or pavement marking tape are provided according to the requirements of section numk furnish certification as specified in section numbnum that these materials meet specifications .
all temporary traffic control devices must be listed in bulletin num as nchrpnum compliant .
temporary type iii barricades must comply with standard drawing tcnum or be listed in bulletin num as nchrpnum compliant .
certification form csnum is not required for temporary traffic control devices .
however temporary traffic control devices permanently incorporated as part of the project require form csnum unless otherwise specified in the contract for that particular item .
num construction a general .
comply with publication num publication num and the mutcd .
install and maintain traffic control devices as indicated on the tcp or an approved alternate plan submitted at the preconstruction conference .
the representative may revise the tcp in writing during construction .
if unforeseen conditions arise or if revisions are made to the tcp by the representative install and maintain additional warning lights and traffic control signs on necessary mounting devices according to publication num publication num and the mutcd and at locations designated in writing by the representative .
use department approved channelizing devices only .
reflectorize channelizing devices according to publication num publication num and the mutcd .
provide safety for general public and work crew and protection of work .
schedule construction operations to allow movement of traffic through various phases of construction with minimum interference .
if traffic interruptions become too frequent cease operations in the area concerned as directed .
take remedial action to correct situation before continuing operations .
remove or cover existing traffic control devices that conflict with the tcp .
when conflict no longer exists erect or uncover them .
install and maintain reduced regulatory speed limit signs in work areas as indicated on the tcp approved alternate plan or as directed .
temporarily remove or cover reduced regulatory speed limit signs when workers are not present except as otherwise indicated on the tcp approved alternate plan or as directed .
install temporary bituminous rumble strips according to locations patterns and configurations indicated .
maintain rumble strips in place for the period indicated or as directed and remove them immediately thereafter .
restore the surface after removal and obtain acceptance .
open any substantially completed section of roadway for the use and convenience of traffic as directed and as specified in section num .
when work is completed immediately remove temporary traffic control devices .
maintain clean and properly operate the devices during the entire time they are in use .
traffic control devices must meet the acceptable or marginal standards of the pennsylvania quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices .
remove all devices when no longer required .
where operations are performed in stages keep only the necessary devices that apply to the present stage of construction in operation .
cover or remove signs that do not apply to the existing conditions .
cover with rubber roofing material epdm having a thickness of num inch num mils or black vinyl coated polyester material having a minimum weight of num ounces per square yard and minimum thickness of num inch num mils to cover the entire sign including any supplemental plaques .
all other materials including burlap or open mesh materials other signs and trash bags are unacceptable .
covers with a color other than black are unacceptable .
stabilize and fasten this material to the sign with either plastic or wood to prevent any movement .
do not apply tape to face of sign .
do not deface or damage the sign face using this procedure .
do not allow weeds brush trees construction equipment materials and the like to obscure any traffic control device .
b maintenance of roadway andor structures .
continuously and effectively maintain existing roadways andor structures within the limits of the project from the start of physical work until the date of project acceptance or until relieved of responsibility for further physical work and maintenance as specified in section numa .
such maintenance includes but is not limited to the following numb numh num num change no .
num picking up and disposing of trash and debris including trash and debris not generated by construction activities .
the contractor is not responsible for picking up and disposing of dead animals keeping roadways clear of dust and soil and cleaning up nonhazardous spills maintaining a safe and unobstructed passageway through or around the work zone for all traffic including emergency pulloff areas at the edges of pavements maintaining surface drainage including the removal of debris ice and snow from around inlets to ensure the drainage system is functioning as intended removal of ice and snow from bridge sidewalks andor temporary walkways open to pedestrian traffic and maintaining access to devices associated with intelligent transportation systems including controllers and meter cabinets .
the contractor is not responsible for the removal of ice and snow from roadways within sections of the project opened to traffic unless otherwise indicated .
treat existing earth roads or improved roads that have been graded with calcium chloride or other approved dust control palliatives as indicated or directed .
if the contractor at any time fails to fully perform required maintenance the representative will provide immediate notification of the noncompliance and establish a date and time by which the maintenance work must be completed .
if the contractor fails to remediate the unsatisfactory maintenance condition within the established time frame the department will perform the required maintenance and deduct the cost of the work from money due or to become due the contractor .
the department reserves the right to enter upon a project and at its own expense perform routine maintenance of the existing roadway andor structures .
this maintenance will be during the life of the project but will not include those items that are the contractors responsibility as specified herein and in section num for the contract work and section nume for the accommodation of local traffic .
the department does not assume responsibility in any way for the maintenance and protection of traffic as a consequence of performing this routine roadway andor structure maintenance .
c snow removal and antiskid material .
the department reserves the right to enter upon a project and at its own expense remove snow andor place antiskid material considered necessary for traffic protection .
the department does not assume responsibility in any way for maintenance of traffic as a consequence of removing snow or placing antiskid material .
remove the antiskid material when necessary .
d detours .
for indicated detours furnish erect maintain and remove the detour signs unless otherwise directed .
also temporarily cover revise or remove existing permanent guide signs in the vicinity of the construction site and along the detour route if the messages on the guide signs conflict with the detour signs .
erect maintain and remove the detour signs and the modification of directional signs as indicated and as necessary for construction conditions .
restore original signs to their original state upon removal of the detour .
e local traffic maintenance and safety .
proceed with the work to ensure safety and the least inconvenience to local traffic .
maintain local traffic ingress and egress by use of existing or new roadways .
provide and maintain local access to and from the nearest intersecting public road or street unless otherwise directed .
as directed provide temporary approaches for local vehicular and pedestrian access to and from commuter service residential business industrial and other public and private facilities .
also provide and maintain adequate bridging over base and surface courses trenches or other construction when directed .
f equipment and material storage .
according to publication num. g tubular markers .
when indicated furnish and install tubular markers according to standard drawing tc num and the mutcd .
when directed replace the complete tubular marker or the tubular marker post only as the case may be .
remove all tubular markers when no longer necessary for traffic control or as directed .
h existing department signs .
remove existing warning regulatory guide and directional signs as required to numh numj num num change no .
num accommodate construction operations .
do not remove stop or yield signs unless an alternate type of traffic control is provided such as flaggers temporary traffic signals etc .
continue the alternate traffic control until the stop or yield signs are replaced .
stake or mark sign locations or locate signs on construction drawings before removing any signs .
reinstall existing warning signs at appropriate locations within num hours of their removal .
with the exception of stop or yield signs as herein noted reinstall existing regulatory guide and directional signs at appropriate locations within num hours of their removal .
remove existing state route and segment markers that are likely to be damaged or disturbed as a result of construction operations .
provide survey ties for all such markers before the removal to facilitate replacement .
replace all state route and segment markers that were removed at their exact longitudinal locations upon completion of the work .
i not used j dropoffs .
the following conditions and treatments apply only to continuous and intermittent dropoffs created by construction maintenance or permitutility operations .
if the treatments in this section can not be met due to constructabilityrelated issues obtain approval of an alternate dropoff treatment method in writing from the bureau of project delivery before implementation .
num .
the following are not considered dropoffs drainage ditches .
compacted earthen embankments tapered at num or flatter .
any area num inches below grade and num feet away from active travel lane .
any area behind guide rail barrier or curb .
any area outside rightofway .
num .
general conditions the duration of the dropoff condition starts at the end of the shift in which the dropoff condition was created .
place all channelizing devices at the same grade as the travel lane as close to the edge line as possible .
as an option an approved type c steady burn light may be placed on each channelizing device throughout the dropoff condition unless otherwise specified in condition num .
for intermittent dropoff conditions place at least num channelizing devices or a type iii barricade transversely in front of each dropoff condition .
when applicable install uneven lane signs wnum low shoulder signs wnum or no guide rail signs wnuma at intervals not to exceed num mile throughout the dropoff condition .
condition num dropoffs num inches below grade and num feet away from active travel lane dropoff location treatment between active travel lane nonactive travel lane or shoulder place channelizing devices throughout dropoff condition .
space all channelizing devices at a maximum distance in feet equal to two times the posted speed limit in miles per hour throughout a continuous or intermittent dropoff condition unless otherwise directed .
between two active travel lanes install longitudinal notched wedge joint during paving operations in accordance with rcnumm and during milling operations mill a num wedge .
for temporary overlay transitions during paving and milling operations follow rcnumm except for the paving notch feather transition edge as much as mix will allow .
or numj numk num num change no .
num condition num dropoffs num inches below grade distance from active travel lane duration condition exists dropoff height num inches to num inches num inches to num feet num feet treatment num feet away num hours a or bd a or be or c a or c num hours num feet to num feet away num hours d e a or bef or c num hours a or bd a or be num feet num hours d e ef num hours footnotes a .
place suitable material to grade and compact to nonmovement .
b .
install a num slope with suitable material and compact to nonmovement .
c. install temporary barrier .
d. place channelizing devices starting at num feet in advance of the dropoff condition .
space all channelizing devices at a maximum distance in feet equal to two times the posted speed limit in miles per hour throughout a continuous or intermittent dropoff condition unless otherwise directed .
e. place channelizing devices starting at num feet in advance of the dropoff condition .
space all channelizing devices at a maximum distance in feet equal to the posted speed limit in miles per hour throughout a continuous or intermittent dropoff condition unless otherwise directed .
f. place an approved type c steady burn light on each channelizing device throughout dropoff condition .
k work area pavement markings .
unless otherwise indicated in the tcp furnish all material and install reflectorized pavement markings in work areas for all base course flexible pavement and rigid pavement construction operations as follows all operations except seal coatsurface treatment oil chip skin patching slurry seal heat scarification and microresurfacing operations .
before terminating work each day replace all lane lines and centerlines covered or destroyed during the days operations with applicable pavement marking pattern shown in standard drawing tcnum and the mutcd .
seal coatsurface treatment oil chip and skin patching operations .
if lane lines or centerlines are covered or destroyed during the days operations install no pavement markings signs wnum throughout the affected area at the beginning and at intervals not exceeding num mile before terminating end all lanes at the same grade longitudinally install temporary overlay transitions during paving and milling operations in accordance with rcnumm except for the paving notch and feather transition edge as much as mix will allow .
numk nump num num change no .
num work each day .
in not less than num days or more than num days after completion of the operation remove signs and replace all lane lines and centerlines covered or destroyed during the operation with the applicable pavement marking pattern shown in standard drawing tcnum and the mutcd .
slurry seal heat scarification and microresurfacing operations .
if lane lines or centerlines are covered or destroyed during the days operations install no pavement markings signs wnum throughout the affected area at the beginning and at intervals not exceeding num mile before terminating work each day .
in not less than num days or more than num days after completion of the operation remove signs and replace all lane lines and centerlines covered or destroyed during the operation with applicable pavement marking pattern shown in standard drawing tcnum and the mutcd .
for seal coatsurface treatment skin patching slurry seal heat scarification and microresurfacing operations the representative may waive the curing period specified in the above bulleted item for the bituminous paving material due to traffic conditions or special circumstances .
in these cases install the applicable standard pavement marking pattern before terminating work each day and eliminate the requirement for installation of no pavement markings signs .
apply work area pavement markings as specified in section num .
for temporary pavement markings placed at the departments direction and under conditions not meeting section num e the requirements listed in section num i j and k will be waived .
temporary pavement markings installed under this condition will be paid by the department .
pavement markings to consist of numinch wide lines except lane lines for all multilane roadways are to be num inches wide .
as an alternate to paint and glass beads provide standard pavement markings consisting of temporary pavement marking tape or use nonplowable raised pavement markers when directed except for final markings .
use traffic line paint and glass beads for pavement markings meeting requirements in publication num publication num and the mutcd or temporary pavement marking tape from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
place standard pavement markings in the same location as covered or destroyed pavement markings unless otherwise indicated in the tcp or directed .
remove any pavement markings improperly placed and install in the correct location at no additional cost to the department .
if the roadway is to be closed to traffic until completion of the project and standard pavement markings will be in place when the roadway is opened to traffic then work area pavement markings as specified above are not required .
l not used m lateral lane restrictions .
provide at the preconstruction conference a written notification of construction activities that will create a physical lateral restriction to roadway width due to temporary barriers barricades drums etc .
include a written schedule indicating the proposed times and widths of restrictions for the various phases of construction .
all restrictions are subject to department approval .
notify the representative in writing at least num days before implementing or changing any lateral lane restriction which provides less than num feet of pavement and shoulder in each direction for oversize vehicles .
notify the representative in writing at least num days before removing the restriction .
n temporary highway lighting .
provide temporary highway lighting as indicated on the tcp .
comply with local government electric utility and state codes or requirements the electrical regulations of the department of labor and industry and applicable construction requirements of the nec nesc and nbfu .
cooperate with electric utility company or agency furnishing power to the system and meet necessary service requirements .
do not locate lighting fixtures to produce distracting or blinding glare for the driver .
perform the highway illumination test conv .
and record test data on department test form csnumd .
correct any defects .
perform the test in the presence of an authorized representative of the department .
provide guide rail crash cushions or other devices as indicated or directed to protect vehicles from hitting poles or other temporary highway lighting appurtenances .
o not used p surveillance and review of traffic control .
designate personnel to be responsible for and to be oncall continuously over traffic control operations .
this designee shall always be available to respond to calls involving nump numu num num change no .
num damage to temporary traffic control devices from causes such as vandalism traffic accident or weather .
provide to the representative during the preconstruction conference the name and phone number of the designee providing the surveillance .
the representative and the contractors designee shall conduct periodic reviews of the traffic control devices throughout the duration of the project to ensure continuous compliance with the approved tcp .
conduct reviews during the day and night adverse weather conditions and active and inactive construction operations as directed .
q temporary barrier .
blunt ends of temporary barrier or glare screen will not be allowed .
protect blunt ends by burying them in a cut slope or using an appropriate end treatment according to the pertinent parts of the following design manual part num section num and the standard drawings .
provide install and maintain topmounted and sidemounted delineators on temporary barriers glare screen and bridge barrier as indicated on the tcp .
clean or replace all delineators once per month or as directed .
clean in an approved method .
r removal of conflicting traffic lines and markings .
remove conflicting pavement markings during any phase of construction and relocate as indicated .
remove as specified in section num .
do not remove traffic lines and markings without a paint truck present on the project site if repainting is required .
s lifting of construction materials .
stop traffic during the placement or removal of any construction materials that are above open lanes of traffic such as but not limited to lifting equipment bridge components signs and overhead sign structure components as directed .
t noncompliance of maintenance and protection of traffic .
work zone liquidated damages will be assessed in the event the contractor neglects or refuses to correct a situation or condition of noncompliance with maintenance and protection of traffic requirements tcp publication num publication num and the mutcd or other contract traffic control requirements .
when deficiencies are found a copy of the work zone traffic control compliance checklist and notification form csnum will be delivered to the contractor to correct the deficiencies as soon as possible .
after receiving this notification the contractor may be assessed work zone liquidated damages if deficiencies are not corrected within the maximum time frames established below .
traffic control devices for short term operations num hours traffic control devices for long term operations num hours except for the following urgent o three or more consecutive channelizing devices num hours o stop and yield sign num hours o arrow panels num hours o attenuating devices respond within num hours and complete repairs within num hours after notified the device is damaged the base amount of work zone liquidated damages will be num .
for longterm operations as defined in publication num an additional num assessment for each hour or portion thereof will be added to the num base amount until the deficiency is corrected .
for shortterm operations as defined by publication num an additional num for each hour or portion thereof will be added to the num base amount until the deficiency is corrected .
assessment of work zone liquidated damages will end when the representative concurs that the deficiencies have been corrected .
if the contractor remains in violation of the maintenance and protection of traffic requirements the district executive will direct department forces to correct the deficiencies and charge the contractor for labor equipment and material costs incurred by the department or suspend work in accordance with section numb until the deficiencies are corrected .
u temporary nonplowable raised pavement markers .
furnish install and maintain yellow or white one or twodirection temporary nonplowable raised pavement markers according to the locations spacings and configurations indicated or directed .
install the markers in compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
markers may be attached by epoxy when the marker does not have to be removed at a later date .
numu numy num num change no .
num maintain the nonplowable markers in place for the period indicated or directed and remove them immediately thereafter .
after removal restore the pavement surface .
v not used w changeable message sign .
furnish operate and maintain threeline or full matrix portable trailer mounted changeable message signs for traffic control as indicated or directed .
have all locations messages and times of operation approved by the district traffic engineer or authorized representative .
when providing telecommunications they must be capable of changing message or sequences of messages from a hand held device andor personal computer with the computer having calendar and time mode capability .
provide appropriate software for personal computer for the purpose of remotely operating the changeable message signs .
for the duration of the project provide a qualified technician familiar with the programming and operation of the changeable message sign .
designate the technician to be on call num hours a day num days a week and to arrive on the project site within num hours of notification .
provide capability to monitor approaching vehicles via radar and display the vehicles speed on the message sign .
x temporary traffic signals .
furnish install maintain and remove all items required to provide temporary signalization in accordance with the approved plans specifications and section num. y flagger training .
provide flaggers that successfully completed a flaggertraining course within the last num years that complies with the departments minimum flagger training guidelines described below .
assure that flaggers carry a valid walletsized training card containing the name of the flagger training source date of successful completion of training and signature or provide a roster of trained flaggers to the representative before the start of flagging operations that contains the names of flaggers training source and date of successful completion of training .
minimum flagger training guidelines include the following num .
minimum course contents .
why flagging is important fundamental principles of work zone traffic control component parts of the work zone channelization devices spacing tapers buffer space visibility to approaching drivers human factors driver attitude expectation reaction qualifications of a flagger clothing flagger operations setting up the flagger station signaling devices and when used hand signaling procedure communications twoflagger operations single flagger operations flagging in intersections nighttime flagging emergency situations flagging in adverse weather conditions sign requirements practical exercise numy numdd num num change no .
num num .
objectives .
at the end of the course the student should be able to describe why flagging is important describe flagger qualifications ensure the flagger station complies with publication num publication num and the mutcd gather all necessary equipment select the proper flagging stationpositionlocation control traffic using the stopslow paddle control traffic using the red flag control twoway traffic in one lane of a highway control traffic at an intersection recognize and be able to control traffic in unique or special flagging situations control traffic at night and recognize a safe nighttime flagging operation communicate with coworkers and the public num .
test .
all students must take and pass a written closed book knowledge test consisting of a minimum of num questions .
passing is num .
num .
retraining .
retraining is required every num years .
z shadow vehicle .
load the truck according to the manufacturers recommendation .
place the shadow vehicle upstream of the construction area at the distance specified in publication num and the mutcd as directed .
aa speed display signs .
furnish place maintain and relocate a speed display sign that is a portable trailer mounted solar powered radar speed monitor unit .
use an approved system listed in bulletin num for speed display signs .
have all locations and times of operation approved by the district traffic engineer or authorized representative .
trim trees and vegetation and remove all obstructions at each placement site .
on interstate highway work zones with a project cost exceeding num use a speed display sign on each approach to the work zone .
bb traffic alert radio .
furnish place program operate relocate maintain and remove a trailer mounted citizen band traffic alert radio as directed .
provide units from a source listed in bulletin num with a separate power source used solely to operate the information radio .
locate the radio for clear reception in all directions from the project in order to allow drivers sufficient time to react .
drive through the project to determine limits of reception .
relocate the device as required .
have all locations messages and times of operation approved by the district traffic engineer traffic management center or authorized representative .
messages are to be specific and confined to information related to unusual temporary or recurring highway or traffic conditions .
upon project completion andor when directed remove the radio from the project .
cc existing traffic signal adjustments .
in the event it becomes necessary to turn off any existing signalization provide flaggers or other approved means to direct traffic within the intersection during any period when the signals are not operating .
obtain the approval of the representative the municipality and district traffic engineer for any changes to the existing signalization including timing phasing and operation adjustments .
obtain approval for planned changes at least num days before implementation unless directed otherwise .
dd conflicting overhead signs .
furnish a type vi orange retroreflective vinyl rollup sheeting material to cover the entire sign .
when the size of the sign requires multiple sheets of material to be sewn together provide a num inch overlap with double stitching of heavy duty numcord nylon thread .
provide retroreflective symbols shields and other legends as indicated .
provide approved black nonreflective vinyl letter characters .
provide an additional num inch minimum of sheeting material to be folded around edge of the sign .
place aluminum grommets spaced a maximum of num inches on center around perimeter of the sheeting with one grommet no further than num inches from each corner .
numdd numb num num change no .
num field verify the size of the sign to be fitted prior to fabrication .
adjust the dimensions as necessary .
secure sign in place as recommended by the manufacturer .
cover and uncover the signs as directed .
repair at no cost to the department retroreflective sheeting damage on the existing sign as a result of covering .
num measurement and payment a maintenance and protection of traffic during construction .
lump sum the department will measure and pay for this item in a proportionate manner based on current estimates .
with the exception of the separate pay items specified in section numb if an item or device is required for maintenance and protection of traffic the cost of the item or device is incidental to item num. b separate pay items .
the department will separately measure and pay for the following items or devices when indicated or required for maintenance and protection of traffic during construction arrow paneleach or day includes maintenance fuel and other operating costs for the payment indicated .
if required by a figure in publication num this work is incidental to item num tubular markerseach changeable message signeach includes maintenance fuel telecommunication service and other operating costs relocating to other locations and programming of messages as directed by the district traffic engineer or authorized representative .
temporary traffic control signaleach temporary traffic control signal reseteach floodlightseach or day temporary barriersection num temporary concrete barrier structure mountedsection num temporary concrete median barrier structure mountedsection num temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mountedsection num reset temporary barriersection num temporary concrete barrier structure mounted resetsection num temporary concrete median barrier structure mounted resetsection num temporary concrete glare screen median barrier structure mounted resetsection num painting traffic lines and markingssection num pavement marking removalsection num temporary nonplowable raised pavement markerseach temporary bituminous rumble stripssquare yard numb numb num num change no .
num temporary impact attenuating devicessection num reset temporary impact attenuating devicessection num standard pavement markings paint beadslinear foot standard pavement markings tapelinear foot additional warning lightsday for the type indicated .
based on an accumulation of num hours when in place for one unit .
additional traffic control signssquare foot based on the minimum size sign for the necessary application as defined in publication num publication num and the mutcd unless otherwise directed .
temporary highway lightinglump sum or each as indicated .
shadow vehicleeach or day includes maintenance fuel relocations and operating costs for the duration of the project .
if required by a figure in publication num this work is incidental to item num speed display signseach or day includes maintenance fuel and other operating costs relocations and programming .
traffic alert radioeach includes maintenance relocations and operating costs for the duration of the project .
rollup vinyl signsquare foot based on the square foot of existing sign .
includes mounting hardware and numinches of material around perimeter of vinyl sign cover .
num numd num num initial edition section nummaintenance and protection during temporary suspension of work num descriptionthis work is maintenance and protection of traffic on the project and the maintenance and protection of the project during a temporary work suspension .
num materialsection num num constructionmaintain and protect the project during suspension as specified in section numb as directed and as follows shape and maintain the existing roadway if existing roadway pavements are broken up and removed in advance of a reasonable paving schedule .
surface roadways as directed with acceptable commercial material or with acceptable local material secured beyond the project limits .
if necessary remove this material when project operation resumes .
apply a calcium chloride dust control solution or other approved dust control palliative in the manner and at the rate of application directed .
if necessary remove this material when project operations resume .
remove all protective signs and devices previously installed on the project .
if necessary remove material placed by department forces when operations resume .
maintain and protect traffic during suspension as specified in section num .
the department reserves the right to maintain traffic through the entire project or portions of the project and to perform necessary maintenance of traffic work .
this department work will be performed if agreement as specified below can not be made upon a price or if the department work performed is in the interest of the state .
num measurement and payment a lump sum basis .
section num if this item is extra work then the department will pay for this item at a negotiated price as specified in section numc .
b acceptable commercial andor local material .
cubic yard or ton if this material is extra work then the department will make payment as specified in section numc .
c calcium chloride or other dustcontrol palliatives .
gallon or ton if these materials are extra work then the department will make payment as specified in section numc .
d removal of material placed by department forces .
cubic yard the department will pay for this work as class num excavation .
num numb num num initial edition section numtemporary bridge and approaches num descriptionthis work is the design furnishing placement maintenance and removal of a temporary bridge and approaches of the type and method indicated including required maintenance and protection of traffic .
num materialas indicated or as shown on the accepted detailed drawings .
num construction a twolane construction .
if not otherwise indicated design a temporary bridge and approaches to accommodate two lanes of traffic on a department right of way or easement .
submit detailed drawings of the proposed bridge and approaches for the representatives review and acceptance .
design the proposed temporary bridge for phlnum at the operating level with a roadway width as indicated between curbs guide rails and with sidewalks when directed .
conform to the alignment and grades indicated .
if not indicated submit a plan of a proposed alignment and grade .
upon acceptance of the detailed drawings construct the temporary bridge and grade drain and pave the approaches .
provide sidewalks and sidewalk protection when indicated .
if indicated move the existing structure and use it as the temporary bridge .
the method of moving placing and maintaining the structure will be subject to the representatives review and acceptance .
when the temporary bridge and approaches are no longer needed remove and dispose of them as directed .
grade and restore the entire disturbed area as specified in section num. b onelane construction .
construct as specified in section numa except construct a onelane temporary bridge having a roadway width between curbs of not less than num feet .
grade the onelane approaches for a total width of not less than num feet and surface for a width of not less than num feet .
c maintenance and protection of traffic .
as specified in section num maintain and protect traffic in the temporary area .
num measurement and payment a method num .
lump sum b method num .
separate items as follows temporary bridge and approaches twolane or onelane .
lump sum maintenance and protection of traffic on temporary bridge and approaches .
lump sum removal of temporary bridge and approaches .
lump sum num numb num num change no .
num section numhighway lighting num descriptionthis work is the furnishing installation erection and wiring of the complete highway lighting system including the electrical power supply and distribution system .
num material a highway lighting material .
section num .
submit for approval before purchase and at no cost to the department catalog cuts certifications photometric calculations drawings and manufacturers specifications for all lighting material including lighting poles luminaires junction boxes conduits cables and power supply components proposed for the project .
refer to the project office manual for material information requirements .
b other material .
fine aggregate type a or bsection num coarse aggregate type a or csection num class a cement concretesection num expansion joint fillersection num reinforcement barssection num nonshrink epoxy groutsection numg nonshrink mortarsection nume caulking compoundsection num precast concrete productssection num c certification and warranties .
secure warranties or guarantees from the manufacturers for electrical and mechanical equipment .
submit these warranties or guarantees to the department at project completion .
submit material certification as specified in section numbnum .
for poles submit a signed warranty from the manufacturer stating that specifications have been met .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows a general .
comply with local government electric utility company and state codes or requirements the electrical regulations of the department of labor and industry and the construction requirements of the nec and nesc .
cooperate with the electric utility company or agency furnishing power to the system and meet the necessary service requirements .
acquire permits as specified in section num .
furnish certificates of approval from appropriate agencies when required .
upon work completion submit to the department five copies of asbuilt drawings as directed showing the date any changes from the indicated system made during construction and any revised circuit diagrams .
upon receipt asbuilt drawing copies will be supplied to the agency maintaining the system .
the acceptance of drawings will not relieve contractor responsibility for erroneous or inconsistent dimensions notations or omissions or for the proper installation and operation of the electrical systems .
b excavation for pole foundations .
before placing forms each foundation excavation will be inspected for the actual soil conditions encountered .
do not proceed with work until the foundation excavation is accepted .
the foundation design may need to be revised based on the actual conditions encountered as determined by the representative .
num.b numg num num change no .
num obtain approval of the completed foundation forms before concrete placement .
remove water from the foundation holes before concrete placement .
c trench excavation and backfill .
remove and store topsoil encountered in the excavation .
excavate trenches for conduit runs parallel to the roadway or as indicated .
the preferred location is off of the shoulder .
provide a minimum num inch clearance from all underground utilities .
backfill the same day if possible .
remove rock within the excavation unless an alternate layout is authorized .
remove and dispose unsuitable material and excess excavation as directed .
place plastic marking tape within the last layer of backfill material for the entire length of the trench .
provide bedding soil for conduits as specified in section numanum.a .
backfill the remaining portion of the trenches with suitable onsite material to match existing conditions as shown on the standard drawings .
do not use coarse aggregate except within the subbase area or as directed .
compact trench material as specified in section numf .
stake trench alignments for inspection and acceptance before excavating when they deviate from the indicated location .
submit the layout for review and acceptance before proceeding if the alignments extend the overall indicated circuit length by more than num. d pole foundations .
construct of class a cement concrete as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
before erection of high mast poles mix cure and test samples of the foundation concrete according to department procedures .
verify the ground elevation at the foundation location for all high mast pole foundations .
provide and place anchor bolts perpendicular to the top plane of the foundation .
use suitable templates or forms to hold the anchor bolts in position while placing concrete .
clean the exposed portion of anchor bolts and associated hardware .
install the necessary number of conduit sweep elbows and orient them inside the foundation to avoid unnecessary bends in the conduit runs .
fasten elbows securely to prevent movement while concrete is being placed .
for high mast pole foundations install a num inch conduit for the grounding electrode conductor .
for all other types of poles install ground rod in pole foundation .
connect no .
num awg copper grounding electrode conductor to the ground rod with an exothermic weld or bronze connector extend the other end through the center of the foundation and leave num inches coiled above the foundation .
test the resistance to earth ground before placing concrete .
install additional ground rods a minimum of num feet apart if the measured resistance between the ground rod and earth is greater than num ohms .
e lighting poles and accessories .
install poles plumb .
for other than highmast use aluminum shims with aluminum bases and use stainless steel shims with other bases .
place shims under no more than three bolts of any base .
do not use shims on bridges use leveling nuts .
orient the handhole in the direction of traffic unless otherwise indicated .
plumb highmast poles using the leveling nuts supplied with the anchor bolts .
unless otherwise indicated install bracket arms at right angles to the pavement edge with arms securely fastened to the pole shafts .
install luminaires according to the manufacturers instructions or as indicated .
fasten an identification plate and a lighting management system lms key plate with stainless steel rivets to the roadway side of the pole num feet above the foundation or as directed .
select one or more poles for the static load test as specified in section num before erecting the remainder of the poles .
use similar pole types and similar materials within the same general area .
fieldassemble twopiece pole shafts by overlapping bolted sections .
do not field weld poles or accessories .
f supervision highmast installations .
ensure that a manufacturers representative is on site to assist in supervising the field assembly and erection of highmast poles and to instruct department personnel in the proper procedures for raising and lowering the luminaire ring and in the recommended maintenance care of the poles .
check the pole section mating and alignment before the erection of the pole .
request the electric utility company to be present during erection of poles within num feet of their aerial electric lines .
g conduits .
support conduits firmly and rigidly in place in a manner to prevent dislodging while placing concrete or while performing other operations .
if possible install conduits under roadways before placing the pavement .
if this is not possible install a numinch diameter rigid steel conduit for a sleeve .
jack auger or bore under pavements shoulders sidewalks railway tracks and other indicated areas .
do not water bore .
extend this sleeve numg numh num num change no .
num under the roadway approximately num inches beyond the outside paved edge .
place the lighting conduit through this sleeve .
grind the cut ends of metallic conduit to remove rough edges .
do not use defective conduit .
thread steel conduit for couplings and fittings .
coat the threads as specified in section numr .
weld plastic conduit joints with solvent according to the conduit manufacturers recommendations .
make conduit bends and offsets either in the shop or in the field .
do not damage the protective coating when making bends and offsets .
do not reduce the interior diameter of the bend .
form the bend on a radius at least twelve times the conduit diameter but not less than num inches .
use manufactured sweep bends whenever possible .
seal the ends of partially installed conduit runs if conduit work is temporarily suspended .
if it is necessary to open the ends for cleaning or testing reseal them upon completion .
seal the conduits in control cabinets .
install conduit expansion and deflection joint fittings at each structure expansion joint as shown on bridge standard drawings .
ground steel conduit and provide electrical continuity on structures as specified in section numq as soon as possible after installation and before energizing the system .
connect fittings junction boxes and other appurtenances to the conduit on a structure so electrical continuity is maintained .
provide conduit expansion joints with an external bonding jumper .
size the bonding jumper to match the equipment grounding conductor installed in the conduit .
coat underground steel galvanized conduit with bituminous paint or other approved coating if placed in a corrosive area .
use hotdipped galvanized coating for other areas .
clean conduit runs after installation by pulling a stiff wire brush the size of the conduit through the conduit .
then test the conduit by pulling a ball mandrel that has a diameter of at least num of the inside diameter of the conduit through each conduit run .
where the mandrel fails to pass either clean the conduit without injury to the conduit walls or replace the conduit .
fasten conduits to electrical equipment using codeapproved devices .
use watertight conduit fittings to connect to watertight enclosures .
attach conduit to wood poles with numinch thick hotdipped galvanized steel straps and galvanized lag screws .
provide num feet maximum spacing between straps .
do not install pull wires in the conduit unless indicated .
provide a numinch minimum direct burial conduit for underground circuits .
h cable installation .
do not damage the cable insulation .
manually remove the cable from the drum or reel .
notify the representative when cable is to be placed .
do not proceed without the representative being present .
use cable grips to install the cable in the conduit .
simultaneously pull cables within a single conduit but do not damage the cable by overpulling .
use a dynamometer if pulling other than by hand .
use pulling lubricant of a type recommended by the cable manufacturer if necessary .
use extreme care when pulling cable through handholes in pole shafts .
place a pad of firm rubber or other similar material around the bottom edges of the opening to protect the cables .
clearly locate underground conduits with aboveground markers if guide rail or other surface features are to be constructed in the immediate area .
provide enough slack cable in junction boxes and light pole bases to allow exterior splicing .
neatly arrange the spliced cables or coil in junction box or pole base .
prevent the entry of moisture into the cable at all times during installation .
seal the ends of cable until final splices are made .
make splices above grade in pole base or transformer base with premolded disconnectable connector kits rated for num v. provide splices with a minimum watertight or splash proof seal using weatherproof boots and tape as required by the manufacturer and when placed in junction boxes or other potentially wet areas provide splices that are waterproof and submersible .
for inground junction boxes use nonfusible splices unless indicated otherwise .
use only breakaway type connectors for connections where breakaway bases are used .
line splice only at pole bases or junction boxes .
do not splice cables inside conduits .
use sevenstrand no .
num awg insulated wire for the line taps from the feeder cable to the ballast or luminaire terminal block for the phase and neutral wires .
provide taps to the feeder cables as specified for line splicing .
do not use wire nuts for cable taps .
provide adequate size connectors for the wire sizes involved .
provide individual fusing for all conventional lighting .
fuse the tap with a numa to numa fuse midget size num v rating .
fuse the phase wire only .
connect the insulated equipment grounding conductor routed with the circuit conductors to the grounding electrode conductor from the pole foundation ground rod with a split bolt connector and then connect to ground lug welded to the pole base .
coat all grounding connections with an approved corrosion inhibitor .
attach the cable to the j hook at the pole top with a cable grip that supports the weight of the cable .
furnish and install circuitidentifying tags on control and distribution circuit cables where they connect to numh numq num num change no .
num equipment located in service cabinets and vaults and on cables in junction boxes and pole shafts .
use fiber or other acceptable nonconducting tags not less than num inch in diameter and not less than num inch thick .
legibly stamp identification markings on the tags using small tool dies or permanent waterproof marker .
securely tie each tag to the proper conductor using plastic or nylon cord .
use underground cable in direct burial conduit for all underground installations .
the minimum underground wire size is no .
num awg copper cable .
i cable duct .
use only if indicated .
install similar to conduits as specified in section numg and according to the manufacturers instructions .
j luminaires .
check the luminaires for the proper lamp socket position according to the lamp distribution indicated before placing on the pole top or arms .
uniformly adjust and level luminaires .
install photocontrol or shorting cap according to the manufacturers instructions or as indicated .
immediately before the illumination test and after all dustgenerating work has been completed clean the light control surfaces according to the luminaire manufacturers recommendations using a cleaner recommended by the manufacturer .
provide luminaires with a weather resistant decal conforming to ansi cnum that shows the lamp wattage .
provide a decal that is visible from the ground .
k service pole installation .
position the service pole inside the right of way and where indicated .
when required mount a meter base on the pole according to the utility companys requirements .
coordinate the meter installation with the utility company .
install poles according to the current specifications and standards of nela eei and nesc .
the minimum depth of holes for setting wood poles num feet to num feet in length is num feet measured from the low side on sloping ground .
dig holes with vertical sides and with a diameter large enough to permit use of a mechanical tamper around the pole .
ensure that each pole is inspected and accepted before backfilling .
deposit acceptable backfilling material around the poles and mechanically tamp in layers of not over num inches .
place backfill material around the pole to drain water away .
guy service poles if necessary .
install cone anchors num feet below ground level .
after placing the anchor backfill the hole with coarse aggregate for a depth of num inches above the anchor then tamp during backfilling .
backfill the remaining hole with the excavated material then thoroughly tamp .
obtain approval for the guys before the conductors are strung .
install a guy guard if the guy is adjacent to the roadway .
install and tighten anchor bolts as specified in section num. m photoelectric control device .
use a plugin device for ease of replacement .
install the device with its detector area facing north .
n enclosure installation .
mount enclosures for housing the control equipment .
provide a separate service disconnect ahead of the control cabinet that is labeled suitable for use as service equipment .
the disconnect can be provided integral to the control cabinet if the cabinet is dead front and labeled as suitable for use as service equipment .
padlock the enclosures .
key as directed .
provide enclosure id tags as specified for pole id tags .
provide the power supply number the system voltage and the lms key number on the tags .
p junction boxes .
obtain acceptance of any change in box location before installation .
excavate then construct or install the box .
backfill around the box and dispose of excess or unsuitable material .
ground the junction box as required .
if using precast junction boxes with knockouts remove the knockouts then tightly grout the conduit or conduit sleeves in place with nonshrink mortar .
ground exposed metal parts of junction boxes with a minimum no .
num awg grounding electrode conductor and a minimum numinch by numfoot ground rod .
connect the grounding electrode conductor to the ground rod with either an exothermic weld or with a bronze connector clamp .
connection to an adjacent system ground rod is allowable .
q grounding .
num .
general .
install individual ground rods .
install additional ground rods a minimum of num feet apart as required if the measured resistance to earth is greater than num ohms .
at the service entrance install the first rod electrode ground rod inside a castinplace or precast junction box with lid and attach the ground rod to the grounding electrode numq numu num num change no .
num conductor with an exothermic weld or a bronze connector .
coat the connections with approved corrosion inhibitor .
provide an equipment grounding conductor with all circuits .
do not connect the neutral to ground except at the service location .
provide an insulated equipment grounding conductor with the same insulation and size as specified for the circuit conductors .
num .
grounding on structures .
ground lighting poles underpass luminaires and metal junction boxes on structures by the following methods by connecting to the embedded or surface structure mounted steel conduit .
by use of a continuous insulated equipment grounding conductor routed with the circuit conductors inside the conduit and connected to ground lugs installed inside the junction boxes .
if using embedded or surface structure mounted nonmetallic conduit use a continuous insulated equipment grounding conductor routed with the circuit conductors in the nonmetallic conduit as the sole equipment grounding conductor for those portions of the circuit .
provide one ground rod for structures up to num feet in length .
provide one ground rod at each end of structures over num feet in length .
provide a no .
num awg uninsulated copper grounding electrode conductor from the ground rod to the nearest structuremounted junction box and attach to the ground lug inside the box .
attach the ground rod to the grounding electrode conductor with an exothermic weld or a bronze connector .
provide a separate insulated continuous equipment grounding conductor of the same size and material as routed with the circuit conductors for structures using either steel or nonmetallic conduit .
r galvanize repair .
repair field damage to any galvanized finishes in accordance with astm anum .
s power supplies .
make arrangements with the local electric utility company for electrical service for the lighting system .
furnish and install the specified number of wooden poles for the power supplies with the necessary auxiliary equipment crossarms brackets meter base transformers cutouts lightning arresters conduit insulators switches fuses circuit breakers lighting contactors photoelectric controls enclosures weatherheads service wire guywire and grounding to provide complete electrical service for the entire lighting system .
t buried cable and conduit markers .
set the markers flush with the ground and directly over the trench .
place the marker directly under the guide rail when trench and guide rail cross .
u tests .
perform the following tests as applicable and record the test data on the test forms .
use meters that bear a certification of calibration with the past year from a recognized testing laboratory .
provide the electrical energy and furnish personnel and equipment to complete the tests .
correct any defects disclosed by the tests and then retest the corrections .
perform the tests in the presence of an authorized representative of the department .
form title csnuma ground rod test csnumb conductor insulation resistance test csnumc circuit performance test csnumd highway illumination test conventional csnume sign illumination test csnumf high mast lighting test csnumg static load test conventional satisfactorily demonstrate that circuits are continuous and free from short circuits and from unspecified grounds .
provide a resistance to earthground for each ground rod location of not more than num ohms .
supply and install additional ground rods connected by a common grounding electrode conductor and installed a minimum of num feet apart until this requirement is met or as directed .
the resistance to ground of conductors for underground cable is to be as shown in table a at numf when measured with a num v megger numu numw num num change no .
num table a insulation resistance megohms minimum based on num feet wire size awg cable type num num num crosslinked polyethylene rhw rhh use num num num crosslinked polyethylene xhhw num num num rubberneoprene rhw num num num pvc thw num num num take voltage readings with load and without load at the power supply side of the control cabinet main breaker .
the readings with load must be within num of nominal voltage typically either num v or num v. take voltage readings at the last light of each circuit .
a voltage reading is acceptable if it is within num of the reading with load at the supply point .
take current ampere readings with a full lighting load on the load side of each distribution breaker in the control cabinet .
a current reading is acceptable if it does not exceed num of the breaker rating .
energize and operate the lighting system including automatic controls for num consecutive hours .
at each control cabinet supply a service voltage graphic record covering the test period with the installed electrical equipment in normal operation lights on at night and off in daytime .
after the lights have been energized for at least num hours burning time and after dark take horizontal footcandle readings at road level with the light meter leveled .
use a light meter conforming to the following lowest full scale not exceeding num footcandles or equivalent sensitivity .
cosine correction filtered or adjusted to match the cie response curve and calibrated for the light source .
accuracy num reading num fullscale num footcandles resolution num footcandles calibrated within the last num months by an independent testing company .
take footcandle readings where directed .
give particular attention to points where low illumination is most likely to occur usually midway between luminaires .
complete the static load tests specified in section numanum .
lower and raise the ring assembly of all high mast poles to ensure proper operation .
v data gathering .
determine the gps location and lms keys for all existing and new highway lighting assets within the contract limits .
enter the data electronically in the highway lighting asset numbering spreadsheet and provide the updated spreadsheet electronically to the bureau of maintenance and operations maintenance technical leadership division bomomtld highway lighting group .
w guarantee .
guarantee the inservice operation of all mechanical and electrical equipment and related components of the entire lighting system including lamps for a period of num days .
the guarantee begins the day after the lighting system is fully operational as determined by the representative after completion of all lighting system related work and completion of the numhour performance test specified in section numu .
the energizing cost during the guarantee period will be borne by the owner under the terms of the agreement where agreements are applicable .
perform the following at the onset of and during the guarantee period execute the inservice guarantee notification form csnumh provided by the department .
commence repairs within one calendar day following notification to the person designated on form csnumh .
guarantee all repairs and material replacements for the balance of the guarantee period or num days whichever is the longer period .
numw numm num num change no .
num repair work not performed within the guarantee period or any extension periods will be considered latent defects as specified in section numb .
repairs that are the direct result of external causes will be performed by others .
examples of external causes are lightning strikes vehicular impact objects driven through the underground circuit trenching through installed circuits etc .
issuance of certificate of acceptance or final settlement of the contract is not consequential to the inservice guarantee period described herein .
the guarantee period is not a part of the contract time .
num measurement and payment a junction boxes .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes the ground wire ground rod ground clamp and necessary excavation and backfill .
b poles conventional .
each for the type and height indicated .
the price includes either frangible or breakaway base when indicated and arm .
c poles highmast .
each for the height indicated .
the price includes the lowering device and wiring from the line splice to the luminaire ring .
the winch drive unit is incidental to the total number of poles constructed .
d arms .
each for the length indicated .
the price includes complete installation .
e luminaires conventional .
each for the wattage and mounting indicated .
the price includes integral ballast or driver and complete wiring from luminaire ballast or driver to line splice .
f luminaires highmast .
each for the wattage indicated .
the price includes integral ballast or driver and complete wiring from the luminairering terminal board to the luminaire ballast or driver .
g luminaires underpass .
each for the wattage and mounting indicated .
the price includes integral ballast or driver and complete wiring conduit and necessary mounting provisions from the line splice at the junction box to the luminaire .
h ballast .
each for the wattage indicated .
the price includes mounting and wiring as directed .
i pole foundations .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes excavation concrete anchor bolt assemblies reinforcement bars conduit ground rods ground rod clamps grounding electrode conductor backfilling and satisfactory disposal of surplus material .
j cable and conduit markers .
each the price includes excavation concrete backfilling and satisfactory disposal of surplus material .
k conduit .
linear foot the price includes fittings expansiondeflection fittings joints bends grounds protective coatings and appurtenances .
does not include conduit in pole foundations .
unless otherwise authorized no allowance will be made for additional conduit lengths as a result of deviation from the indicated conduit location .
m cable .
linear foot no allowance will be made for coiling or looping cable slack lengths inside pole bases or junction boxes when additional lengths of cable are necessary for splicing .
an allowance will be made for cable entry into each pole base from the trench to the handhole .
numm numr num num change no .
num unless otherwise authorized no allowance will be made for additional cable lengths or cable size as a result of deviation from the indicated cable location .
the ground rods specified for structures are incidental to the circuit cables .
splices and fuses are incidental to the circuit cables .
n trenches .
linear foot the price includes excavation backfilling temporary and permanent plastic trench markers and surplus material disposal .
no allowance will be made for rock excavation or for any other subsurface condition encountered .
unless otherwise authorized no allowance will be made for additional trench lengths as a result of deviation from the indicated trench locations .
o complete power supply system .
each the price includes service pole and all necessary power supply equipment .
p testing of entire lighting system .
lump sum the price includes furnishing personnel equipment and electrical energy necessary for tests .
q conduit sleeve .
linear foot the price includes all work necessary to install the conduit sleeve as specified in section numg .
the price does not include circuit conduit passing through the sleeve .
r asset numbering system update effort .
lump sum the price includes furnishing personnel and equipment necessary to gather accurate information and to provide updated documentation in electronic spreadsheet format .
num numk num num change no .
num section numsign lighting num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of a complete electrical distribution control and lighting system for the illumination of indicated signs .
num materialsection num .
certification and warranties as specified in section numc .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows a general .
section numa and as follows do not alter sign structure members to attach electrical items unless indicated .
when necessary drill during structural fabrication .
b trench excavation and backfill .
section numc c service pole installation .
section numk d photoelectric control device .
section numm e enclosure installation .
section numn f luminaires .
attach the luminaires to the supports .
install a lamp in each luminaire .
clean the luminaires as specified in section numj .
if the luminaire is provided with a remote ballast mount the remote ballast over the shoulder .
submit mounting method and materials for approval .
g junction boxes .
section nump h conduit installation .
section numg and as follows unless another method is specified attach exposed conduits to sign structures using galvanized or stainless steel supports and ubolts or twohole straps with spacers and expansion bolts and attach the conduit to sign columns and shafts with clamping bands and bolts .
i cable installation .
section numh deviation from the indicated layout may be allowed if it is necessary to overcome obstacles during construction provided that drawings showing the deviations are submitted for approval .
extend cables from the breakers of each sign structure mounted lighting panel to each ballast and sign lighting fixture .
attach exposed cable runs to the structures using numinch stainless steel straps or black plastic tie straps as directed at intervals not exceeding num feet .
j cable and conduit markers .
section numt k grounding .
install grounding electrode conductors ground rods connectors insulated equipment grounding conductors bonding jumpers and necessary devices to limit the voltage to earth on the exposed normally noncurrent carrying metal parts of the entire electrical system and sign structure .
at the power supply connect one end of the no .
num awg grounding electrode conductor to the breaker panel ground bus and the other end to the ground rod at the service pole .
at each sign structure install a ground rod and install a no .
num awg grounding electrode conductor through the sign column shaft and attach to the grounding lug accessible from the handhole .
connect the ground wire to the ground rod with an exothermic weld or a bronze clamp .
do not ground the system neutral conductor .
ground the equipment grounding conductor and enclosure using a connection on the grounding lug in the column shaft .
drive the ground rod vertically into the ground a horizontal distance of num foot from the foundation and opposite the roadway side of the shaft .
numm num num num change no .
num m tests .
section numu except as follows num .
circuit tests .
make voltage readings at the power supply side of the service pole equipment or at the supply side of the highway sign lighting circuit and make readings at ballasts .
provide a voltage drop not exceeding num of the rated voltage at the service point when under full load at the lamp ballast .
take current readings on the load side of each main breaker and neutral circuit .
take current readings at nighttime and at daytime with the lighting systems in normal operation .
num .
performance test .
as directed take footcandle readings at several points on the sign face .
n guarantee .
section numw num measurement and paymentlump sum the price includes furnishing personnel equipment and the costs of electrical energy for the tests .
num numb num num initial edition section numpost mounted signs type a num descriptionthis work is furnishing and installation of fabricated aluminum signs of the type indicated on steel s or w beam posts and breakaway system .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a extruded aluminum channel signs posts and miscellaneous material .
extruded aluminum channel signssection num steel s or w beam posts and breakaway systemsection num galvanized steel hex head bolts nuts lockwashers aluminum postclips auxiliary supports for exit panels numinch rivetssection num b flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffeners posts and miscellaneous material .
flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffenerssection num steel s or w beam posts and breakaway systemsection num numinch and numinch aluminum rivets stainless steel bolts nuts washers postclips twistin toggle and buckle straps butting plates auxiliary supports for exit panelssection num c foundations .
num .
castinplace foundation .
class a cement concretesection num reinforcement barssection num num .
steel finnedpipe foundation .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
erect posts plumb using a method that does not twist bend or otherwise deform the posts .
before erection correct twisted bent or deformed posts .
erect signs by a method that does not twist bend or otherwise deform the signs .
level correctly align and then center signs on the posts and properly fasten .
exercise extreme care when using hoisting cables on the sign to avoid damage to the reflective sheeting .
repair or replace damaged posts and signs .
fasten the signs to the posts with the necessary hardware as detailed in tc num standard series .
b location .
the indicated location of sign installations is approximate with the exact location established at the site .
mark longitudinal and lateral location by stakes or paint marks with an identifying symbol .
on tangent sections of roadway locate and erect posts to allow signs to face away from roadway at an angle of num degrees from the pavement edge .
on curves locate and erect the posts perpendicular to the sight line where the sight line is an imaginary line connecting the center of the near traffic lane .
the length in feet from the sign to the center of the near traffic lane is equal to num times the letter height of the smallest legend in inches but not less than num feet .
for example numinch x numinch letter equals a numfoot sight line .
numc numg num num initial edition c removal of existing signs .
remove existing signs or sign installations as indicated .
existing signs or sign installations that are permanently removed shall become the property of the contractor unless indicated otherwise .
remove foundations to a minimum num inches below final grade .
d clearing and grubbing .
when directed and as specified in section num remove material brush trees or branches which obstruct the clear view of signs being placed .
e restoration of site .
restore the site to its original condition including the disposal of excess or unsuitable materials .
f motorist service signs .
provide and install symbols legends and borders with the exception of business logo signs as indicated .
g posts and foundations .
num .
posts .
submit a sketch for acceptance for each plan location before post fabrication showing the following location of sign by plan station lateral offset from pavement edge to sign edge sign size width and height exit panel sign size width and height number of post supports and sections post heights measured from bottom of post base plate to post top measured distance from reference line elevation at pavement edge to foundation top steel finned pipe foundation design or footing base type design and reinforcing steel and bracket identification number and quantity .
replace galvanized parts or members damaged in transition or erection with new material having properly galvanized surfaces .
repair damage to galvanized surfaces that does not exceed num per linear foot of the total surface area according to astm a num and as specified in section numr .
num .
foundations .
num.a castinplace foundations .
excavate for the foundation then position the posts and connections with the post flange faces aligned in the same plane .
place concrete against undisturbed earth as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
form the top num inches of foundations .
num.b steel finnedpipe foundations .
install foundation and provide installation report prepared by technical assistant according to the drawing and manufacturers recommendations .
technical assistant .
provide a certified designerinstaller to be present at the project site to assist the contractor and representative in the event that unusual problems or special circumstances arise .
furnish evidence of the designerinstallers certification from the steel finnedpipe foundation supplier to the representative before the start of work .
numh numc num num initial edition h erection .
install nuts on post clips with a torque wrench for extruded aluminum channels .
apply num inch pounds of torque to each galvanized nut with the threads dry clean and unlubricated .
attach the sign to posts with twistin toggle and buckle straps or stainless steel postclips for flat sheet aluminum .
apply num inchpounds of torque to each stainless steel nut with the threads dry clean and unlubricated .
clean signs after erection removing any accumulation of oil grease dirt or foreign material .
brace the panel with one or more auxiliary supports if exit panels can not be supported by two sign posts .
num measurement and payment a post mounted signs type a .
square foot of sign the unit price includes removal of existing signs and erection of posts but not furnishing and galvanizing posts .
b steel s or w beam posts .
pound c breakaway system .
each the price includes all breakaway hardware for a single post and all necessary machining .
num num num num initial edition section numpost mounted signs type b num descriptionthis work is furnishing and installation of flat sheet signs on breakaway steel posts .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows flat sheet signssection num breakaway steel postsfrom a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and as specified in section num .
antitheft hardwaresection num system a packaged dry concretesection numb num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as specified in sections numa b d and e and as follows a general .
drive anchors into undisturbed earth with anchor top a maximum of num inches above lower slope side .
drill concrete if posts are to be located in concrete areas .
drive square anchor into undisturbed earth and place concrete if square steel posts are used in concrete .
complete installation after concrete is cured a minimum of num hours .
fasten stop and yield signs and other signs if indicated to posts with antitheft hardware .
permanently scribe numinch numerals on back of sign indicating the monthdayyear of installation .
b removal of existing signs .
remove existing signs or sign installations only when indicated or directed .
return aluminum and steel removed from existing sign installations to the department unless indicated otherwise .
sort and band removed items by type of material onto separate wooden pallets .
prevent additional damage or deterioration of the sign materials particularly aluminum sign blanks during storage bundling and delivery .
give num working days notice to arrange delivery to the department as indicated .
num measurement and paymentsquare foot of sign the unit price includes removal of existing signs .
num num num num initial edition section numpost mounted signs type c num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of flat sheet signs on wood posts .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a signs posts supports and miscellaneous material .
flat sheet signssection num treated wood postssection num antitheft hardwaresection num system a lag screwssection numd shims and barssection numanum bracketssection numfnum b foundations .
class a cement concretesection num sleevessection numjnum num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as specified in sections numa b d and e section numb and as follows excavate for the post foundation .
place the post with shim plates and bars attached in the sleeve in the excavated foundation .
carefully set the sleeve using the temporary framing to ensure proper location .
place foundation concrete as specified in the applicable parts of section num against undisturbed earth .
finish the foundation tops flush and in the same plane as the adjacent ground except trowel the concrete surface and shape to prevent water standing against the posts .
drill or form the hole if posts are to be located in concrete such as divisors or islands .
limit field cutting of posts to a minimum .
field treat the cut area with the original post preservative .
where multiple sign assemblies on the same installation require larger posts than shown on the standard drawings refer to the standard drawings for post mounted signs type e. permanently scribe numinch numerals on back of sign indicating the month and year of installation .
num measurement and paymentsquare foot of sign the price includes removal of existing signs .
num num num num initial edition section numpost mounted signs type d num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffeners on steel pipe supports fastened to fabricated structural steel mounting brackets .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffenerssection num twistin toggles and buckle straps anchorssection num steel brackets bars pipes shapes and plates supportssection num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as specified in sections numa and b and section numb except insert the word support for the word post .
permanently scribe numinch numerals on back of sign indicating the month and year of installation .
num measurement and paymentsquare foot of sign the unit price does not include furnishing and erecting fabricated structural steel mounting brackets .
num numa num num initial edition section numpost mounted signs type e num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of fabricated aluminum signs of type indicated on wood posts or composite posts including the removal of existing signs .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a extruded aluminum channel signs posts supports and miscellaneous material .
extruded aluminum channel signssection num treated wood postssection numa composite postssection numb galvanized steel hex head bolts nuts lockwashers aluminum postclips auxiliary supports for exit panels rivetssection num angles supportssection numg shim bars and plates supportssection numanum b flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffeners posts and miscellaneous material .
flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffenerssection num treated wood postssection numa composite postssection numb rivetssection nume stainless steel bolts nuts washers postclips twistin toggles and buckle straps butting plates auxiliary supports for exit panelssection num angles supportsection numg shim bars and plates supportssection numanum c foundations .
class a cement concretesection num sleevessection numjnum steel pipesection nume num constructionif indicated remove existing signs .
a wood posts .
section num numb num num num initial edition b composite posts .
as shown on the standard drawings as specified in sections numa b and e section numb and as follows excavate for the post foundation .
place the post in the sleeve in the excavated foundation .
set the sleeve using the temporary framing to ensure proper location .
place foundation concrete against undisturbed earth as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
finish the foundation tops flush and in the same plane as the adjacent ground except trowel the concrete surface and shape to prevent water standing against the posts .
drill or form the hole if posts are to be located in concrete such as divisors or islands .
place protective plastic cap over top end of post .
permanently scribe numinch numerals on back of sign indicating the month and year of installation .
num measurement and paymentsquare foot of sign the unit price includes removal of existing signs .
num num num num initial edition section numpost mounted signs type f num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of signs of the type indicated on existing posts or posts installed for other purposes .
num materialas shown on the standard drawing for the corresponding type post and as follows flat sheet signssection num brackets and bars supportssection num extruded aluminum channel signssection num flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffenerssection num galvanized steel hex head bolts nuts lockwashers aluminum postclips lag screws rivets antitheft sign hardware system asection num num constructionattach signs to supports as shown on the standard drawings for post mounted signs type a b c d or e as appropriate .
band signs or brackets to signal poles mast arm columns or luminaire supports .
when mounting as a secondary sign below another sign install sign at a minimum height of num feet on conventional highways in rural areas at num feet on conventional highways on business commercial and residential streets where parking or pedestrian movements are likely to occur or where other obstructions exist and at num feet on expressways and freeways .
height is measured as the difference in elevation between near roadway edge surface and sign bottom .
erect the sign in a level position correctly aligned on the posts and firmly attached with the necessary mounting hardware .
permanently scribe numinch numerals on the back of sign indicating the month and year of installation .
num measurement and paymentsquare foot of sign the unit price includes removal of existing signs as necessary .
num numb num initial edition section numstructure mounted signs num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of signs of the type indicated mounted on overhead structures .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows extruded channel signs and miscellaneous materialsection numa flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffeners and miscellaneous materialsection numb flat sheet signssection num other miscellaneous material anglessection numg anglessection numanum galvanized as specified in section nums .
internally illuminated signssection numg school zone speed limit flashing warning signs sections num num num num and numh or otherwise indicated on the approved plans .
flashing warning signs sections num num num num numh and num or otherwise indicated on the approved plans .
led blankout signs sections num num num numh and num or otherwise indicated on the approved plans .
num constructionsection numh as shown on the standard drawings and as follows remove existing signs only if indicated .
signs that are removed become property of contractor unless otherwise indicated .
submit to the department all street name sign layout sheets for review and approval before fabrication .
erect signs level position correctly on sign brackets and attach firmly with the necessary mounting hardware as shown in the standard drawings .
erect signs by a method that does not twist bend or otherwise deform the signs .
repair or replace damaged signs .
verify that the lowest point of any sign over the roadway is not less than num feet above the roadway surface unless otherwise specified on the approved plans .
provide internally illuminated signs from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
install in accordance with the approved plans .
provide school zone speed limit flashing warning signs from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
install as indicated in sections num num num num num and num or otherwise indicated on the approved plans .
provide flashing warning signs from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
install as indicated and in sections num num num num num and num or otherwise indicated on the approved plans .
provide led blankout signs from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and in accordance with publication numm the june num num ite standard for vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode led circular signal supplement excluding sections num and num maintained minimum luminous intensity num controller assembly compatibility num load switch compatibility and num signal conflict monitor compatibility .
install as indicated in sections num num num num num and num or otherwise indicated on the approved plans .
num measurement and payment a structure mounted signs .
square foot of sign .
the unit price includes removal of existing signs and mounting hardware .
b internally illuminated sign .
each .
numb nume num initial edition includes all necessary connections wiring photoelectric cells swing brackets strapping bolts washers and associated hardware to make the signs fully operational .
c school zone speed limit flashing warning signs .
each .
includes light emitting diode led indications controller assembly solar components if applicable wiring and associated hardware to make the sign fully operational .
d flashing warning signs .
each .
includes light emitting diode led indications controller assembly solar components if applicable wiring and associated hardware to make the sign fully operational .
e led blankout sign .
each .
including all necessary connections wiring photoelectric cells swing brackets strapping bolts washers and associated hardware to make the signs fully operational .
num numb num num initial edition section numdelineation devices num descriptionthis work is the furnishing installation and removal of delineation devices of the type and color indicated .
num materialprovide delineation devices of the type and color indicated in the standard drawings and as listed in bulletin num .
certify materials as specified in section numbnum .
a barrier mount .
provide delineation devices with an anchoring system of pressuresensitive or epoxy adhesive as recommended by the manufacturer for anchoring the delineation device to the top or side of the barrier .
b guide rail mount .
provide delineation devices with an anchoring system as recommended by the manufacturer for anchoring to the face or top of the strong or weak post guide rail .
c post mount .
provide delineation devices mounted on flexible posts meeting nchrp num crash test criteria .
num .
ground mount .
provide a ground mount anchoring system for installing flexible delineator posts in the ground or in proposed pavement median or island .
num .
surface mount .
provide a surface mount anchoring system for installing flexible delineator posts to existing pavements .
num construction a general .
locate delineation devices as indicated by type and color .
remove and install devices as shown on the standard drawings .
verify that the reflective surface of all delineation devices is visible to approaching traffic .
remove and dispose of delineators not being replaced as indicated .
b barrier mount .
install barriermount delineators with a pressuresensitive adhesive or epoxy as recommended by the manufacturer on a section of barrier that is clean and dry .
c guide rail mount .
install guide rail mounted delineators as indicated for the particular type .
be certain the delineators are securely attached to the face of the guide rail or the top of the guide rail post as recommended by the manufacturer .
d post mounts .
check each post to be certain it is plumb .
num .
ground mount .
drive flexible delineator post soil anchors until the top is flush with the ground .
place soil anchors in proposed pavement median or island for inpavement mount .
insert post and secure as recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
surface mount .
install surface mount base anchors on the existing pavement and insert post and secure as recommended by the manufacturer .
num measurement and payment a delineator .
each the unit price includes removal of existing delineation devices .
b delineator removal .
each num num num num initial edition section numdistance markers num descriptionthis work is furnishing and installation of distance markers on breakaway steel posts or distance marker supports .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows aluminum blankssection numa breakaway steel postssection num antitheft hardwaresection numj brackets bars clamps straps and gussett plates supportssection numi num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows the location of an initial marker will be established by the representative .
locate the markers in order along both main roadway sides beginning as directed .
measure to accurately establish the marker locations in nummile increments along the outside pavement edge of the northbound or eastbound roadway only .
locate markers on the southbound or westbound roadway opposite the marker locations established on the northbound or eastbound roadway .
drive posts or erect supports where necessary and mount markers .
after mounting markers tighten antitheft nuts and bolts to ensure a snug fit .
erect markers facing traffic on distance marker brackets if a marker location is on a structure .
num measurement and paymenteach the price includes posts and supports .
num num num num initial edition section num reset post mounted signs type a num descriptionthis work is the removal of existing extruded aluminum channel signs or flat sheet signs posts anchors foundations and associated hardware and resetting the existing signs as indicated with new posts anchors foundations and associated hardware .
num materialsection numa except delete the first bullet section numb except delete the first bullet and section numc .
num constructionsection num and as follows remove existing signs posts anchors and associated hardware as indicated .
remove existing foundations to a minimum depth of num inches below final ground surface and backfill any holes in accordance with section numbnum .
stockpile signs for reuse .
dispose of existing anchors and associated hardware outside the rightofway .
if specified or indicated store existing posts for department pickup .
otherwise dispose of existing posts outside the rightofway .
provide new posts anchors foundations and associated hardware to be set at the specified locations .
reset the existing signs .
avoid damage to existing signs during the removal and stockpiling operations .
replace any sign lost or damaged as a result of any of the resetting operations at no additional expense to the department .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section num reset post mounted signs type b num descriptionthis work is the removal of existing flat sheet signs posts anchors and associated hardware and resetting the existing flat sheet signs as indicated with new posts anchors and associated hardware .
num materialsection num except delete the first bullet .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as specified in section numa b d and e and as follows remove existing signs posts anchors and associated hardware as indicated .
stockpile signs for reuse .
dispose of existing anchors and associated hardware outside the rightofway .
if specified or indicated store existing posts for department pickup .
otherwise dispose of existing posts outside the rightofway .
provide new breakaway steel posts anchors and associated hardware to be set at the specified locations .
reset the existing signs .
avoid damage to existing signs during the removal and stockpiling operations .
replace any sign lost or damaged as a result of any of the resetting operations at no additional expense to the department .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section num reset post mounted signs type c num descriptionthis work is the removal of existing signs wood posts foundations and associated hardware and resetting the existing signs as indicated with new wood posts foundations and associated hardware .
num materialsection numa except delete the first bullet section numb .
num constructionsection num and as follows remove existing signs wood posts foundations and associated hardware as indicated .
backfill any holes in accordance with section numbnum .
stockpile signs for reuse .
dispose of existing associated hardware outside the rightofway .
if specified or indicated store existing posts for department pickup .
otherwise dispose of existing posts outside the rightofway .
provide new treated wood posts foundations andor associated hardware as directed to be set at the specified locations .
reset the existing signs .
avoid damage to existing signs during the removal and stockpiling operations .
replace any sign lost or damaged as a result of any of the resetting operations at no additional expense to the department .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section num reset post mounted signs type e num descriptionthis work is the removal of existing signs posts foundations and associated hardware and resetting the existing signs as indicated with new posts foundations and associated hardware .
num materialsection numa except delete the first bullet section numb except delete the first bullet .
num constructionsection num and as follows remove existing signs posts foundations and associated hardware as indicated .
backfill any holes in accordance with section numbnum .
stockpile signs for reuse .
dispose of associated hardware outside the rightofway .
if specified or indicated store existing posts for department pickup .
otherwise dispose of existing posts outside the rightofway .
provide new posts foundations andor associated hardware as directed to be set at the specified locations .
reset the existing signs .
avoid damage to existing signs during the removal and stockpiling operations .
replace any sign lost or damaged as a result of any of the resetting operations at no additional expense to the department .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section num reset post mounted signs type f num description this work is the removal of existing signs and associated hardware and resetting the existing signs as indicated on existing posts or posts installed for other purposes .
num material section num except delete the first third and fourth bullets .
num construction section num and as follows remove existing signs and associated hardware as indicated .
stockpile signs for reuse .
dispose of existing associated hardware outside the rightofway .
if specified or indicated store existing posts for department pickup .
otherwise dispose of existing posts outside the rightofway .
reset the existing signs at the specified locations .
provide new associated hardware as directed .
avoid damage to existing signs during the removal and stockpiling operations .
replace any sign lost or damaged as a result of any of the resetting operations at no additional expense to the department .
num measurement and payment each num numd num initial edition section numsteel sign structure num descriptionthis work is the construction of overhead steel sign structures of the type indicated .
num material a cantilever centermount monopipe or span with single plane truss .
num .
pipe columns struts and truss chords .
provide supplemental cvn testing zone num nonfracture critical in accordance with aashto specifications for all pipe with nominal wall thicknesses greater than num inch .
the actual yield strength for all pipe per mill test report is not to exceed num pounds per square inch .
num.a astm a numa numm grade b type e or s or astm a num grade b or astm a num grade b num.b api numl grades b xnum or xnum pslnum with the following characteristics no jointers permitted do not use thermomechanical rolled or thermomechanical formed grade suffix m pipe on monopipe structures .
process of manufacture seamless electric resistance welded or longitudinal seam submerged arc welded .
num .
truss webs and truss verticals .
as specified in section numanum for tubular members or section numanum for structural shapes .
num .
steel angle shapes and plates .
section numanum num .
pressbreak columns .
section numanum unless otherwise specifically approved by the department .
provide supplemental cvn testing zonenum nonfracture critical in accordance with aashto specifications for columns with nominal wall plate thicknesses greater than num inch .
provide a minimum internal surface concave bend radius at each pressbreak that is five times the wall thickness or num inch whichever is larger .
bends are parallel to direction of mill rolling .
the dimension across the flats on fabricated pressbreak columns may not vary by more than num from the specified dimension .
the fabricator is responsible for all fabrication adjustments that may be necessary to accommodate any dimensional variation .
b span with trichord or boxshaped truss .
as specified in sections numanum through numanum .
c tapered tube structures .
num .
chord and column members .
section numanum .
provide supplemental cvn testing zone num non fracture critical in accordance with aashto specifications for tube wall thickness greater than num inch .
if press break columns are used provide a minimum internal concave surface bend radius that is five times the wall thickness or num inch whichever is larger .
bends re parallel to direction of mill rolling .
num .
steel angles shapes and plates .
section numanum d fabricated structural steel .
section num except identify on the shop drawings weld locations type size process and nondestructive testing .
shielded metal arc welding smaw submerged arc welding saw gas metal arc welding gmaw and gasshielded flux cored arc welding fcaw are approved .
galvanize as specified in section nums .
if necessary perform one time weld repair of column to base plate column to splice plate chord to splice plate andor circumferential butt welds in chords and columns .
if the initial repair fails seek numd numg num initial edition approval of the chief structural materials engineer before making any further repairs at the previously repaired location .
column base plates must meet a class c flatness tolerance as specified in section num for structures erected directly on a prefinished concrete foundation using bridge shoe bedding material .
perform and evaluate all non destructive testing according to cyclically loaded nontubular tension criteria .
num .
perform the following minimum ultrasonic testing of complete joint penetration cjp groove welds num.a on monopipe structures num of the length of all cjp groove welds on other structures num of the length of the length of each weld connecting columns to base plates cords to splice plates connection plates to columns and chords welds on truss seat plates and longitudinal seam welds on cantilever and centermount sleeves .
if a rejectable defect is found on a partially tested weld then test num of the cjp weld length on that plate or sleeve .
num.b num of the groove weld length on at least num of the number of similar type connections of web members to the truss chords .
if any rejectable defect is found double the testing frequency until no rejectable defects are discovered .
num .
perform the following minimum magnetic particle inspection mt of fillet welds and partial joint penetration pjp groove welds .
num.a intermediate member connections mt num of the weldment length on at least num of the total number of connections on trusses and towers respectively .
if any rejectable defect is found double the testing frequency until no rejectable defects are discovered .
num.b welds on truss seat plates base plates cantilever and centermount sleeves and alternate pressbreak members and fillet welds connecting backing rings to base plates and flange splice plates mt a minimum of num of the total length of each weld .
if a rejectable defect is found then test num of the weld on that element .
num.c welds attaching handhole frames to columns mt num of the length of each weld .
num.d all other connections mt num of the weldments on at least num of the total number of connections if any rejectable defect is found double the testing frequency until no rejectable defects are discovered .
num .
perform num radiographic inspection of complete penetration longitudinal seam welds on tapered tube structures and on all pressbreak columns .
num .
the departments plant inspector will select weld locations and weldments to be tested when less than num of weld length is required to be tested .
num .
backing rings for full penetration welds must be continuous or butt welded with a full penetration weld .
perform num ultrasonic inspection ut of butt welds in rings numinch and thicker .
perform num mt on rings less than numinch thick .
e anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numcnum except anchor bolts shall conform to grade num only .
f class a cement concrete .
section num g mortar .
section numd with a numday compressive strength equal to or greater than num pounds per square numg nume num initial edition inch .
h reinforcement bars .
section num i stainless steel ubolts and washers .
astm a num type num .
maximum allowable diameter for stainless steel ubolts is num inch condition b. j stainless steel nuts .
astm f num alloy group num k high strength bolts .
section numd furnish bolts nuts and washers for testing purposes and test as specified in section numcnum.b .
ubolts other than stainless steel shall conform to astm a num .
stainless steel ubolts as specified in section numi may be substituted for astm a num ubolts for bolt diameters of num inch and smaller .
m bedding material for bridge shoes .
section numh n preassembly of field connections .
before galvanizing preassemble field connections of chord trusses and chord sections to verify geometry and camber .
if distortion occurs after galvanizing reverify .
o certification .
section numbnum num constructionas indicated as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
submit detailed shop drawings for review and acceptance .
submit erection drawings as directed by the structure control engineer conforming to section num .
material and workmanship not previously inspected will be inspected on the work site .
remove rejected material from the work site .
restore the site to its original condition including the disposal of excess or unsuitable material .
b foundations .
excavate and construct the foundations of class a cement concrete as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
use steel templates provided by the fabricator to accurately set tower base anchor bolts to the correct elevation and alignment .
securely brace the bolts against displacement before concrete is placed .
provide conduit sweeps when required .
after constructing the concrete foundations backfill the excavation around the foundation using acceptable material in uniform loose layers not exceeding num inches in depth .
compact to the necessary density by means of mechanical tampers .
c bearing areas .
construct the column base bearing areas of concrete pedestals in a true and level position .
provide full bearing under bases .
place bedding material for bridge shoes if indicated .
d cantilever and centermount structures .
adjust cantilever and centermount structures after the sign panels and lighting are installed to make the signs level .
e column installation and anchor bolt pretensioning .
install sign structure columns and pretension the anchor bolts in strict conformance with the following procedure num .
remove all dirt or other foreign material from the top of the concrete pedestals or caissons .
clean top and bottom surfaces of column base plates to the satisfaction of the representative remove any burrs or excessive surface galvanizing in the area of the anchor bolt holes that would prevent proper seating of the washers in the snug tightened condition .
num .
verify that a test nut can be turned onto each anchor bolt to a point below the elevation corresponding nume nume num initial edition to the bottom of each inplace leveling nut and can then be backed off the bolt by the effort of one person using a numinch long wrench or equivalent without employing a pipe extension on the wrench .
num .
clean and lubricate the exposed threads of all anchor bolts .
clean and lubricate the threads and bearing surfaces of all nuts .
relubricate the anchor bolts and the nuts if more than num hours has elapsed since earlier lubrication or if the bolts or nuts have become wet since they were first lubricated .
num .
turn the leveling nuts onto the anchor bolts and align the nuts to their approximate final elevation .
place one hardened washer on top of each leveling nut .
num .
install column .
column must fit freely over the anchor bolts do not force column onto anchor bolts .
support the column with the crane as necessary and adjust leveling nuts to align the column into its proper upright position .
bring all leveling nut washers into contact with the bottom of the base plate .
note upon subsequent completion of any column installation and the tightening of all nuts the clear dimension between the bottom of each leveling nut and the top of the concrete pedestal or caisson shall not exceed approximately num inch as shown on the standard drawings .
in no case shall this clear dimension ever exceed the diameter of the anchor bolt unless substantiated by design bending calculations for the bolts .
num .
place one hardened washer onto each anchor bolt on top of the base plate and turn the top nuts onto the anchor bolts and into contact with the washers on the base plate .
note if for any reason the slope of an anchor bolt from vertical or the slope of the base plate from horizontal results in a deviation of greater than a num slope at the boltplate intersection or if a nut can not be brought into full contact with the base plate after final tightening a fabricatedtofit beveled washer must be used in place of a flat washer under each nut at that location .
num .
tighten the top nuts to a snugtight condition using a star tightening pattern .
snugtight is defined as the maximum nut rotation resulting from the full effort of one person using a numinch long wrench or equivalent no pipe extensions .
a star tightening pattern is one in which the nuts on opposite or near opposite sides of the bolt circle are successively tightened in a pattern resembling a star .
num .
tighten the leveling nuts to a snugtight condition using a star tightening pattern as stipulated for top nuts .
at this point verify that the clear distance between the bottom of each leveling nut and the top of the concrete is compliant with maximum allowable requirements .
num .
before final turnofnut tightening of the top nuts mark the reference position of each top nut in its snug tight condition with a suitable marking on one flat and a corresponding reference mark on the base plate at the same location .
then using a star tightening pattern and at least two tightening cycles passes incrementally turn the top nuts until achieving the total required nut rotation as specified in the table below .
after tightening is completed verify proper rotation at each nut by observing the reference marks and verify that the nut and washer are in full contact with the top surface of the base plate .
top nut rotation beyond snug tight anchor bolt diam .
in .
fnum grade num num num num turn num num num turn note the top nut rotation tolerance is num num degrees num turn from the specified value .
num .
install jam nuts to a snugtight condition and burr the threads of each anchor bolt immediately above the jam nut .
num .
install the rodent screen on the base plate .
num .
verify boltnut tensioning no sooner than num hours and no later than num days after finalcomplete nume numd num initial edition installation as follows a .
remove the rodent screen .
b .
using a numinch long wrench apply a snugtight force to each top nut not jam nut and then to each leveling nut as stipulated in paragraphs num and num above .
if any nut rotates by any amount carefully document the location and approximate degree of rotation of that nut in writing and report the information to the chief structural materials engineer as soon as possible upon completion of the verification .
c. apply a snugtight force to each jam nut and replace the rodent screen .
f expansion .
provide a num numinch clearance for expansion of structures mounted between concrete walls .
hand tighten the nuts on the ubolts at expansion points on such structures and then install jam nuts .
g connections using highstrength bolts .
section numcnum num measurement and payment a steel sign structures .
lump sum the price includes removal of existing signs .
b class num excavation .
cubic yard c class a cement concrete .
cubic yard d reinforcement bars .
pound num num num num initial edition section numtraffic signal supports num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of complete and operational traffic signal supports for the mounting of traffic control devices and luminaires .
num material sections num and num and as follows reinforcement steelsection num conduitsection numa class a cement concretesection num ground rodsection numj nonshrink mortarsection nume metal screeningsection num premolded expansion joint fillersection num num construction sections num and num as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a excavation .
before forming and placing concrete each foundation excavation will be inspected for the actual soil conditions encountered .
do not proceed with the work until the excavation is accepted .
if necessary revise the foundation design based on the soil conditions encountered .
before submitting the revised design for approval obtain the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in the state .
foundation locations may be changed to avoid underground obstructions with written permission of the representative .
b foundations .
install reinforcement steel anchor bolts conduit sweeps and ground rods with ground wire clamps .
orient the anchor bolt template to obtain the proper angle of the mast arm .
place concrete as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
backfill around the foundation in numinch layers with selected onsite material then compact mechanically to the density of the undisturbed earth .
dispose of excess or unsuitable material .
place numinch premolded expansion joint filler between the foundation and existing concrete sidewalks and pavements .
after placing concrete do not install supports for a minimum of num hours .
c traffic signal supports .
install supports of the type indicated on the foundation .
use leveling nuts on the anchor bolts to adjust the support shaft rake to provide a vertical set when the load is added .
connect the ground wire to the grounding lug .
install span and tether wires on strain poles .
allow enough span wire and tether wire length to fasten wire and for sag adjustment .
after installing signal cable signal heads and signs adjust sag of the span wire .
install mast arm to column using highstrength bolts .
threaded plate traffic signal support connections are not allowed .
check for vertical alignment of the shaft and for alignment of the mast arm after signals brackets signs luminaires and signal cable are in place .
adjust to the correct alignment .
tighten anchor nuts as specified in section num .
place nonshrink mortar or metal screening providing drain hole in the mortar or screening .
place mortar or screening vertically at the outside edge of the base plate .
num measurement and paymenteach and as specified in section num num numd num initial edition section numcontroller assembly num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of a traffic signal controller assembly of the type indicated .
num material sections num num num num and num and as follows class a cement concretesection num caulking compoundsection numb num construction sections num and num as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a controller assembly .
install the controller assembly with internal timebase coordination as indicated .
for basemounted controller assemblies construct the foundation as specified in sections numa and b. connect field wiring for signals interconnect and preemption .
connect service to the inputoutput terminals of the controller assembly .
connect to the equipment safety ground .
when the signal controller becomes operational and during initial turnon demonstrate that all functions are operating in accordance to all the design documents and the applicable standards for the installed unit .
conduct the demonstration as directed in the presence of the representative .
upon successful demonstration that all functions are operating properly the controller will be subject to a numday system test .
if a fault occurs during the numday test period correct the problem and restart the test .
once the numday period has expired with no recordable system faults and meets the approval of the representative the system will be considered for final acceptance .
connect the conflict monitor or malfunction management unit to function as specified in section numb .
when the controller assembly becomes operational and during initial turnon demonstrate that the conflict monitor or malfunction management unit will cause transfer of the signals to flashing operation upon sensing all possible conflicting signal indications .
conduct the demonstration as directed in the presence of the representative .
the num day system test shall not begin until the conflict monitor or malfunction management unit is functioning properly .
before or during the initial turnon connect output from shutdown relay to the output and power input of the signal load switches .
connect relay to controller assembly to provide flashing operation with the traffic signal controller unit installed or removed .
provide activation of the shutdown relay from any of the following sources removal of controller voltage when indicated police panel switch output from conflict monitor or malfunction management unit connect systems and communication control equipment as indicated .
before the numday system test field test for the indicated operation as specified in section numb .
b time clock .
install the time clock when indicated .
connect to inputoutput terminals of the control equipment .
connect to the equipment safety ground .
field test for indicated operation .
c connector harness .
provide a separate harness and connector that meets nema standards and is wired for the maximum phase capability of the controller unit .
d cable connections nema tsnum tsnum type numadvanced traffic controller atc and type numatc .
num .
copper cables .
connect the traffic signal cable and interconnection cable to the proper color coded controller terminals as directed by the representative .
crimptype connectors are not to be used for traffic control cable or interconnection cable .
all wiring and cable connections are to be neat and with all such cables tiewrapped .
spare conductors of signal cable and interconnection cable are to be neatly wrapped in the cabinet and of the same length as the active conductors .
connect all communication cable conductors to the terminal block .
mount on the inside of the lower left cabinet wall a communication cable terminal block .
the terminal block is to have a sufficient number of connections to splice two numpair communication cables together .
if applicable mount on this numd numa num initial edition panel an rsnum interface for connecting a portable pc to the num microcomputer .
the rsnum interface is to consist of a shielded cable with a dbnum connector at one end and a num cnum type connector at the other .
plug the dbnum connector into the cnum port of the num controller .
num .
fiber optics .
route all fiber optic cables entering the controller cabinet through a num num inch internal diameter conduit as specified in section num .
run a continuous conduit segment from the base of the pole through the bottom entry hub of the junction box and into entry hub in the bottom of the controller cabinet .
place conduit to maintain the minimum bend radius of fiber optic cable .
the conduit from the cabinet to the closest junction box or manhole is incidental to this item .
the cabinet is to have the means to hold service loops each num feet in length of each of the jacketed fiber optic cables entering and leaving the cabinet .
secure each service loop to the bottom of the lowest rack in the cabinet in such a way as to ensure the minimum bend radius of the cables and prevent interference of any kind .
however the service loops are to be easily removed and reattached during fiber maintenance .
carefully route the fiber optic cables to the patch panel for termination .
the cabinet is to have a patch panel mounted on an easily removable aluminum panel to house all internal fiber splices mount the aluminum panel in an appropriate location inside the cabinet .
secure the fiber optic cables to the panel before entering the patch panel .
terminate all field fibers in the cabinet .
if applicable mount on this panel an rsnum interface for connecting a portable computer to the num microcomputer .
the rsnum interface is to consist of a shielded cable with dbnum connect at one end and a num cnum type connector at the other .
mount the dbnum connector on the panel for easy access and the cnum type connector plugged into the cnum port of the num controller .
num measurement and payment each and as specified in sections num and num for the type indicated a controller assembly .
each the price includes required controller assembly with buss interface unit biu and detector card rack assembly conflict monitor or malfunction management unit flasher unit load switches or switch packs cabinet relays cable terminalharness assembly electric load center generator adapter kit police panel and time clock .
num numd num initial edition section numtraffic signal systems and communications num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of the system equipment for the control of traffic signals and the furnishing and installation of equipment necessary to provide communication between controller and assemblies and other components that form a system as indicated on the approved plans .
num materialsections num and num and as follows class a cement concretesection num caulking compoundsection numb num constructionsections num and num as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a time based coordinator unit .
section num b master controller assembly .
section num c coordination unit .
section num d closed loop signal system .
num .
software .
install two licensed versions of closed loop system software one on a municipality designated computer and the other on a designated department computer .
provide software upgrades as released by the manufacturer at no additional cost .
provide necessary connections to facilitate communications with the onstreet master and local controllers through the software .
software versions to be input with project specific data i.e .
intersection data intersection graphics with real time displays overall system map graphics .
num .
testing .
conduct a numday systems test after the completion of all individual intersections numday tests .
system test will include but not be limited to the following communication test from the systems computers to intersection controllers and vice versa monitor detector status provide real time intersection display log system events upload and download system and intersection databases review system status reports view system displays test system security codes automatic adjustments for daylight savings time dst emergency preemption logs provide num days of support after the successful completion of the systems test .
support includes correcting software deficiencies that may be discovered through sustained operation and addressing any system related problems within num hours of notification .
supply support contact information to the municipality and the representative .
num .
training .
provide two separate numhour training sessions on the system software for a maximum of ten people .
hold the sessions at the municipality after the successful completion of the systems test .
provide appropriate handouts to each attendee on the system software .
cover the following basic system architecture the operation of the closed loop system software numd numh num initial edition revising system parameters the purpose and operation of each data screen backing up the software and data the addition of new intersections to the system understanding and responding to alarms and failure modes prevention of unauthorized access to the system printing system reports and any trouble shooting procedures .
e radio communications system furnish all necessary antennas cables jumpers and lightning protection as necessary to provide a complete and functioning wireless interconnect system to include but not be limited to the following one radio unit at the master controller location and at each local controller location as indicated on the approved plans .
communication cable from the controller to the radio unit .
omni and directional antennas as directed on the approved plans .
coaxial cable assembly with length and size as shown on the approved plans .
coaxial lightning suppressors at all locations and grounded to the grounding electrode system .
supply antenna grounding kits at all locations and connected to the grounding electrode system .
provide each radio unit with repeater capabilities .
provide all product information and warranties for all equipment .
neatly install all equipment meeting all fcc tiaeia requirements and all state and local codes .
upon completion of the radio system installation conduct the following tests in the presence of the representative to ensure the installation is functioning adequately .
perform cable frequency sweep testing with appropriate test equipment .
test cables and connectors over cable manufacturers entire certified frequency range .
report cable vswr performance in graphical format .
perform tdr testing to identify point faults .
report in graphical format .
test all ground system interconnections .
report impedance measurements .
repair or replace any cables and connectors that do not meet manufacturers published performance standards .
retest any such cables .
tune and configure system to maximize performance of radio link .
report actual vswr rssi and sn ratio .
utilize radio manufacturers diagnostic system software to assist in analysis and configuration .
log and submit printed diagnostic software results .
visually inspect all installed system components .
restore or replace all components found to be in less than perfect condition .
adjust erip to within fcc allowable limits .
upon successful completion of the testing requirements the representative will provide the contractor with final approval that the system is complete .
g cable .
install instrument control and communication cables and hardware as required .
do not splice cables except at terminal strips .
test the cables as specified in section numj as applicable .
h cellular communications system cellular communication system consisting of a cellular modem communication cables antenna and surge protection .
furnish all necessary materials necessary to provide a complete and functioning cellular interconnect system including but not limited to the following requirements one cellular modem is provided at the master controller location and at each local controller location as indicated on the approved plans .
communication cables from the controller to the cellular modem .
omni antennas as directed per the approved plans .
size the antenna to match the cellular modem used and the strength of the cellular signal for each location .
numh numj num initial edition provide surge protection for the cellular modem at all locations and connect to the grounding electrode system .
provide all product information and warranties for all equipment .
neatly install all equipment meeting all fcc requirements and all state and local codes .
facilitate the cellular modem authorizations with the service representative and ensure that all cellular contracts are turned over to the proper responsible parties .
upon completion of the cellular system installation demonstrate to the representative that the installation is functioning properly and according to the approved plans .
i telephone dialup communications system telephone dialup communication system consisting of a dialup modem communication cables and surge protection .
furnish all necessary materials necessary to provide a complete and functioning dialup interconnect system including but not limited to the following requirements one dialup modem is provided at location as indicated on the approved plans .
communication cables from the controller to the dialup modem .
provide surge protection for the dialup modem at all locations and connect to the grounding electrode system .
provide all product information and warranties for all equipment .
install all equipment in a neat and professional manner meeting contract requirements and all state and local codes .
facilitate the telephone connections with the service representative and coordinate with the representative to ensure that all telephone lines are turned over to the proper responsible parties .
upon completion of the dialup system installation demonstrate to the representative that the installation is functioning properly and according to the approved plans .
j fiber optic communications system fiber optic communication system consisting of a fiber optic fo network switch patch panel communication cables and surge protection .
furnish all necessary materials necessary to provide a complete and functioning fo interconnect system including but not limited to the following requirements one fo network switch is provided at the master controller location and at each local controller location as indicated on the approved plans .
communication cables from the controller to the fo network switch .
provide fo cable between each location as indicated on the approved plans .
provide fo patch panel for terminating each fo cable at an enclosure .
provide inner duct in all underground conduit installations in accordance with section numa b c. provide all product information and warranties for all equipment .
standards unless specified otherwise provide all fo cables and installation methods meeting the following standards eia fotpnum for requirements on impact resistance of fo cable eia fotpnum for requirements on tensile resistance of fo cable eia fotpnum for requirements on crush resistance of fo cable eia fotpnum for requirements on moisture resistance of fo cable eia fotpnum for requirements on flexibility of fo cable provide multifiber optic cables over num feet long with minimum num fiber count except where indicated otherwise on the approved plans and specifications .
terminate all spare fibers with st type connectors and connect the patch panel .
provide fo patch cords exceeding num feet long with minimum num spare fibers or num of used fiber count whichever is the greatest except where indicated on the approved plans .
install each fo cable run as one continuous length no splicing in the conduit system is allowed fusion splicing for fo lines longer than num feet is allowed but only in designated splice trays inside designated splice enclosures .
test all fiber strands including spare fibers for continuity and submit documentation .
ensure that pulling strength of the cable is not exceeded during installation .
ensure that the minimum bend radius of the cable is not exceeded during installation .
install aerial fo cables in accordance with the manufactures recommended installation methods and components numj nume num initial edition and be loose tube design .
ensure that the maximum installation tension span tensioning is not exceeded during the installation of aerial fo cables .
do not exceed num db insertion loss per mated connector pair .
where the installed fo connector assembly to terminate onto a connector at a fo device and the said mating device connector is not separable from the device then the insertion loss of the single installed fo connector assembly will be less than numdb .
perform optical power tests before and after splice for attenuation on the spliced fo line longer than num feet .
do not exceed numdb insertion loss for each splice .
document results and submit to the representative .
use st type connector for a fo strand .
in cases where st type connector is not available for the related device obtain written permission for the use of manufacturers standard connector type before finalizing procurementsupply of affected items .
fabrication tolerances and quality of the connector shall be such that the limitation on installed insertion loss of the connector is achievable .
provide fo patch cables as indicated on the approved plans .
fo patch cables must be provided from the connectors on the fo cross patch panel to the connectors on the fo network switch .
provide single mode fibers consisting of singlemode num m cable num m loose tube gelfilled with fibers aramid yarn strength members yellow flexible flame retardant jacket round duplex configuration ul type ofnr .
provide a cable with a maximum attenuation of num dbkm num nm and num dbkm num nm .
install all equipment in a neat and professional manner meeting all installation requirements and all state and local codes .
install all conduit and trenches in accordance with sections numa b c. for aerial fo installations coordinate any utility pole attachments or provide service poles for attachment if indicated on the approved plans .
provide service poles in accordance with section numa .
upon completion of the fo system installation demonstrate to the representative that the installation meets the operational limits and section num .
demonstrate to the representative that the installation is according to the approved plans .
k traffic signal system testing .
unless otherwise indicated in section numdnum for a closed loop system .
conduct a separate numday operations test on the system and communications .
test the entire system for the indicated operation including proper operation and communication between local controller assemblies master controller assemblies and other necessary remote control or monitoring equipment .
system test includes hardware and software used for control communication or monitoring .
change inputs outputs and programming controls and adjust or revise initial signal timing parameters as directed .
l traffic signal system training .
unless otherwise indicated in section numdnum for a closed loop system .
provide initial system training during the first week of the numday system test lasting a minimum of num calendar days .
trainees include both local municipalities and department staff as directed by the representative .
num measurement and paymentsection num and as follows a master controller assembly .
each for the type indicated .
b closed loop signal system .
lump sum num to be paid on installation .
num to be paid on completion of the num day systems test .
c radio communications system .
lump sum includes all antennas cable transmitterreceivers protective devices mounting hardware and testing and diagnostic work for a complete system .
d cellular communications system .
each includes all antennas cable modems mounting hardware and protective devices to make a complete and functional cellular communications system .
e telephone dialup communications system .
each includes all cable modems and protective devices to make a complete and functional telecommunications system .
numd numg num initial edition d fiber optic communications system .
each includes all cable modems mounting hardware and protective devices to make a complete and functional fiber optic communications system .
g system training .
lump sum of the type indicated .
num nume num initial edition section numelectrical distribution num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of the electrical distribution for the control and illumination of traffic signals .
num materialsections num num and num num constructionsections numa and num as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a conduit trench and backfill .
excavate and backfill as specified in the applicable parts of section numc .
cut existing pavement only when indicated .
if applicable for type ii trench and backfill require full slab sidewalk replacement as specified in section num .
restore existing pavement .
for flexible pavement use bituminous material of a type equal to the existing pavement as determined by the representative .
for rigid pavement use high early strength cement concrete as specified in section num. b directional boring .
install and maintain all erosion and sediment pollution control measures as indicated on plans before the start of directional boring .
the depth of directional borings should be below the existing roadway subgrade .
do not deform the pavement .
guide the boring .
pneumatic hammers are not allowed .
keep boring pits at least num feet from the edge of pavement unless otherwise authorized in writing .
do not use water or drilling fluids to the extent that the pavement might be undermined or subgrade softened .
maintain drilling fluid in bore hole to increase stability of the surrounding soil .
angle the entryexit holes so that the curvature of the entryexit holes does not exceed the allowable bending radius of the traffic signal conduit .
cover the boring pits with adequate planking if the drilling operation must be left overnight .
refill and compact boring as specified in section numb .
c conduit .
install as specified in the applicable parts of section numg and as follows if allowed by the representative indicated conduit runs may be changed to avoid underground obstructions .
install conduit as indicated .
maintain at least a numinch separation between conduit and other underground utilities .
install highimpact plastic spacers a maximum of num feet on center if more than two rigid nonmetallic conduits are to be installed in a common trench .
for conduits within junction boxes and foundations ends of the conduit should be restricted with a rodentproof filler .
d bonding and grounding .
bond and ground all electrical equipment as indicated as shown on the standard drawings as specified in the applicable parts of section numq and as follows provide a continuous mechanical and electrical grounding system from the controller assembly through the electrical distribution system .
bridge grounding bushings on rigid metallic conduit .
thread bonding bushings on the free ends and lock in place with stainless steel set screws lug mountings and binding screws .
e signal cable and wire .
num .
general .
install indicated cable to form a continuous circuit between the proper equipment terminals .
install cables inside supports and brackets .
insert cable in conduit using lubricant .
if new cable is to be installed in conduit with existing conductors remove the existing cable clean the conduit as specified in section numg and then insert both old and new cable into the conduit as a unit .
replace existing cable damaged during removal as directed .
use insulated locking spade terminals for conductor terminations .
neatly arrange conductors and tie with cable ties within fixtures .
attach cable tags at splices indicating phase and function within all junction boxes pole bases and cabinets .
terminate all spare signal conductors collectively with a pressuretype mechanical lug and cover with electrical tape .
ground spare conductors .
attach conductor terminations in controller cabinets to barriertype terminal blocks with no more than one conductor per screw otherwise use pressuretype mechanical lugs to accommodate the number of conductors being nume numf num initial edition terminated .
identify and mark blocks .
terminate on grounding bus and identify spare and reserved conductors .
provide enough slack cable in pole bases controller cabinets and junction boxes to allow for proper wiring connections .
for pole mounted signals and pedestrian pushbuttons install signal cable inside pole to the terminal block of the signal or pushbutton .
for span wire installations lash cable to the span wire or secure using cable rings and saddles .
provide drip loops at wire entrances to poles and signal heads .
secure drip loops with outdoortype selflocking cable ties .
num .
conductor color codes .
num.a pedestrian pushbutton .
cable num black spare num white logic ground num red pedestrian call detector num.b pedestrian signal .
numc cable num black walking person walk num white neutral num red upraised hand dont walk num green reserved num orange spare numc cable num black walking person walk num num white neutral num and num num red upraised hand dont walk num num green reserved num orange walking person walk num num blue upraised hand dont walk num num whitetracer spare num.c vehicular signal .
numc cable num black green ballarrow num white neutral num red red ball num green reserved num orange yellow ballarrow numc cable num black green ball num white neutral num red red ball num green reserved num orange yellow ball num blue green arrow num whitetracer yellow arrowspare or as indicated .
f electrical service .
install the conduit and service wire where indicated and consistent with the service type .
perform necessary circuit connections to complete service to the controller assembly as shown on the standard drawings .
install power service outlets in cabinet as specified in section numj and the nec .
install service pole as specified in section numk and as shown on the standard drawings .
verify with the utility company the location of the service conduit on the service pole or to the service manhole .
numf numk num initial edition notify the utility company of service requirements .
ensure that service is inspected as required by the utility .
g splicing .
splice wires and cables only at the following locations ground wires within junction boxes signal wires and cables in pole bases and places where indicated if existing traffic signals are being modified .
when splicing signal cables within pole bases use wire nuts sealed with waterproof resin .
h junction box .
section nump i ground rods .
install ground rods and ground wire clamps as shown on the standard drawings .
j testing and commissioning .
test traffic signal power and control wiring circuits after installation of the electrical distribution system before connecting to operating equipment and in the presence of the service representative .
complete testing as follows no electrical energy is to be applied to any equipment or components before system testing .
the contractors service engineer must initiate operation of the equipment .
all grounding electrodes are adequately installed and measure num ohms or less to earth .
the contractors representative must verify that instruments have been properly installed configured and meet the manufacturers qualifications for warranty .
submit a certificate from the manufacturer or from the service representative stating that the installed equipment has been inspected adjusted approved and certified to be satisfactory before field testing .
correct and recheck any equipment not functioning correctly .
provide corrective measures to remove any ground loops found during startup .
immediately correct any defects and malfunctions with approved methods and materials .
include in the testing but not limited to taking all variables to their limits simulated or actual process to verify all alarms failure interlocks andor transfers and operational interlocks .
k submittals .
submit num copies of documentation to the representative for all components .
include the following information on the documentation as a minimum product data for each component include manufacturers descriptive literature product specifications published details technical bulletins performance and capacity rating curves charts and schedules catalogue data sheets and other submittal materials as required to verify that the proposed products conform to the quality and functionality as required for the installation .
identification clearly indicate by an arrow on submissions covering more than one product type or style exactly which product is being submitted for approval .
equipment characteristics size location weight and electrical requirements .
manufacturer include the catalogue name company name address and telephone number for each product submitted .
arrangement drawings provide arrangement drawing for all signal controller cabinets showing the numk numi num initial edition external front panel and internal side and rear mounting subpanels .
provide bill of materials on arrangement drawing identifying equipment shown and all software .
reference equipment by a numerical item number .
include the following information item identity quantity description manufacturer catalog number provide wiring diagrams for each signal controller cabinet illustrating the power connections to each internal device and all field connections .
display all wiring in a ladder diagram format .
l generator adaptor kit .
submit shop drawingscatalog cuts of the kit conforming to section numh before installation .
provide and attach to the signal controller cabinet after approval .
m uninterruptible power supply ups .
in accordance with section numi and as follows provide trueonline double conversion initiate a numday test only after the total system is running and functional .
install and test the ups in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
num measurement and paymentsection num and as follows a conduit .
linear foot for the type indicated .
b trench and backfill .
linear foot for the type indicated .
c directional boring .
linear foot for the type indicated .
d signal cable .
linear foot the unit price includes cable identification tags and cable lashing .
e junction box .
each for the type indicated .
f electrical service .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes service pole service head meter socket service disconnect power line surge protector exposed conduit conduit fittings service wire generator adaptor kit ground rod and ground wire .
g signal controller cabinet .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes enclosure internal cabinet power supply system generator adaptor kit terminal blocks mounting hardware breakers fuse holders internal wiring equipment and communication surge protection displays programming hardware relays receptacles light and heater .
h uninterruptible power supply ups .
each i cement concrete sidewalks .
section num num nume num num change no .
num section numsignal heads num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of assemblies for the control and illumination of vehicular traffic signals pedestrian signals or lane control signals which includes the appropriate housing and mounting hardware .
num materialsections num and num .
num constructionsection num as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
arrange and display traffic signal heads in accordance with the approved plans .
variations to the permit should not be completed without approval of the district traffic engineer .
securely mount signal heads using signal mounting brackets where indicated and according to the regulations .
install signal heads over roadways with the top of the housings at the same elevation and as shown on the standard drawings .
where vehicular and pedestrian signals are to be installed on the same support separate the assemblies .
aim vehicular signal heads as directed toward a point approximately num feet in advance of the stop line and in the center of the traveled traffic approach .
install louvers where it is necessary to restrict the view of the signal indications from an adjacent approach as specified in section numc .
aim pedestrian signals to the far side of the crosswalk they are to control .
install backplates as specified in section num and install visors as directed on the approved plans .
securely cover signals with an opaque material that covers and hides signal indicators from the view of traffic until the signal is put into operation .
use material that is sufficiently opaque to hide any lighted signal face indication .
burlap may be used as a hood material if the signal indications are not lighted and will not be until the hood is removed .
maintain the hood and replace or repair the hood if it becomes loose torn or removed .
b light emitting diode led modules .
install or retrofit into existing signal heads according to manufacturers instructions .
c optically programmed signals .
according to the manufacturers instructions program each signal head to restrict signal visibility to the area indicated .
num measurement and payment a vehicular signal heads .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes when indicated traffic signal housing louvers backplates and mounting hardware .
b optically programmed signal heads .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes when indicated traffic signal housing tunnel visors louvers backplates and mounting hardware .
c pedestrian signal heads .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes when indicated traffic signal housing louvers and mounting hardware .
d laneuse traffic control signal heads .
each e programmable louvered head .
each num numa num num change no .
num section numdetectors num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of devices to sense the presence or passage of vehicles or pedestrians .
num materialsections num and num num constructionsection num as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a vehicular detection .
num .
loop detector .
saw cut slots in the pavement for the sensor as indicated .
rotary drill a hole for the conduit at curb .
blow the slot and hole free of moisture and debris .
install the conduit .
install the number of sensor turns to obtain the inductance required by the manufacturer to achieve proper operation without splices kinks or curls and without straining or stretching around the corners of the slot .
install a minimum of two turns of wire for each loop detector .
use a blunt nonmetallic tool to seat the sensor in the bottom of the slot .
check for slack raised portions and tightness .
correct if necessary .
insert the two leads from the loop twisted together a minimum of num turns per foot in the conduit leading to the junction box .
test leakage resistance series resistance and inductance before sealing the sawcut slot .
leakage resistance greater than num megohms is necessary when tested at num vdc minimum .
series resistance is not to exceed num ohms per num feet .
inductance is to be between num microhenries and num microhenries .
seal the conduit with duct seal .
seal the hole and slots with sealant according to the manufacturers instructions .
do not apply the sealant if the air temperature is below numf unless otherwise specified by manufacturer or during precipitation .
fill the slot to within num inch of the pavement surface and ensure that there are no voids .
do not allow traffic on the slot until the sealant is cured .
remove excess sealant from adjacent road surfaces but do not use solvents .
when resurfacing occurs over any area of loop sensor install the sensor in the existing pavement structure or in the binder course before placement of the wearing course .
do not install the top course of pavement before the sealant is cured .
splice the sensor wires to the leadin cable as shown on the standard drawings .
encapsulate the splice with sealant to prevent water from penetrating the splice .
connect the sensor to each leadin pair as indicated .
band all excess loop sensorleadin cable in the junction box to prevent movement resulting in false calls .
extend the leadin cable to the terminal strip in the controller cabinet without splices .
measure inductance of loop and leadin .
inductance is to be between num microhenries and num microhenries .
place a record of the inductance readings in the controller cabinet .
connect to the loop detector amplifier .
adjust the amplifier according to the manufacturers instructions to obtain the necessary sensitivity .
provide field validation that the detector equipment is properly working .
num .
video detector .
install and mount according to the manufacturers instructions to provide area of detection and operation as indicated without detecting conflicting movements .
secure detectors using appropriate mounting brackets as required by the manufacturer .
adjust and realign video detector as necessary to obtain optimal detection zone .
draw appropriate detection zones as indicated on the approved plans .
for applications that require remote monitoring of the traffic signal video provide a reduced frame rate connection .
do not transmit remote monitoring of the video over the traffic signal controller interconnect communications system .
equip intersection with a remote connection as indicated on the plans .
compress images before transmitting and adjust frame rates to meet the bandwidth requirements .
provide all material support and coordination necessary to ensure the remote video access is functioning properly .
provide field validation that the detector equipment is properly working .
num .
radar detector .
install and mount according to the manufacturers instructions to provide area of detection and operation as indicated without detecting conflicting movements .
secure sensors using appropriate mounting brackets as required by the manufacturer .
provide field validation that the detector equipment is properly working .
num .
radar detection system .
install intersection detection control utilizing above ground techniques .
mount the sensors directly to a pole or mast arm and provide cable as required and recommended by the manufacturer .
provide field validation that the detector equipment is properly working .
numa numb num num change no .
num num .
magnetometer detector .
before installation conduct the manufacturers test to determine if the earths magnetic flux at the point of installation is sufficient for the detector to operate .
rotary drill a hole in the pavement for the sensor .
saw cut slots for the lead as indicated .
rotary drill a hole for the conduit at curb .
blow the holes and slot free of moisture and debris .
install the conduit .
insert the sensor vertically in the hole .
then insert the lead wire in the slot and in the conduit leading to the junction box .
use a blunt nonmetallic tool to seat the wires in the bottom of the slot .
test leakage resistance and series resistance .
leakage resistance greater than num megohms is necessary .
series resistance is not to exceed num ohms per num feet .
backfill the sensor hole then seal the holes and slot with sealant according to the manufacturers instructions .
do not apply the sealant if the air temperature is below numf or during precipitation .
complete the installation for the magnetometer detector as specified in section numanum .
num .
magnetic detector .
bore a tunnel with boring pit as necessary without disturbing the pavement from the junction box to a point approximately num feet beyond the centerline of the detection zone .
bore a diameter only large enough to insert the conduit .
repair any damage to the roadway or pavement base drain caused by boring .
insert the capped rigid nonmetallic conduit in the tunnel using a proper lubricant if necessary .
insert the sensor within the conduit .
test leakage resistance and series resistance .
leakage resistance greater than num megohms is necessary .
series resistance is not to exceed more than num ohms per num feet .
complete the magnetic detector installation as specified in section numanum .
adjust the location of the sensor to obtain proper operation .
b pedestrian detection .
num .
pushbuttons .
install the pedestrian pushbutton and indicated sign using stainless steel vandalresistant machine screws rivets or stainless steel banding taking care not to impair the message on the sign .
install in accordance with publications numm num and num and the approved plans .
ensure that the pushbutton and sign is right side up .
drill and tap mounting holes of the size and pattern specified by the manufacturer .
drill and deburr the cable entrance hole .
connect the pushbutton according to the manufacturers instructions as indicated and as shown on the standard drawings .
provide sealant above pushbutton where it abuts connecting support .
fieldtest the operation by activating the pushbutton and performing a visual check of the controller indicator lights and a timing check of the pedestrian phase or phase extension .
num .
accessible pedestrian signals aps .
sections numbnum num and num the standard drawings the mutcd and as follows install the aps pushbutton speaker and vibrotactile device and any applicable pushbutton sign within num feet of the extension of a crosswalk line and reachable from the level landing of the curb ramp .
orient the arrow parallel to the direction of the crosswalk .
attach any external speakers directly to the traffic signal supports and not to pedestrian signal heads .
adjust volumes of the pushbutton locator tone and walk indication emitting from the pushbutton housing to a maximum of num to num dba louder than ambient sound except when audible beaconing is provided in response to an extended pushbutton press .
fieldtest the operation by activating the pushbutton and performing a visual check of the controller indicator lights and a timing check of the pedestrian phase or phase extension .
c preemption systems .
in accordance with the mutcd approved plans and as follows install in accordance with the manufacturers and suppliers specifications to provide for a complete and operational system .
review each detector location in the field with a service representative and a representative of the district traffic unit before installation in order to provide optimum operation .
test complete system at the intersection with an emergency vehicle .
num measurement and paymentsections num and num and as follows a detector leadin cable .
linear foot b detector card rack assembly .
each unless provided as part of new controller assembly .
numc numo num num change no .
num c detector card .
each unless provided as part of new controller assembly .
d loop sensors .
linear foot measured along sawcut to where it enters conduit .
the sensor in conduit is incidental to the payment for conduit .
e loop amplifiers .
each for the type indicated .
f video detector .
each the price includes cable controller interface video monitor for setting up detection zone mounting hardware and all software for complete installation .
g radar detector .
each the price includes radar detector for setting up detection zones mounting brackets cables and connections tested and accepted .
h radar detection system .
each the price includes cable communication interface interface radar detectors for setting up detection zones mounting hardware and all software for complete installation .
i magnetometer sensor .
each j magnetometer amplifiers .
each for the type indicated .
k magnetic sensors .
each l magnetic amplifiers .
each for the type indicated .
m pedestrian pushbuttons .
each the price includes signs and mounting hardware .
n accessible pedestrian signal .
each the price includes signs and mounting hardware .
o preemption system .
each for the type indicated .
includes all material required for the installation of an intersection emergency preemption system including detector units preemption cable and failsafe lamps .
num numd num num initial edition section numhot thermoplastic pavement markings num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of hot thermoplastic pavement markings of the indicated type and color with a surface application of glass beads .
num material a general .
provide materials from a source listed in bulletin num .
certify materials as specified in section numbnum .
b thermoplastic .
aashto m num .
provide a material listed in bulletin num. c glass beads .
section num type a num .
intermix .
provide sufficient uncoated glass beads to comprise num of the marking material by weight .
num .
surfaceapplied .
moisture resistant coated with a maximum of num passing the no .
num sieve and a minimum of num rounds per sieve and a minimum or num rounds overall .
num construction a general .
for proper adhesion perform surface preparation of the road surface and provide the pretreatment according to bulletin num or recommended by the manufacturer .
clean the roadway surface where the hot thermoplastic pavement markings will be applied .
remove all surface treatment laitance curing compound or any contaminants that would hinder adhesion .
clear any loose dirt and other debris from the application area .
surface preparation is incidental to the application of hot thermoplastic pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under section num .
identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at numfoot intervals .
the inspectorincharge will approve the locations .
apply on dry pavement when the air and roadway temperatures are between numf and numf and when the wind speed is less than num miles per hour .
b application .
uniformly apply the markings at a minimum thickness of num mils num mils .
a tolerance of num inch from the specified width will be allowed provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the general appearance .
for skip line patterns maintain a tolerance of num inches for each numfoot cycle and num inches for each numfoot skip line .
c glass beads .
apply glass beads immediately after application of the markings at a minimum rate of num pounds per num square feet of markings .
uniformly distribute glass beads on the surface .
provide markings with an average minimum initial retroreflectivity of num mcdmnumlux for white and num mcdmnumlux for yellow .
under the direction and supervision of the representative measure retroreflectivity with a nummeter geometry retroreflectometer conforming to astm e num within num days after installation in accordance with ptm no .
num. d defective markings .
remove any markings placed incorrectly and replace them .
repair those markings which after application and drying are determined to be defective by the inspectorincharge .
complete this work at no additional cost to the department .
major problem areas and method of repair include the following insufficient thickness or line width uneven crosssectionprepare defective material by grinding or blast cleaning to remove a substantial amount of beads and the marking surface is roughened .
remove loose particles and debris with compressed air .
restripe the cleaned surface as specified in sections numb and c. inadequate retroreflectivity glass bead coverage or retentionremove defective markings and clean pavement surface including num foot beyond each end of the affected area .
remove loose particles and numd numb num num initial edition debris with compressed air .
restripe the marking on the cleaned surface as specified in sections numb and c. e guarantee .
where directed remove and replace material that has not remained within close conformity to location or has not remained effective in performing useful service in accordance with section numb for a period of num days from the date of acceptance .
the minimum acceptable service is as follows longitudinal markings .
num of material remains in each numfoot section of marking where the intersection unit is defined as material on an approach leg within num feet of the intersection .
transverse markings legends and symbols .
num of material remains for each individual legend symbol crosswalk or stop line .
num measurement and payment a line .
linear foot b legend .
each num numb num num initial edition section numcold plastic pavement markings or legends num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of plastic pavement markings or legends of the type indicated .
num materialastm d num .
when required provide compatible adhesive activator or primer sealer as listed in bulletin num or as recommended by the manufacturer .
num construction a general .
for proper adhesion perform surface preparation of the road surface and provide the pretreatment according to bulletin num or recommended by the manufacturer .
clean the roadway surface where the cold plastic pavement markings or legends will be applied .
remove all surface treatment laitance curing compound or any contaminants that would hinder adhesion .
clear any loose dirt and other debris from the application area .
use a cleaning method that includes as a last operation the use of compressed air over the application area to provide a dustfree surface .
surface preparation is incidental to the application of cold plastic pavement markings or legends except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under section num .
identify the location of the final pavement markings .
the inspectorincharge will approve the locations .
apply on dry pavement when the roadway temperature is greater than or equal to numf unless unless otherwise directed .
apply according to the manufacturers instructions .
provide applicator units manual or automatic that are capable of applying two parallel lines simultaneously with a numinch space between the lines .
b retroreflectivity .
provide markings with an average minimum initial retroreflectivity of num mcdmlux for white and num mcdmlux for yellow .
under the direction and supervision of the representative measure with a nummeter geometry retroreflectometer conforming to astm e num within num days after installation in accordance with ptm no .
num. c inlaid .
applied as part of a bituminous resurfacing project .
place the material with a thickness of num mils num mils to num mils num mils on the pavement before final compaction and within the temperature range specified by the manufacturer .
roll the material into the new surface to achieve a flush finished surface .
d surface applied .
apply the material with a thickness of num mils num mils onto the existing cleaned surface of concrete or bituminous roadways .
e guarantee .
where directed remove or replace material that in accordance with section numb has not remained within close conformity to location or has not remained effective in performing useful service for a period of num days from the date of acceptance .
the minimum acceptable service is as follows longitudinal markings .
num of material remains in each numfoot section of marking where the intersection unit is defined as material on an approach leg within num feet of the intersection .
transverse markings legends and symbols .
num of material remaining for each individual legend symbol crosswalk or stop line .
num measurement and payment a line .
linear foot b plastic legend .
each num numc num num initial edition section numwaterborne pavement markings num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and application of waterborne pavement markings of the type and color indicated .
num material a general .
provide materials from a source listed in bulletin num .
certify materials as specified in section numbnum .
b paint .
provide waterborne traffic paints listed in bulletin num. c glass beads .
section num furnish type a glass beads unless otherwise specified .
num construction a general .
at least num days before beginning work provide the inspectorincharge with a schedule of operations .
in addition provide the inspectorincharge with the manufacturers instruction for the installation of the materials application temperatures proper mixing techniques and any other data to ensure the material is being properly installed .
b equipment .
num .
line application .
use a machine that is capable of simultaneously applying two parallel lines of the width indicated in solid or broken patterns or various combinations thereof capable of automatically dispensing glass beads onto the painted surface at the required application rate by the pressurized gun method and equipped with a measuring device which automatically and continuously measures the length of each line placed to the nearest foot .
num .
legend application .
include crosswalks symbols legends stop lines and other miscellaneous items .
do not apply with hand brushes or rollers .
glass beads may be handapplied .
c application rates .
num .
paint .
dispense at a wetfilm thickness of num mils num mil for all markings except edge line markings are num mils num mil .
num .
glass beads .
apply at a rate of num pounds per gallon of paint .
num .
calibration .
use a machine calibrated as follows line measuring device .
calibrate automatic line length gauges to maintain a tolerance of num feet per mile .
cycle lengthline timer .
calibrate cycle length in a tolerance of num inches per num feet calibrate line length to maintain a tolerance of num inches per num feet .
bead guns .
calibrate to dispense glass beads at the specified rate .
check by dispensing glass numc numa num num initial edition beads into a gallon container for a predetermined fixed period of time .
verify the weight of glass beads .
paint guns .
calibrate to simultaneously apply the paint at the uniform rates specified with an allowable tolerance of num mil and with an allowable width tolerance of num inch .
d surface preparation .
clean the roadway surface where the waterborne pavement markings will be applied .
remove all surface treatment laitance curing compound or any contaminants that would hinder adhesion .
clear any loose dirt and other debris from the area to be painted with compressed air .
surface preparation is incidental to the application of waterborne pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under section num .
identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at numfoot intervals .
the inspectorincharge will approve the locations .
e temperature restriction .
apply on a dry pavement with minimum ambient and pavement temperatures of numf and a maximum relative humidity of num .
confirm the proper atmospheric and pavement surface conditions with the inspectorincharge .
f protection of painted surfaces .
provide protection to allow adequate time for the markings to dry and be trackfree from vehicular traffic .
follow the manufacturers recommendations or use a minimum of num minutes .
use barrier cones to protect markings that do not dry in less than num minutes on a roadway where traffic is maintained .
repaint marked or damaged areas as directed .
g centerline application .
locate and place as indicated and as follows avoid placing markings on longitudinal pavement joints and seams .
where existing centerlines are visible and properly located apply directly over the existing pattern .
where centerlines do not exist or existing centerlines are improperly located apply at the correct location as determined by the inspectorincharge .
remove the improperly located existing markings as specified in section num .
divide the roadway on twolane roadways .
however if a portion of the roadway on either or both sides is to be used for parking then divide the traveled way .
h edgeline application .
do not place markings on joints or seams between the traveled way and shoulder .
i retroreflectivity .
provide markings with an average minimum initial retroreflectivity of num mcdmnumlux for white and num mcdmnumlux for yellow .
under the direction and supervision of the representative measure with a num meter geometry retroreflectometer conforming to astm e num within num days after installation in accordance with ptm no .
num. j defective work .
remove and replace any markings placed incorrectly .
repair those markings which after application and drying the inspectorincharge determines to be defective .
complete this work at no additional cost to the department .
major types of defective work and method of repair include the following inadequate retroreflectivity glass bead coverage or retention .
restripe over defective marking .
insufficient thickness or line width uneven crosssection poor adhesion or delaminating .
remove defective markings as specified in section num and clean pavement surface including num foot beyond each end of the affected area .
remove loose particles and debris with compressed air .
restripe the marking on the cleaned surface as specified in this specification .
k guarantee .
guarantee pavement marking material against failure due to premature wear or poor adhesion resulting from defective materials or method of application in accordance with section numb for a period of num days from the date of acceptance .
num measurement and payment a line .
linear foot numb numc num num initial edition b legend .
each c pavement marking removal .
section num num numb num num initial edition section numpavement marking removal num descriptionthis work is the removal of pavement markings and legends .
num constructionremove existing pavement markings as indicated immediately before any change in traffic patterns or before the application of final markings .
remove markings that conflict with revised traffic patterns and may confuse motorists .
do not paint over existing lines with black paint .
remove markings for restriping to the extent that num of the material is removed without materially damaging or grooving the pavement surface more than num inch .
for all other marking removal eliminate the markings to the extent that the marking is not visible to motorists when viewed from a distance of num feet .
remove waterborne pavement markings by sandblasting grit blasting steel shot blasting or waterblasting .
grinding is acceptable only for the removal of thermoplastic cold plastic or epoxy marking materials .
obtain approval from the representative for the proposed removal method before beginning work .
vacuum or collect residue including sand dust and marking material concurrently with the removal operation unless alternate procedure is submitted and accepted .
clean the area of dust with compressed air .
perform this work only in the area where the markings are to be applied .
do not allow sand dust or other residual material which may interfere with drainage or constitute a traffic hazard to accumulate .
dispose of all residue in an acceptable manner .
repair any pavement or surface damage caused during the removal process .
prevent damage to transverse and longitudinal joint sealers and repair any damage as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment a lines .
num .
linear foot num .
square foot b legends .
num .
each num .
square foot num numa num num initial edition section numepoxy pavement markings num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of reflectorized twocomponent epoxy resin pavement markings of the color indicated with glass beads at the locations indicated .
num material a general .
provide materials approved by the department from a source listed in bulletin num .
certify materials as specified in section numbnum .
b epoxy resin .
provide only those epoxy materials listed in bulletin num .
do not use polluting solvents or fillers .
num .
color .
furnish white and yellow pavement markings that satisfy the following chromaticity coordinates num num num num x y x y x y x y white num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num furnish black epoxy that satisfies color chip num of federal standard numb and is equal to the quality of the white epoxy being used .
num .
no track time .
dry to a notrack condition in num minutes or less when tested according to astm d num at a temperature of numf numf at a thickness of num mils num mil with glass beads applied at a rate of num pounds per gallon of epoxy .
c glass beads .
section num. d black aggregate .
furnish with the following gradations sieve size retained no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num num construction a equipment .
provide application equipment with a system capable of spraying epoxy material mixed in the proper formulation conforming to manufacturers requirements .
applying symbol markings and longitudinal lines with the specified glass bead application .
heating epoxy part a to satisfy manufacturers recommendations .
heating epoxy part b to satisfy manufacturers recommendations .
mixing part a with part b according to manufacturers recommendations .
applying glass beads using the double drop method .
numa numd num num initial edition provide an operator for the equipment who is fully knowledgeable of all equipment operations and application techniques .
provide a pressure gauge on each proportioning pump to verify pressures .
position these gauges to be easily visible to the operator of the equipment and the inspectorincharge .
obtain from the manufacturer of the epoxy material being used specifications for the proper mix ratios of the epoxy component proper temperatures proper mixing techniques and any other data to ensure that the epoxy material is being properly installed .
furnish this information to the inspectorincharge at least num days before beginning work .
b procedures .
num .
for proper adhesion perform surface preparation of the road surface and provide the pretreatment according to bulletin num or recommended by the manufacturer .
clean the roadway surface where the epoxy pavement markings will be applied .
remove all surface treatment laitance curing compound or any contaminants that would hinder adhesion .
clear any loose dirt and other debris from the application area .
surface preparation is incidental to the application of epoxy pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under section num .
identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at numfoot intervals .
the inspectorincharge will approve the locations .
num .
before starting work furnish four sample plates of each color of materials used .
prepare two plates with and two plates without glass beads or aggregate .
num .
uniformly apply the epoxy markings at a wet thickness of num mils num mil .
a tolerance of num inch from the indicated width will be allowed provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the general appearance .
for skip line patterns maintain a tolerance of num inches for each numfoot cycle and num inches for each num foot skip line .
num .
apply glass beads immediately after application of the epoxy markings .
use the double drop method with a minimum rate of num pounds per gallon for type a beads and num pounds per gallon for type b beads for a total minimum of num pounds per gallon of epoxy .
uniformly distribute glass beads on the surface .
provide markings with an average minimum initial retroreflectivity of num mcdmnumlux for white and num mcdmnumlux for yellow .
under the direction and supervision of the representative measure retroreflectivity with a nummeter geometry retroreflectometer conforming to astm e num within num days after installation in accordance with ptm no .
num .
num .
after the application of epoxy material and glass beads protect the markings from traffic for a minimum period of num minutes or until the epoxy has dried sufficiently to prevent dirt pickup or tracking .
num .
apply black epoxy markings on cement concrete roadways .
place the black markings flooded with black aggregate immediately after all white skip line patterns .
use the same line dimensions for both colors .
num .
install epoxy on dry pavement only if the road surface and ambient temperatures are numf or higher unless otherwise approved by the inspectorincharge and acceptable to the manufacturer .
c defective markings .
remove and replace any markings placed incorrectly .
repair those markings which after application and drying the inspectorincharge determines to be defective .
complete this work at no additional cost to the department .
major types of defective work and method of repair include the following insufficient thickness or line width uneven crosssection .
grind or blast clean defective material to remove a substantial amount of beads and to roughen the marking surface .
remove loose particles and debris with compressed air .
restripe the cleaned surface as specified in this specification .
inadequate retroreflectivity glass bead coverage or retention .
restripe over defective marking .
poor adhesion delaminating .
remove defective markings as specified in section num and clean pavement surface including num foot beyond each end of the affected area .
remove loose particles and debris with compressed air .
restripe the marking on the cleaned surface as specified in this specification .
d guarantee .
guarantee num of the pavement marking material against failure due premature wear or poor adhesion resulting from defective materials or method of application in accordance with section numb for a period numd numb num num initial edition of num days from the date of acceptance .
the representative will identify material to be repaired or replaced .
begin all repair or replacement work within num days of notification by the representative and perform as specified in these specifications .
num measurement and payment a line .
linear foot b legend .
each num nume num num change no .
num section numpreformed thermoplastic pavement markings num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of preformed thermoplastic pavement markings of the type and color indicated .
num material a general .
provide materials from a source listed in bulletin num .
certify materials as specified in section numbnum .
b thermoplastic .
aashto m num type num except that the material is in a preformed state .
provide a material listed in bulletin num .
furnish a material with a minimum initial skid resistance of num british pendulum number bpn for all crosswalks stop lines legends or where indicated .
c glass beads .
section num type a .
num .
intermix .
provide sufficient uncoated glass beads to comprise num of the marking material by weight and have a minimum of num rounds overall .
num .
surfaceapplied .
moisture resistant coated with a maximum of num passing the no .
num sieve and a minimum of num rounds per sieve and a minimum or num rounds overall .
num construction a general .
at least num days before beginning work provide the inspectorincharge with a schedule of operations .
in addition provide the inspectorincharge with the manufacturers instructions for the installation of the materials application temperatures proper mixing techniques and any other data to ensure the material is being properly installed .
b pretreatment .
for proper adhesion perform surface preparation of the road surface and provide the pretreatment according to bulletin num or recommended by the manufacturer .
clean the roadway surface where the preformed thermoplastic pavement markings will be applied .
remove all surface treatment laitance curing compound or any contaminants that would hinder adhesion .
clear any loose dirt and other debris from the application area .
surface preparation is incidental to the application of preformed thermoplastic pavement markings except for the removal of pavement markings which is performed and paid for under section num .
identify the location of the final pavement markings by applying spots on the pavement at numfoot intervals .
the inspectorincharge will approve the locations .
apply on dry pavement when the air and roadway temperatures are within the manufacturers recommendations and when the wind speed is less than num miles per hours .
if recommended by the manufacturer preheat the surface to remove any moisture .
c application .
apply markings which have a minimum thickness of num mils num mils .
a tolerance of num inch from the indicated width will be allowed provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the general appearance .
use a heat gun to fuse the material to the pavement .
heat the material as recommended by the manufacturer .
d glass beads .
surface apply glass beads as recommended by the manufacturer immediately after application of the markings .
uniformly distribute glass beads on the surface .
provide markings with an average minimum initial retroreflectivity of num mcdmnumlux for white and num mcdmnumlux for yellow .
under the direction and supervision of the representative measure retroreflectivity with a nummeter geometry retroreflectometer conforming to astm enum within num days after installation in accordance with ptm no .
num. e defective markings .
remove any markings placed incorrectly and replace them .
repair those markings which after application and drying are determined to be defective by the inspectorincharge .
complete this work at no additional cost to the department .
major problem areas and method of repair include the following nume numc num num change no .
num insufficient thickness or line width uneven crosssectionprepare defective material by grinding or blast cleaning to remove a substantial amount of beads and the marking surface is roughened .
remove loose particles and debris with compressed air .
restripe the cleaned surface as specified in this specification .
inadequate retroreflectivity glass bead coverage or retentionremove defective markings and clean pavement surface including num foot beyond each end of the affected area .
remove loose particles and debris with compressed air .
restripe the marking on the cleaned surface as specified in this specification .
f guarantee .
where directed remove and replace material that has not remained within close conformity to location or has not remained effective in performing useful service in accordance with section numb for a period of num days from the date of acceptance .
the minimum acceptable service is as follows longitudinal markings .
num of material remains in each numfoot section of marking where the intersection unit is defined as material on an approach leg within num feet of the intersection .
transverse markings legends and symbols .
num of material remains for each individual legend symbol crosswalk or stop line .
num measurement and payment a line .
linear foot b legend .
each c decorative crosswalk .
square foot num nume num num initial edition section numsnowplowable raised pavement markers num descriptionthis work is the furnishing installation replacement and removal of snowplowable retroreflective raised pavement markers of the type indicated .
num material a general .
provide materials listed in bulletin num .
certify materials as specified in section numbnum .
b snowplowable raised pavement markers .
astm d num c adhesive .
astm d num anum and xnum .
a type and formulation recommended by the pavement marker manufacturer and approved by the department for bonding the reflectors or holders to the pavement or the reflectors to the holders .
d concrete material .
section num e bituminous material .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings recommended by the manufacturer and as follows a layout .
before installing lay out the pavement marker locations .
do not place devices on pavement surfaces that show visible evidence of pavement cracking checking spalling or failure of underlying base material .
do not place devices within num inches of a pavement joint .
during the preinstallation layout if it is determined that a device would be placed at a point where any of the above conditions exists relocate it longitudinally to the directed location .
b sawing .
cut the depression in the pavement .
c installation .
install within num days of making the saw cuts .
before applying the adhesive vacuum or blow the depression to remove loose material then clean and dry the depression with compressed air .
apply the adhesive and place the unit into the depression .
be certain that markers are properly seated with the leading edges below the roadway surface or reflectors are placed as shown on the standard drawings .
secure in place until adhesive is set .
at the time of installation be sure that devices are free of dirt dust oil grease rust moisture or any foreign matter that impairs adhesion to the pavement .
do not apply devices if the pavement surface temperature and the air temperature at the time of application are less than numf or as recommended by the manufacturer .
do not install markers if the pavement surface is moist or wet .
d replacement .
use the following procedures for the replacement of the holders or reflectors cut a new depression when required .
ensure the attachment area is smooth and clean .
apply adhesive and install the new holder or reflector as indicated above .
e removal .
remove and dispose of existing pavement markers prior to paving or milling operations .
remove by method that will cause the least damage to pavement structure and is approved by the department .
satisfactorily repair any pavement damage caused by the removal methods .
when pavement markers are removed from a bituminous pavement prepare the existing surface voids as specified in section numg .
fill voids in pavement with bituminous wearing course or approved equal .
when pavement markers are removed from a cement concrete pavement clean void areas from all loose and foreign material .
fill voids as specified in section num .
numf numc num num initial edition f guarantee .
within num calendar days of notification replace defective holders andor reflectors if any of the following unsatisfactory conditions exist the holder does not remain in place or does not resist deformation for num days after acceptance has not remained in the exact location and alignment as originally placed is deformed cracked or otherwise not able to provide useful service or shows visible signs of bond failure between the holder and the adhesive .
reflectors are missing or do not provide full service for a period of num days after acceptance .
reflectors fail between the date of notification and the replacement date .
num measurement and payment a raised pavement marker .
each includes removal and disposal of existing pavement markers and filling of pavement voids .
b reflector replacement .
each includes removal and disposal of existing reflectors .
c raised pavement marker removal without replacement .
each as indicated for the existing pavement type .
includes filling of pavement voids .
num num num num initial edition section numremove post mounted signs type a num descriptionthis work is the removal and disposal of existing signs of the type specified as indicated and directed .
num constructionremove and dispose of existing signs and posts and backfill any holes as specified in section numbnum as indicated and directed .
remove existing foundations to a minimum depth of num inches below the final ground surface and backfill any holes as specified in section numbnum .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section numremove post mounted signs type b num descriptionthis work is the removal of existing signs of the type specified as indicated and directed .
num constructionremove existing signs and posts and backfill any holes as specified in section numbnum as indicated and directed .
do not damage signs during removal .
salvage all aluminum signs and dispose of other materials .
deliver aluminum signs to the project field office and place in neat like piles for pickup by the departments maintenance forces .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section numremove post mounted signs type c num descriptionthis work is the removal of existing signs of the type specified as indicated and directed .
num constructionremove existing signs posts and foundations and backfill any holes as specified in section numbnum as indicated and directed .
do not damage signs during removal .
salvage all aluminum signs and dispose of other materials .
deliver aluminum signs to the project field office and place in neat like piles for pickup by the departments maintenance forces .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section numremove post mounted signs type e num descriptionthis work is the removal and disposal of existing signs of the type specified as indicated and directed .
num constructionremove and dispose of existing signs posts and associated hardware as indicated and directed .
remove existing foundations to a minimum depth of num inches below the final ground surface and backfill any holes as specified in section numbnum .
num measurement and paymenteach num num num num initial edition section numremove post mounted signs type f num descriptionthis work is the removal of existing signs of the type specified as indicated and directed .
num constructionremove existing signs and associated hardware as indicated and directed .
salvage all aluminum signs and dispose of other materials .
do not damage signs during removal .
deliver aluminum signs to the project field office and place in neat like piles for pickup by the departments maintenance forces .
num measurement and paymenteach num numg num num change no .
num section num structures section numcement concrete structures num descriptionthis work is construction of bridges arches culverts and other cement concrete work .
num material a cement concrete .
section num .
the cement factor may be increased to obtain high earlyetrength concrete with written consent from the representative .
do not use type iii high earlystrength nonairentraining cement .
b concrete curing material and admixtures .
curing and protecting coverssection num curing compoundssection numa white only and numc concrete admixturessection num do not use admixtures containing chloride salts in bridgedeck concrete .
c structure foundation drains .
section num and section num d nonstaining nonshrinking grout .
use for minor patching of concrete surfaces .
mix one part cement two parts fine aggregate and enough water to provide a consistency stiff enough to place by either manual or mechanical tamping .
do not use more than num num gallons of water per bag of cement .
mix for num seconds cover to prevent loss of moisture and allow to stand for num minutes .
remix for num seconds without further addition of water then place within num minutes after completion of mixing .
use material as follows cement type ip is or iisection num fine aggregate type a or csection num watersection num the contractor may use premixed grout .
obtain from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
mix according to the manufacturers instructions .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
e nonshrink grout for studs dowels and anchor bolts .
section numc except use type c fine aggregate .
the contractor may use premixed nonshrink grout .
obtain a grout which passes a no .
num sieve from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
mix according to the manufacturers instructions .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
f bituminous tack coat for bridge decks .
section num g lighting pole anchorage .
provide as shown on the standard drawings and as follows anchor bolts nuts and washerssection numcnum metallic coated steel anglesection numanum conduitsection numb numg numj num num change no .
num junction boxsection num h forms .
num .
temporary .
use plywood at least num inch thick or other accepted material made for form work .
for final exposed concrete surfaces use smooth material free of knots holes bulges and depressions .
num .
metal bridge deck forms .
use permanent forms fabricated from steel conforming to astm anumanumm and astm anumanumm structural quality sq excluding grade num class num with a coating designation of gnum and a minimum thickness of num gage .
coat fasteners if used either by galvanizing according to astm anum or astm bnum thickness class fezn num or cadmium plating according to astm bnum class num .
an alternate form system may be used if indicated or if accepted in writing by the chief bridge engineer .
submit material details and erection methods of the alternate form system for review and acceptance .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
i other material .
premolded expansion joint fillersection num closed cell neoprene spongesection numpnum joint sealing materialsection numb c or d waterstopssection num caulking compoundsection num reinforcementsection num steel welded wire fabricsection num deformed and plain bar dowelssection num structural steelsection num waterproofingsection num coarse aggregate no .
numsection num conduits and conduit protective coatingsections numb and d selected borrow excavationstructure backfill as shown on the standard drawings .
anchor boltssection numcnum bituminous material class rcnumsection num geotextiles class numsection num polyethylene sheetingsection num bituminous paper section num asphalt cement pg num section num j tremie cement concrete .
use class a cement concrete as specified in section num modified as follows numj numa num num change no .
num cement factor min .
num bags per cubic yard slumpnum inches num inch compressive strength at num daysnum pounds per square inch provide admixtures that retard concrete set num feet above and below the tremie pipe outlet are compatible with the air entrainment agents and do not allow excessive segregation of the aggregate .
k concrete bonding compound .
section num l antiwashout admixture .
section numf from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num constructionconstruct as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a forms and centering .
num .
general .
support forms so that deflection does not exceed num inch under plastic concrete .
before using forms clean them and obtain approval for use .
use forms that are strong and firm securely braced tied together if required by means of form ties tight enough to prevent the leakage of mortar and strong enough to withstand the action of mechanical vibrators if used .
remove dirt chips sawdust and other foreign materials before placing concrete .
except for stayinplace forms before placing reinforcing steel thoroughly coat forms with a release agent .
coat forms for exposed surfaces with a nonstaining release agent .
adequately brace forms .
if forms are insufficiently braced or unsatisfactorily built the work will be halted either before or during concrete placement until such defects have been satisfactorily corrected .
chamfer the edges as indicated .
do not leave wood separators in the completed work .
do not use form support systems that will cause unacceptable overstress or deformation to permanent bridge members .
use ties that are adjustable in length to allow tightening of forms .
use ties that leave no metal in the concrete within num num inches of the exposed surface .
do not fit ties with lugs cones washers or other devices to act as spreaders within the form or devices that leave depressions in back of the exposed surface of the concrete .
flat bands may be used if the bands conform to the following not less than num inch wide .
not less than num gage thick .
placed on edge .
protected by adequate spreaders to prevent twisting during construction .
do not use wire ties or thin narrow flat bands except in the construction of endwalls inlets and manholes .
where necessary coat the form ties with a release agent to facilitate removal .
do not damage the concrete on the exposed surface when removing forms and ties .
do not cut ties back from the concrete face .
before starting construction obtain acceptance of working drawings required for centering and falsework as specified in section numc .
before placing concrete obtain acceptance of inplace forms .
camber the centering to compensate for deadload deflection and settlement of centering .
provide for gradual and uniform lowering .
where required drench the inside of forms with water immediately before placing concrete .
num .
metal bridge deck forms permanent .
when portions of a bridge deck are constructed adjacent to each other and divided by an open or a preformed joint do not use metal forms in the cantilever area on either side of the joint except with prior written permission of the chief bridge engineer .
submit shop drawings of the forms as specified in section numd for review and acceptance .
include the numa numg num num change no .
num following on the shop drawings grade of steel .
physical and section properties for permanent metal bridge deck form sheets .
methods of attachment .
locations where the forms are supported by steel beam flanges subject to tensile stresses .
prepare the drawings conforming to the details and design shown on the standard drawings .
before welding in a tension zone make a test installation on a sample of a simulated flange using the same welding procedure materials and fitup that are to be used in the tension zone .
allow no burnthrough of the parts being welded or fusion to the flange .
do not weld to flanges in tension zones .
when this welding procedure has been satisfactorily demonstrated do not deviate from that used in the test during welding in the tension zone .
perform field cutting of forms supports and closures using saws shears or other acceptable methods .
do not cut by burning or melting .
make the attachments concrete tight .
a fastening system using a lowvelocity powder actuated piston tool to attach forms to support angles may be used .
thoroughly clean and wire brush form metal where galvanized coating has been damaged .
paint with two coats no color added according to astm anum .
areas of welds and of weld burns need not be touched up .
uncoated edges resulting from shearing or punching are acceptable .
b reinforcement .
num .
reinforcement bars .
section num .
for bridge decks also comply with the following place bars as indicated .
use reinforcement chairs spaced not greater than num feet apart to maintain the position of bottom and top bars .
tie down the top bar mat as specified in section numd .
tie the top bar mat to the lower bar mat forms or form straps or studs or chairs tied to the lower mat at sufficient locations to hold the reinforcement in the proper position .
provide beam haunch reinforcement as indicated and as shown on the standard drawings .
use galvanized chairs with astm anum class num coating or use stainless steel plasticcoated or epoxycoated steel chairs .
use chairs with exposed cutends coated or turned up .
place reinforcement so the indicated cover clearance does not deviate from position by more than num inch .
do not place concrete until the reinforcing placement is accepted .
num .
steel welded wire fabric .
place as indicated .
lap ends and sides num inches .
fasten with annealed iron wire or metal clips .
c weep holes .
construct holes as indicated .
place geotextiles class num as specified in section num .
then place approximately num cubic yard of no .
num coarse aggregate within the geotextiles at the inlet end unless otherwise directed .
d structure foundation drains .
construct as indicated .
place within geotextiles class num as specified in section num. e pipes and conduits .
place pipes and conduits in the structure concrete as indicated including pipes and conduits supplied by others .
maintain existing pipes and conduits where indicated .
if indicated wrap pipes with bituminous paper .
f placing anchor bolts and expansion plates .
place expansion plates anchor bolts pier nosing angles and other material as indicated .
place anchor bolts supplied by others as indicated or directed .
paint projecting portions of anchor bolts as specified in section num as soon as practical after the anchor bolts have been set but not until the surrounding concrete or grout has hardened sufficiently to preclude damage from the painting operation .
coat threads with grease after painting .
if the bridge substructure and superstructure are built under separate contracts proceed as specified in section numcnum.g .
g placing lighting pole anchorage .
construct the lighting pole anchorages as an integral part of the structure .
numg numk num num change no .
num where indicated install anchor bolts nuts and washers as specified in section numcnum num numinch conduit junction box drain pipe steel angles and the required fittings .
cap the conduit with a cap or plug to prevent entry of foreign material and moisture .
for future lighting protect the anchor bolts using a painted hardwood block .
h consistency of concrete at the time of placement .
do not add water to concrete in the field unless authorized in writing by the district executive .
if written authorization is obtained the quantity of water may be increased by a maximum of num gallon per cubic yard .
immediately remove free water soft concrete or mortar that appears on the surface of the concrete and correct the cause of this condition .
i mixing conditions .
section numf j proportioning and mixing concrete .
section num k placing and finishing concrete .
num .
general requirements .
at least num days before the element of work is started submit for review and acceptance a qc plan showing the methods sequence and schedule for placing concrete .
maintain material on hand and in place if necessary for curing and protecting the concrete .
before placing foundation concrete ensure that the bearing area is firm reasonably dry and free of water .
the representative will inspect the foundation area for bearing capacity before placement if directed drill or drive a bar into the material below the foundation or footing bottom to a depth sufficient to determine the suitability of the material .
place concrete without segregation .
remove and discard any concrete that is segregated too wet for use or not of uniform consistency .
do not drop the concrete mixture a distance greater than num feet .
do not allow concrete to come in contact with aluminum unless the aluminum is coated with an accepted coating .
do not place consecutive batches adjacent to each other at concrete temperatures differing by more than numf .
do not place concrete upon frozen foundation material in forms containing frost around frosted reinforcement or in pile shells surrounded by ice or frozen earth .
for succeeding batches place concrete in the forms within num minutes .
place concrete in horizontal layers no more than num inches in depth .
fill each part of the form by depositing the concrete as close to its final position as possible .
do not work or flow concrete along the forms from the point of deposit .
work the concrete without displacing the reinforcement .
place concrete so that the upper surface of the concrete is at the indicated elevation after it has been struck off and after initial shrinkage has taken place .
finish exposed concrete surfaces accurately and evenly free from open and rough areas and free from depressions and projections .
in bridge seats and walls place concrete to the required elevation .
strike off with a straightedge and float to the correct elevation .
do not add water or curing agent to the concrete surface to assist in finishing .
finish bearing areas of substructures as specified in section numknum .
in areas where reinforcement extends through a construction joint do not place concrete adjacent to previously placed concrete until at least num hours has elapsed .
num .
use of vibrating equipment .
keep sufficient vibration equipment in reserve to guard against a work shutdown caused by the failure of the equipment in operation .
use an acceptable mechanical vibrator .
do not attach it to the forms or reinforcement .
use a vibrator capable of transmitting vibration to the concrete with a frequency of not less than num impulses per second .
determine the vibrator size by the reinforcement spacing .
when sufficient concrete has been deposited spade and manipulate it to fill the form .
apply the vibrator to the concrete at intervals not exceeding num feet immediately after the concrete has been deposited .
move the vibrator throughout the mass completely working the concrete around the reinforcement and other embedded fixtures and into the corners and angles of the forms .
correct any reinforcement displacement caused by the vibrator before continuing vibration .
move the vibrator slowly to prevent segregation .
do not use vibrators to spread concrete .
remove and discard concrete segregated by the vibrating operation .
ensure that the vibrator does not penetrate or disturb partially hardened layers .
reinforcement in freshly placed concrete may be vibrated for short durations to ensure proper reinforcement embedment .
num .
placing concrete in water .
numk numk num num change no .
num num.a general .
when the depth of water in the foundation area is less than num inch no adjustments to the specified class of concrete are required .
when there is greater than num inch of water in the foundation utilize an antiwashout admixture awa as specified below unless otherwise approved by the dmedmm based on a case specific justification .
if use of the awa is waived by the representative add num more cement than the quantity specified for the concrete class being used as specified in section numh .
drilled shafts and caissons are exempt from this requirement .
do not deposit concrete in water having a temperature below numf .
utilize a mix design using an awa to achieve a loss no more than num as determined by ptm no .
num .
if concrete with an awa is placed below the frost line no air entrainment is required in the concrete mix design .
when concrete is placed above the frost line design concrete to have an air content of num .
accept concrete at point of placement with an air content between num and num .
limit the slump at point of placement to no more than num inches .
hold a concrete placement meeting and present all details of the placement to the representative .
do not begin concrete placement until the placement procedures concrete mix design inspection procedures and concrete sampling procedures have been accepted by the representative .
if the tremie method is selected for placing concrete submit a concrete placement procedure plan for approval at least num calendar days before performing the work and include the following concrete mix design .
available concrete production capability .
availability and capacity of equipment to be used to transfer concrete to the tremie .
the total volume of concrete to be placed .
the various placement schemes available .
tremie locations .
maximum flow distance of concrete .
any restrictions to flow such as reinforcing steel piles and internal form bracing .
the method of sealing the tremies and the emergency restart procedure if the seal is broken .
an inspection plan detailing sounding locations and the frequency of soundings .
take soundings over the entire placement area on at least an hourly basis .
a concrete sampling and testing plan .
num.b water under num feet deep .
if placing concrete in water num feet deep or less build the concrete above the water level in one end of the form then place the concrete on top of the concrete above water and gradually work ahead so that the smallest possible area of fresh concrete is exposed to the water .
num.c water over num feet deep .
if concrete is placed in water deeper than num feet place in approximately horizontal layers in a consolidated mass in its final position using the tremie method or other acceptable method and do not disturb after placing .
do not place concrete with bottomdump buckets .
use tight forms constructed to retain concrete under water and maintain still water within the forms .
regulate the consistency of the concrete to prevent segregation of the material .
before placing tremie concrete ensure the foundation area is level and all forms and surfaces are free of mud and silt .
use a tremie with a smooth interior face and watertight discharge tube at least num inches in diameter long enough to reach the bottom of the placement and marked in numfoot increments .
provide a valve or similar device including various types of plugs at the lower end of the discharge tube that closes tightly while the tremie is being numk numk num num change no .
num charged and lowered into position and that can be fully opened in the lowered position .
attach tremie tube to a funnel or hopper of at least numcubic yard capacity to facilitate transfer of concrete to the tremie .
do not use tremie tubes fabricated from aluminum .
furnish at least two tremie tubes to ensure continuous concrete placement .
do not place tremie concrete by pumping directly to the bottom of placement .
place tremie concrete only in the presence of the representative .
maneuver the tremie tube by using an accurately controlled crane or hoist that allows free vertical movement of the discharge end of the tube .
keep the concrete level in the tremie tube stable .
maintain the equilibrium level .
keep the discharge end of the tremie tube fully submerged in the freshly deposited concrete .
keep the tremie tube relatively motionless .
do not move the tremie laterally during concrete placement .
place tremie concrete in one continuous operation .
place concrete at a rate that prevents aggregate segregation and allows flow over the entire placement area .
keep the top surface of concrete as level as possible .
maintain balanced hydrostatic pressures to prevent form failure and movement of water through the plastic concrete .
when the tremie concrete has reached a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch proceed with dewatering of forms .
upon completion of dewatering and in the presence of the representative thoroughly inspect the hardened tremie concrete .
remove laitance and other undesirable material by chipping scraping or other means that are not detrimental to the sound concrete .
visually inspect tremie slabs num feet or less in thickness and if any areas of the concrete are suspect drill cores as directed .
for slabs greater than num feet in thickness verify concrete integrity by drilling four numinch diameter cores or one numinch core for every num square feet of slab area whichever is greater .
drill additional cores as directed .
use a double tube core barrel with a diamond bit to obtain the cores .
do not exceed num feet for individual core runs .
drill cores from the top of the tremie slab to within num inches of the bottom .
operate drilling equipment at speeds and pressures that ensure satisfactory core recovery .
pull the core at the end of each run .
identify and store to preserve the integrity of the cores .
record the existence of any void areas or other concrete deficiencies .
if defective concrete areas or voids are found fill with pressure grout or class a cement concrete as directed .
completely fill all core holes as specified in section numknum .
upon completion of the project dispose of cores in a satisfactory manner .
num .
pumping concrete .
num.a concrete pump and reduction device .
provide a concrete pump with a flexible end section at least num feet long equipped with a reduction device or combination of devices to provide a steady and continous discharge .
devices that may be used include but are not limited to a combination of num degree angles a tapered reduction hose a slide gate a numfoot diameter loop in rubber hose or a finger reducer .
pump and waste enough material through the pump to insure that the grout used to prime the pump has been discharged from the system .
num.b determining qc and acceptance testing location .
the location of the qc sampling and acceptance sampling will be determined daily on the first load of concrete and for every num cubic yard therafter by the following procedure provide a concrete mixture in conformance with specification requirements in section num for slump air content and temperature before placement into the pump .
obtain a sample of concrete before placement in the pump and perform slump and air content tests .
position the pump into the most severe vertical drop boom configuration or when pumping from the same elevation as the placement at the longest horizontal section configuration that will occur during placement .
obtain a sample of conrete at the discharge end of the pump and perform slump and air content tests .
the entrained air in the hardened concrete must be between num and num as specified in section numcnum .
if the test results for slump and air content taken at the discharge end of the pump are within num inch of the slump and num of the air content taken before placement into the pump qc and acceptance testing may be performed before placement into the pump .
if the test results are not within these tolerances acceptance testing will be performed at the discharge end of the pump .
the representative may require acceptance testing and qc testing to be performed at the point of placement at any time the quality of the material comes into question .
if more than one pump is utilized during a placement each pump must comply with the above procedure .
numk numk num num change no .
num num .
superstructures .
when constructing superstructures place the concrete in one continuous operation unless otherwise indicated specified or directed .
before constructing spandrel walls barriers or other concrete construction placed on concrete slab tbeam rigid frame superstructures or open or closed spandrel arches relieve the supporting centering of falsework to allow the superstructures to take part of the permanent deflection .
do not place barriers for concrete rigid frame structures until after completing the backfilling and the embankment adjacent to the structures .
num .
bridge decks .
follow the procedure as specified below num.a preplacement meeting .
at least num weeks before concrete deck placement schedule a deck pre placement meeting to review the specification method and sequence of placing deck concrete quality control testing and method of protective measures to control the concrete evaporation rate .
num.b ambient conditions during placement .
place concrete at a concrete temperature between numf and numf .
do not proceed with mixing and placement operations if the forecasted ambient temperature is expected to reach numf within the scheduled placement time or if the evaporation rate will exceed num pounds per square foot per hour .
unless otherwise authorized in writing by the district executive do not start the placement operation unless the ambient air temperature is a minimum of numf and rising and is predicted to stay above numf throughout the placement operation .
adjustment of slump may be allowed through the addition of additional water reducer at the job site if a comprehensive procedure detailed in the qc plan has been submitted and approved by the assistant construction engineer for this purpose .
provide the necessary equipment and determine the evaporation rate before starting deck placement and every hour during the placement .
do not exceed an evaporation rate of num pounds per square foot per hour .
num.c finishing equipment .
have readily available at the bridge deck placement site all remediation equipment and procedures as submitted accepted and demonstrated during the dry run before starting the placement .
if the evaporation rate in section numknum.b is exceeded stop concrete placement until protective measures are taken to reduce the values to an acceptable level .
fog cure misting is an acceptable method to mitigate an excessive evaporation rate .
use high or low pressure equipment equipped with nozzles that atomize droplets and can keep a large surface damp without causing water deposits .
apply the fog over the entire placement area behind the finishing operation not covered by wet burlap when the evaporation rate in section numknum.b is exceeded .
do not leave concrete exposed for an extended duration .
place concrete no greater than num feet ahead of finishing machine to prevent any premature drying unless concrete will be finished within num minutes .
use motorized mechanical finishing equipment capable of applying vibration to the plastic deck surface through the use of a separate attachment from the machine manufacturer or by other means approved by the representative .
submit a sketch to the inspectorincharge describing the equipment and showing complete details of supports for the equipment .
vibrating screeds may be used with the written permission of the district executive .
vibrating screeds are to be powervibrated and moved by means of a positive poweroperated apparatus but are not to be a substitute for highfrequency vibrators .
handfinishing methods will be allowed outside mechanically screeded areas and to a placed bulkhead in cases of power equipment failures .
use strikeoff finishing machines or screeds large enough to finish the full width of deck between curbs or between longitudinal construction joints or between both .
when strikeoff finishing machines are used support the wheels above the pavement surface on temporary rails supported on nondeflecting forms or other horizontal structural devices .
support vibrating screeds on temporary pipe guides or ongrade angles .
use adjustable finishing machine supports or vertical supports for screed guides .
fix supports during finishing at intervals to limit deflection to not more than num inch in num feet .
use supports that are removable to at least num inches below the surface with a minimum disturbance of concrete .
fill voids left upon removal of screed guides and supports with nonstaining nonshrinking mortar after the deck concrete has reached its initial set .
num.d concrete placement and finishing .
for rigid frame decks place the concrete from the center of the span toward each leg or abutment simultaneously .
continuously check falsework or supporting beams so the concrete as placed meets the lines and grades indicated .
keep wedges and blocking tight during placement of the concrete .
numk numk num num change no .
num use a placing sequence as indicated in the contract drawings or as accepted at the preplacement meeting .
unless allowed in writing by the district executive do not allow truck mixers truck agitators or other heavy motorized equipment on the deck spans in which concrete is being placed .
provide sufficient materials at the work site during concrete deck placement to protect the bridge deck concrete against rain before initial set .
if rain begins stop placement operations and immediately cover the concrete with protective materials .
if it is necessary to stop operations due to weather or operational conditions provide bulkheads at the work site and place them as directed .
remove bulkheads before resuming concrete placement operations .
obtain acceptance of changes or additions to indicated construction joints before incorporating into the work .
adjust the deck openings at expansion joints and at expansion dams at the time concrete is placed to provide the openings indicated at numf under full dead load .
do not allow screed or runway supports to bear on the forms unless direct undersupport is provided to prevent form damage or deflection .
do not discharge concrete near side laps or at midspan of the corrugated sheets to a depth greater than num inches above the top of the forms .
do not discharge concrete in a manner that causes excessive concentrated construction loads .
place concrete at a minimum rate of num linear feet of deck per hour in a longitudinal direction except for reinforced concrete slabs and rigid frames .
vibrate the concrete to prevent honeycombing and voids especially at construction joints expansion joints valleys and ends of form sheets .
obtain acceptance of placing sequences procedures and mixes before placing concrete .
repair or replace damaged material .
conduct final finishing operations immediately behind the finishing machines or screeds from work bridges of rigid construction not in contact with the surface of the concrete set on rails and easily moved .
finish with a num foot longhandled straightedge to achieve a smooth surface .
make one pass of the float if the concrete surface remains open after the finishing machine operations .
do not overfinish concrete .
use of steel trowels and fresno floats are prohibited .
num.e concrete curing and testing .
cure the deck as specified in section numpnum.b .
maintain wet burlap application within num feet behind the finishing equipment at all times .
minimal marking of the concrete is allowed .
following cure test the surface again as specified in section numo .
if directed to facilitate inspection remove at least one section of permanent forms at a location directed for each span of every bridge in the project .
after the deck concrete has been in place for a minimum period of num days test the concrete by sounding with a hammer where directed .
if hollow sounding areas are found and if directed remove the forms for the representatives inspection after the concrete has attained adequate strength .
the forms need not be replaced .
repair the adjacent metal forms and supports in order to present a neat appearance .
remove or repair unsatisfactory concrete .
provide facilities for the safe and convenient conduct of the inspection .
num .
reinforced concrete arches .
place the concrete symmetrically on each side of the span and progress uniformly from the spring line to the crown .
num .
reinforced concrete box culverts .
place concrete in the base slab with horizontal construction joints formed in the sidewalls as indicated .
form horizontal construction joints to provide keys as shown on the standard drawings .
when the concrete has reached the top of the sidewall stop the concrete operation for num hours to allow for settlement of the wall concrete before placing the top slab .
num .
bearing areas of substructures .
as indicated construct concrete bearing areas of substructures upon which neoprene pads masonry plates shoes pedestals column bases or other metallic bearing devices are to be placed .
slope areas between and surrounding bearings to drain so no water accumulates or stands at any point .
after curing grind the defined bearing area to the indicated elevations as necessary according to the following tolerances deviation from specified elevations for steel beam superstructures num feet except do not exceed a num feet difference between specified elevations of bearing areas of adjacent beams measured at the centerline of beams and centerline of bearings .
for prestressed concrete beam superstructures num feet numk numk num num change no .
num having no projecting irregularities exceeding num inch variation in flatness for neoprene pads num inch for metal bearings and high load multirotational bearings bearing seats up to num inches long num inch bearing seats over num inches but less than num inches long num inch bearing seats over num inches long num inch variation in slope between specified elevations for each beam seat for neoprene pads num for metal bearing and high load multirotational bearings num when using neoprene pads provide a bearing surface with a rough texture .
for metal and highload multirotational bearings fill minor depressions caused by finishing bush hammering or grinding with a lowviscosity epoxy applied with a squeegee .
num .
final finishes .
num.a conventional finish .
do not brush or bag finish or paint with grout or neat cement .
after the forms are removed correct irregularities in the exposed concrete surfaces .
exposed surfaces are surfaces above normal ground level or water level when applicable and surfaces that will not be concealed by other construction .
irregularities include fins protrusions individual holes larger than num inch in any dimension and clusters of smaller holes .
num.b tooled finish .
tool finish surfaces as indicated by cutting into the body of the concrete with a pointed tool or bush hammer until the concrete surface shows a grouping of broken aggregate particles in a matrix of mortar .
num.c other finishes .
finish surfaces by other methods as indicated .
num .
patching .
saturate holes with water and immediately completely fill the holes with nonstaining nonshrinking mortar .
for holes passing entirely through walls use a plungertype caulking gun or other device to force the mortar through the wall starting at the back face .
hold a piece of burlap or canvas over the hole on the front face .
then when the hole is completely filled strike off the excess mortar until the mortar is flush with the surface .
completely fill holes not passing entirely through the wall by ramming the mortar in place with a suitable tool .
strike off the excess material until the material is flush with the wall surface .
for minor patching treat concrete surfaces to be patched with a paint coat mixture of neat cement and water .
tamp mortar into place manually preferably to at least num inch depth .
when possible overfill spaces being repaired .
allow the excess to stand for num minutes then strike off and finish without excess troweling .
where the space can not be overfilled finish immediately .
cure for at least num days using an acceptable method that ensures against loss of moisture by evaporation .
when required for all or part of the curing period hold the mortar in place or support by using an acceptable method that ensures retention of the mortar without its drying out .
num .
concrete bridge barriers .
num.a general .
for bridges with spans of num feet or more construct barrier as indicated and as shown on the standard drawings using either a slip form or conventional fixed forms .
conform to the following finished tolerances for both slipform and conventional fixedform methods of bridge barrier construction bar reinforcement cover num inch width top num inch width bottom num inch numk numk num num change no .
num surface straightness deviation from centerline of individual section of unit num inch in num feet vertical profile alignment deviation from a line parallel to the grade line num inch in num feet alignment with edge of bridge deck num inch in num feet test surface straightness and vertical alignment along the front face top and rear face of the barrier using a numfoot straightedge .
hold the straightedge in successive positions for the entire length of the barrier and advance in stages of not more than num feet .
num.b slipforming bridge barriers .
if the slipform method is used submit a qc plan to the representative at least num calendar days before beginning slipforming .
obtain acceptance of the qc plan before placing barrier concrete .
as a minimum include in the qc plan the type of equipment materials slump target and range coarse aggregate source and procedures required for the test section and to construct the barrier .
provide class aa cement concrete as specified in section num except use no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate and furnish concrete conforming to the qc plan .
if the finished tolerances specified in section numknum.a can not be maintained during production stop slipforming operations remove the unacceptable work and modify the operation .
if the modifications do not produce acceptable results as specified in section numknum.a use the fixedform method of construction as specified in section numa .
the department will not grant additional compensation or additional time as a result of required removals modifications or changes resulting from the method of forming concrete bridge barriers .
num.b.num test section .
construct one numfoot test section per project to demonstrate that an acceptable product can be produced .
construct this test section at a location near the project site using the same equipment material personnel and procedures as described in the qc plan .
construct an additional test section if any changes in equipment material procedures or personnel are made .
place the test section on a concrete slab with reinforcing steel to simulate actual conditions .
with the district executives written approval the test section may be constructed inplace on the bridge structure .
the test section will consist of the first num feet of the bridge barrier placed .
include in the submission to the district executive documentation of past experience constructing slipform bridge barriers with contract references .
test concrete as specified in section num .
in addition obtain three test cores from the test section according to ptm no .
num .
submit cores to lts to be tested for information .
repair tears as directed .
honeycombing sags tears or other evidence of poor quality concrete that can not be satisfactorily repaired without the use of water or extra concrete or grout will be cause for rejection of the test section .
test reinforcement cover in the presence of the representative using a pachometer or other nondestructive test method .
the representative will evaluate the procedure material equipment and appearance of the test section .
if the test section is rejected by the representative place an additional test section with the approval of the representative or use the fixedform method of construction .
remove and dispose of rejected test sections .
leave the accepted test section in place until all the slipformed bridge barriers are complete .
the slipformed bridge barriers will be compared to the accepted test section to ensure that similar acceptable quality is being achieved .
if the test section was not constructed in place on the bridge structure remove and dispose of the test section following completion and final acceptance of all slipformed bridge barriers .
num.b.num construction of slip formed bridge barriers .
after set up make a dry run of the equipment to ensure it will clear obstacles to be embedded or flush with surfaces such as pull boxes expansion joint plates and light standard foundations .
ensure that clearances for concrete cover are maintained on reinforcement bars .
if modifications are necessary correct any deficiencies and perform another dry run in the presence of the representative before starting the slipform operation .
at no additional cost to the department place additional epoxycoated reinforcing steel to provide bracing for the barrier against displacement due to the pressure developed by the slipform extruding process .
if applicable apply a uniform coat of concrete bonding compound as specified in section num and according to the manufacturers recommendations to the interface between the hardened concrete bridge deck surface and the slipformed bridge barrier before the slipforming operation .
coordinate operations for mixing delivering and placing of concrete with minimal stopping and restarting of the slipform machine and according to the qc plan .
do not allow vehicular traffic on the bridge while slipforming operations are in progress except for slipform machine and supply trucks .
meet temperature and humidity requirements as specified in section numk nump num num change no .
num numknum .
ensure that the barrier maintains its shape without support after extrusion .
if honeycombing sagging or tearing of the bridge barrier occurs during the slip forming operation repair according to the approved qc plan .
ensure that the completed surface is free of honeycombing sags and tears and finish with a light vertical brushing .
cure slipformed bridge barriers as specified in section nump .
mark the bridge deck in advance of the concreting operation to ensure that saw cuts are made at the indicated locations and do not conflict with the reinforcing steel pattern .
space joints as indicated .
accurately locate saw cut joints to ensure the reinforcement steel will have the specified cover .
saw cut as soon as possible after concrete has set sufficiently to preclude raveling during the sawing and before any shrinkage cracking occurs in the concrete .
saw cut joints num inch wide and num inch deep in the top outside and inside faces .
complete saw cuts num inches above the top of the deck slab or pavement surface .
l not used .
m connections of existing and new concrete .
num .
terms .
the terms new concrete construction fresh concrete and hardened concrete refer to work performed under the current contract .
hardened concrete has cured for a minimum of num days .
the terms existing concrete structures and existing concrete refer to work performed under a previous contract .
num .
general .
to connect fresh concrete with hardened or existing concrete thoroughly clean the connecting surface of laitance and loose and foreign material prior to applying the type ii in a nonload bearing joint or type v in a load bearing joint epoxy bonding compound as specified in section num .
coat contact surfaces with concrete bonding compound at construction joints between fresh concrete and existing concrete .
coat contact surfaces with concrete bonding compounds to connect fresh concrete with hardened concrete at all deck construction joints deck expansion joints expansion dam block out areas and where indicated as specified in section nume .
coat contact surfaces with concrete bonding compound to connect fresh concrete with hardened or existing deck concrete for slipformed bridge barriers as specified in section nume and section numknum.b.num .
coat surfaces in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use of other bonding compound coatings extends the period after coating between placement pours but in no case longer than num hours typical or in accordance with the manufacturers recommended viability of the coating whichever is less .
num .
tied connections .
where indicated to connect new concrete construction to existing concrete structures use drill holes of the required depth and diameter in the existing structure to allow placing dowel bars expansion bolts or extensions of reinforcement .
furnish and place in the holes dowel bars expansion bolts and reinforcement of the size and type indicated .
grout studs dowels and anchor bolts with nonshrink grout or anchor as indicated .
n joints .
rivet or foldseam the splices of metal waterstops before soldering .
make splices for rubber plastic and similar waterstops according to the manufacturers recommendations .
if the construction plane is to be horizontal and concrete placement is stopped for more than num minutes provide acceptable keyways and sufficient dowel bars .
when directed place vertical construction joints then place acceptable dowel bars as required .
o not used .
p curing and protection of concrete .
begin curing as soon as the concrete has been placed and is sufficiently hardened .
cure concrete as specified in section nump num .
do not count as a curing day a day on which the curing temperature drops below numf at any time during that day except for flood curing of footings .
for bridge decks during day num through day num do not count as a curing day a day on which the curing temperature drops below numf .
during day num through day num do not count as a curing day a day on which the curing temperature drops below numf .
if at any time during the curing period the curing temperature falls below numf the department will consider the work unsatisfactory and will reject it .
num .
definitions of temperatures .
num.a air temperature .
section num nump nump num num change no .
num num.b curing temperature .
curing temperature is the temperature of the air immediately adjacent to concrete .
where concrete is not covered by forms or other protective coverings or where protective coverings are considered inadequate the curing temperature will be the air temperature .
during cool and cold weather the curing temperature is the temperature inside the forms protective coverings or housings specified in section numpnum .
the curing temperature for the first numhour period after placing concrete will be considered as not more than the temperature of the concrete at the time of its placement in the forms .
num .
records of temperature .
provide highlow thermometers to maintain an accurate daily record of air and curing temperatures during cool and cold weather .
in the presence of an inspector take curing temperatures on the surface of the concrete at representative locations on a structure .
submit these temperature records daily to the inspectorincharge .
num .
normal curing and protection .
num.a liquid membraneforming curing compound .
for surfaces cured by the membrane method finish before application of the curing compound .
during the finishing period and until forms are removed protect the concrete by the water method of curing .
apply the compound in two coats by spraying to provide a continuous uniform membrane .
for each coat apply at least num gallon of compound per num square feet of concrete .
on formed surfaces apply the first coat immediately after stripping forms and after acceptance of the concrete finish .
if the surface is dry soak the concrete with water and apply the curing compound just as the surface film of water disappears .
apply the second application after the first application has set .
during spraycuring operations keep unsprayed surfaces wet with water .
apply compound to unformed surfaces immediately after finishing operations have been completed and after the surface film of water has disappeared .
do not apply membranecuring compound to construction joint surfaces .
protect exposed steel during application of curing compounds .
water cure these areas as specified in section numpnum.b .
if membrane is damaged or membrane peels from concrete surfaces repair immediately .
for bridge decks after num curing days if the numday qc compressive strength result is greater than or equal to num pounds per square inch the contractor may discontinue the water cure for the lot of concrete represented by the qc cylinders .
if the numday qc cylinders are less than num pounds per square inch continue water curing until the num day minimum mix design strength is obtained or for a maximum of num curing days .
at the end of the water curing period remove the wet burlap .
utilize a white liquid membrane within num minutes .
spray two coats of white liquid membraneforming curing compound to the deck concrete .
apply the curing membrane when no free water remains on the surface of the deck but while the surface is still saturated .
apply each coat of curing membrane according to the manufacturers instructions with a minimum spreading rate per coat of num gallon per num square feet of deck surface .
if the deck surface is dry or becomes dry thoroughly wet it with water applied as a fog spray by means of approved equipment .
spray the second coat after the first application has set and at right angles to the first application .
for approach slabs apply the liquid membrane curing compound after the numday water cure .
protect the curing membrane against damage for a minimum of num days .
reapply an additional coat of curing compound to any damaged areas .
should the curing membrane be subjected to continuous damage the representative may limit work on the deck until the numday period is complete .
reduction of the numday period will not be allowed under any circumstance .
for bridge decks placed between september num and march num utilize polyethylene sheeting in lieu of the white liquid membrane and after the numday period is complete apply boiled linseed oil as specified in section numa .
for all decks placed outside of the september num to march num time frame do not apply boiled linseed oil to the deck surface .
num.b water curing .
use a fogspray perforated pipe or hose watering system to keep forms and curing covers saturated during the curing period .
for curing and protecting covers on endwalls inlets manholes copings bridge seats and similar miscellaneous concrete keep saturated using an acceptable method .
flood curing of concrete footings will be allowed if the water temperature is numf or above .
provide curing water for bridge decks and approach slabs that is a minimum of numf for the entire water curing period .
use covers of either burlapbacked white polyethylene sheeting or a double thickness of burlap .
for bridge decks use only a double thickness of burlap .
use one type of cover for the duration of curing unless a change in type is accepted or a combination of covers approved by the representative .
place the burlap in a manner that minimizes marring of the finished deck surface .
secure covers to prevent their being lifted and displaced .
adequately secure the nump nump num num change no .
num polyethylene sheeting to prevent displacement due to wind .
provide a minimum of num feet overlap at all sheet edges .
replace any torn or damaged areas at the direction of the representative .
if burlap or polyethylene sheeting is temporarily removed for any reason during the curing period use soaker hoses to keep the entire exposed area continuously wet .
replace saturated burlap and polyethylene sheeting as soon as possible .
saturate the covers prior to use and keep in a saturated condition for the curing period .
soak the burlap for a minimum of num hours before placement .
rewet the burlap as needed before placement .
apply two layers of wet burlap within num feet of strikeoff from the finishing machine .
do not allow the surface to dry after strikeoff or at any time during the cure period .
during times of delay expected to exceed num minutes cover all concrete that has been placed but not finished with wet burlap .
minimal marking of the concrete from the burlap is allowed .
maintain the wet burlap in a fully wet condition using misting hoses fogging machines that span the entire burlap covered surface or other approved devices until the concrete has set sufficiently to support foot traffic .
at that time place soaker hoses on the burlap to maintain continuous saturation of all burlap material to the entire deck surface .
cure for a minimum of num days when high earlystrength concrete is used cure for a minimum of num days .
cure bridge decks for a minimum of num days followed by a numday liquid membrane cure .
cure approach slabs for a minimum of num days followed by a numday liquid membrane cure for approach slabs constructed with aaap .
cure according to the procedures submitted and approved at the deck preplacement meeting .
cure for at least the minimum time stated above and until minimum compressive strengths are attained as specified in section numdnum.b as determined from molded cylinder specimens tested according to ptm no .
num .
as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently place curing covers on the exposed concrete .
if the double thickness of burlap method is used place burlap so each strip overlaps onehalf its width .
as soon as forms or sections of forms are loosened or removed cover the exposed concrete surfaces with pre saturated curing covers then keep saturated for the remainder of the curing period .
num.c bridge deck intermediate curing .
for manually textured decks in the plastic state or as directed by the representative apply an intermediate monomolecular film curing agentafter the finishing operation .
if directed apply additional applications to prevent surface drying before placement of curing covers .
apply the monomolecular film in a lightfog application using a pressure spray tank with an adjustable nozzle .
use a watertocuring agent ratio and rate of application both according to the manufacturers recommendations .
agitate the solution before each application .
apply the monomolecular film in a continuous film immediately after the final finishing operation is completed on any area .
do not perform finishing after application of the curing agent .
after application of the monomolecular film complete curing using water .
num .
cool weather curing and protection .
if the forecasted air temperature during concrete curing is expected to drop to numf but not below numf or if concrete is placed at an air temperature below numf but above numf follow the requirements for normal curing and protection .
in addition cover burlap with polyethylene sheeting and place insulating mats as specified in section nume or place hay or straw to a depth of at least num inches over concrete not covered by forms .
keep the insulation mats hay or straw in place as required to maintain proper curing temperatures .
num .
cold weather curing and protection .
if the forecasted air temperature is expected to drop to numf or lower during concrete curing or if concrete is to be placed at air temperatures below numf comply with the requirements specified for normal curing and protection and use heating andor insulation as necessary to maintain the curing temperature for the duration of the curing period .
if forms are removed before the end of the curing period provide additional heating or insulation as necessary to maintain the curing temperature for the remainder of the curing period .
after the concrete has cured for the required length of time gradually lower its temperature to that of the surrounding air .
do not allow the temperature of the concrete to drop more than numf in any numhour period for the first num days after the curing period .
continue to record the air temperature and curing temperature during this numday period .
num.a heating .
furnish and place sufficient canvas and frames or another type of housing to enclose and protect the fresh concrete and forms .
before placing the concrete furnish necessary fuel and sufficient acceptable heating apparatus preferably steamheating equipment .
keep the air surrounding the fresh concrete at a temperature above numf but not more than numf .
keep the concrete covers moist during the curing period .
num.b insulating mats or foam insulation .
insulating mats or foam insulation as specified in section nume nump numq num num change no .
num and section numf respectively may be used to maintain curing temperature .
apply the mat insulation tightly against the forms .
seal the ends of the mat to exclude air and moisture .
overlap the insulation on previously placed concrete by num foot .
when using steel forms place the insulation tightly against the forms .
in addition insulate the framework of the steel forms either by the use of the insulating mat material or foam insulation or by draping polyethylene sheets or tarpaulins over the exposed members to effectively reduce the heat loss .
immediately repair tears in the mat liner .
where tie rods extend through the insulated form place closefitting washers on the rod against the mat and secure to provide adequate protection .
cover the tops of piers abutments and similar concrete surfaces with the insulation mat tightly secured to prevent loss of heat .
for the areas around protruding reinforcement that can not be protected with the insulation mat cover with a double thickness of burlap .
cover with enough straw or hay to prevent loss of heat from the concrete during the curing period .
in addition cover insulated areas with tarpaulins .
do not insulate bridge decks unless the underside is enclosed and preheated before the concrete is placed and the heat is maintained at the specified temperature during the entire curing period .
when foam insulation is used use a minimum thickness of num num inches .
the contractor may use cracked molded foam boards only after repairs are made with an adhesive .
keep the insulation protection in place for the full curing period but do not allow the concrete temperature to rise above numf .
do not expose fresh concrete to subfreezing temperatures .
provide standby heat if directed .
failure to properly place the insulation material or failure to maintain the necessary concrete temperature will be cause for the representative to deny continued use of the material on the project for curing in cold weather and require the use of heating as specified in section numpnum.a .
q removal of falsework and forms and application of external loads to concrete .
except for flood curing of concrete footings do not count a day during which the curing temperature falls below numf in the total elapsed days required for removal of falsework or forms or for the application of external loads on concrete .
num .
removal of falsework and forms .
keep falsework and forms under arches box culverts pier caps slabs beams girders and brackets in place for num days after placing the final portion of the section involved after which they may be removed provided the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength as specified in table a .
determine the minimum compressive strength according to ptm no .
num or determine the minimum compressive strength by the maturity method according to ptm no .
num .
cure test cylinders according to ptm no .
num .
during normal and coolweather curing keep forms for walls columns outside faces of pier caps arches sides of beams and other vertical faces not sustaining loads in place for a minimum of num hours after completing placement of concrete .
then remove forms provided the concrete has hardened enough to preclude damage resulting from form removal .
barrier forms may be removed in less than num hours provided the concrete has hardened enough to preclude damage from form removal .
during coldweather curing keep forms in place for a minimum of num days .
do not remove deck forms before the end of the water curing period removal of burlap unless approved by the representative .
at construction joints keep bulkheads in place for a minimum of num hours after placing concrete .
then remove bulkheads provided the concrete has hardened enough to preclude damage resulting from removal of the bulkheads .
during cold weather curing keep bulkheads in place for num hours and keep the concrete moist at all times .
table a minimum compressive strength minimum psi class aaap num class aaa num class aa num class a num num .
application of external loads to concrete .
strength determination for all values given in section numqnum will be determined by compressive strength according to ptm no .
num or maturity method according to ptm no .
num .
numq numq num num change no .
num num.a dead loads .
do not begin work on wall column or pier shaft construction until num hours after placing footings .
for footings on piles do not begin work until num hours after placing footings .
where falsework for the cap on pier bents is supported on the footings or from the ground do not begin work on the cap construction until num hours after placing the columns .
where forms are supported on collars attached to the columns do not begin work on cap construction until num days after placing the columns and the concrete has attained its minimum compressive strength as specified in table a. construct column and piershaft lifts according to one of the following methods method num .
where the forms for previous lifts not including the footing are left in place and adequately braced do not place the next higher lift until num hours after placing the lift immediately below .
method num .
where forms are supported by the concrete in the previous lift not including the footing and where other forms and bracing have been removed from the lower lifts do not place the next higher lift until num days after placing the previous lift and the concrete has attained its minimum compressive strength as specified in table a .
do not place superstructure beams on abutment walls or solid shaft piers until num days after placing the wall or shaft and the concrete has attained its minimum compressive strength as specified in table a .
do not place superstructure beams on caps pier bents or on cantilevers of hammerhead piers until num days after placing the caps or cantilevers and the concrete has attained its minimum compressive strength as specified in table a .
num.b backfilling .
backfill as specified in section num .
do not backfill or place material adjoining abutment walls backwalls retaining walls box culverts and arches until num days after placing last concrete and then only if concrete has attained the numday minimum mix design compressive strength as specified in section num table a .
maintain symmetrical loading on each side of the span and progress uniformly in placing embankment and structure backfill adjacent to and over arch rings box culverts or rigid frame structures unless otherwise indicated .
num.c live loads .
do not allow diamond grinding and diamond saw grooving equipment or poweroperated concrete buggies to cross a deck until num days after the deck concrete in a span has been placed and the deck concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
do not place the conveyorbelt systems on a deck until num hours after the concrete is placed and their weight is uniformly distributed and operation of the system does not damage the deck .
do not allow truck mixers truck agitators other heavy equipment construction traffic or the traveling public on a structure until authorized by the representative .
this authorization will be given as follows a truck mixer not exceeding num miles per hour and a slip form paver for barrier will be allowed on the deck for construction of other concrete appurtenances when the concrete in the deck has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch and after minimum num day wet cure .
do not allow more than one truck on the deck at a time in a span or continuous unit for each truck placement occurrence .
bridge deck may be opened to traffic after a period of num days after placing the last deck concrete and the deck concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch and cure period is complete .
do not open to traffic until texturing of the bridge deck has been applied .
after a period of num days after placing the last barrier concrete and the barrier concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
do not construct barrier or sidewalk on new decks until num days after placing the deck concrete and the deck concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
do not allow trucks or heavy equipment to travel within num feet of barrier until num days after placing the barrier concrete and the barrier concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
numq numd num num change no .
num control speed of trucks equipment and the traveling public until barriers have attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
r waterproofing .
apply waterproofing as indicated or where directed as specified in section num and as follows num .
cracks in culverts .
where directed cover minor cracks in culverts by waterproofing them with an accepted sealer .
apply the sealer as recommended by the sealant manufacturer .
seal cracks on backfill sides only .
num .
form tie holes .
if directed satisfactorily waterproof form tie holes on the backfill side of the box or arch culverts .
s tack coat for bridge decks .
if a bituminous concrete surface is to be placed on the bridge deck apply a bituminous tack coat on the deck before placing the bituminous material as specified in section num. t backfilling and placing structure backfill and embankment .
not used .
u defective work .
at no expense to the department remove and replace concrete that is bulged uneven or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of rain improper finish improper cure or honeycombing which in the structural control engineers opinion can not be repaired .
if directed remove and replace concrete that has not attained the minimum compressive strength .
repair or replace concrete that exhibits cracks or surface tears as directed by the structure control engineer .
use a high molecular weight methacrylate penetrating crack sealer a low viscosity epoxy resin or other suitable material to repair the surface cracks and tears .
submit for review a detailed quality control and action plan that includes at a minimum the proposed crack sealing material data sheet from the manufacture and conditions for use including ambient and substrate temperature and moisture conditions .
do not perform any crack sealing before the quality control and action plan has been reviewed by the representative .
v bridge approach slabs .
construct as shown on the contract drawings and in accordance with section num .
num measurement and payment a cement concrete .
cubic yard or lump sum as indicated for the class specified for the item indicated .
the department will not make a deduction in measurement for anchor bolts expansion plates drainage openings weep holes pipes or conduits if the volume displaced by an installation of opening does not exceed num cubic yard .
the department will not deduct the volume of reinforcement bars from the measured volume of concrete .
where it is impractical to measure concrete in cavities or sink holes the department will measure by the volume shown on the certified slips of the delivered batch weights as recorded by department representatives assigned to the work .
the cost of concrete cores taken to examine tremieplaced concrete is incidental to the other concrete work .
b reinforcement .
num .
reinforcement bars .
section num dowel bars required for unplanned joints are incidental to other reinforcement .
num .
steelwelded wire fabric .
pound annealed iron wire chairs and ties are incidental to the weight of the steel wire fabric .
c structure foundation drain .
linear foot for the size indicated .
measurement includes all pipe connections .
d no .
num coarse aggregate .
cubic yard nume numi num num change no .
num e excavation .
section num for the class indicated .
f backfill for excavation below indicated elevation .
cubic yard paid as specified in section num. g selected borrow excavation structure backfill .
for the type indicated and as follows num .
volume basis .
cubic yard measured in place as compacted material using the average endarea method .
num .
weight basis .
ton h lighting pole anchorage .
each the price includes anchor bolts nuts washers num numinch conduit junction box drain pipe steel angle and required fittings .
i antiwashout admixture .
cubic yard the price includes only the additional cost associated with the incorporation of awa into a cubic yard of cement concrete .
this associated cost may include material mix designs and handling .
the actual cement concrete is paid under the lump sum item for the structure or the item for the class of concrete specified .
section numd will not apply to this item .
num numc num num initial edition section numreinforcement bars num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and placement of reinforcement bars for cement concrete construction .
num material a reinforcement steel .
reinforcement bars section num .
as indicated provide epoxy coating for reinforcement bars as specified in section numc .
galvanized reinforcement bars as specified in section nume may be substituted for epoxycoated reinforcement bars as specified in section nume .
as indicated provide stainless steel reinforcement bars as specified in section numf .
uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars may be substituted for epoxycoated reinforcement bars as specified in section numg .
b other material .
annealed iron wireastm a num as described in section numdnum .
cementsection num watersection num welding materialsection numt c mechanical splice system .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following physical requirements ultimate tensile strength of mechanical splice system num of specified ultimate tensile strength of reinforcement bars minimum allowable slip see table a yield strength of mechanical splice system num of specified yield strength of reinforcement bars minimum fatigue resistance allowable slip california test no .
num num kips per square inch to num kips per square inch for num cycles num inch maximum table a reinforcing bar number total slip inch maximum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numc numa num num initial edition num num num num num num provide an epoxycoated mechanical splice system to splice epoxy coated reinforcement bars .
apply a minimum coating thickness of num mils to repaired areas but not exceeding the manufacturers recommendations and repair according to the following sections of astm a num scope section num referenced documents section num terminology section num powder coating section num patching material section num surface preparation section num coating application section num coating thickness testing sections num and num coating adhesion section num retests section num repair of damaged coating sections num num and num provide a galvanized mechanical splice system to splice galvanized reinforcement bars .
thread reinforcement bar ends before galvanization .
remove all grease oils or other contaminants that would adversely affect the bond before galvanization .
galvanize the mechanical splice system according to astm a num with a minimum thickness of num mils or num ounce per square foot .
tap the splice system oversize according to astm a num section num .
chromate according to astm a num section num .
provide a stainless steel mechanical splice system to splice stainless steel reinforcement bars compatible with one of the uns designations listed in section numf for stainless steel reinforcement bars .
the representative will select for each size of reinforcement bar used four splices either sample or actual .
three are to be assembled for testing to verify the physical properties and one is to remain unassembled for testing of coating thickness or verification of reinforcement bar strength in case of a failing test result .
assemble samples or actual splices in the presence of the representative in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and section nume .
all samples must have a minimum of num inches of reinforcement bar extending from each end of the coupler body .
immediately package and deliver the samples to the representative .
the representative will submit the field verification samples sample class fv to the lts for testing and conformance to the specified requirements .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num construction a general .
provide reinforcement bars free from injurious defects such as cracks and laminations .
provide reinforcement bars free from frost dirt oil grease paint mortar loose rust mill scale and other materials that would reduce bond .
the department will not reject reinforcement bars for bonded rust surface seams surface irregularities or mill scale provided the minimum dimensions crosssectional area and tensile properties of a hand wire brushed specimen meet the physical requirements for the size and grade of steel indicated .
remove loose scaly or thick rust .
a light powdery coating of rust formed during project storage does not require cleaning .
the representative will reject reinforcement bars with rusting that has caused detectable reduction in crosssectional area .
obtain the representatives acceptance of inplace reinforcement bars before concrete is placed .
maintain the reinforcement bars in the correct position .
verify the compatibility of the bar schedule with the structure plans and details .
make adjustments to the bar schedule including reinforcement bar details and quantities and obtain the representatives acceptance before fabrication .
the department will not grant additional contract time as a result of adjustments to the bar schedule or to reinforcement bars .
with each shipment of reinforcement bars delivered to the project have the material supplier furnish a bill of lading that provides an itemized listing as shown on the bar schedule for individual structural units of all bars in the shipment by quantity size length mark type weight and bending dimensions as indicated .
include numa numc num num initial edition general project identification information as well as any appropriate remarks and plan references drawing number description etc .
on the bill of lading .
submit bills of lading to department inspection personnel to verify and document field quantities and for the departments project records .
b storage .
section numd and as follows store reinforcement bars off the ground on platforms skids or other supports and protect the reinforcement bars from mechanical injury and surface deterioration caused by exposure to conditions producing rust .
keep reinforcement bars free from frost dirt oil grease paint mortar loose rust mill scale and other materials that would reduce bond .
handle and store epoxycoated reinforcement bars by methods that will not damage the epoxy coating .
furnish all systems for handling epoxycoated reinforcement bars with adequately padded contact areas if possible .
pad all bundling bands and lift all bundles with a strong back multiple supports or platform bridge to prevent bartobar abrasion from sags in the bar bundle .
do not drop or drag bars or bundles .
transport and store epoxycoated reinforcement bars on wooden or padded supports .
for additional storage and handling requirements for epoxycoated reinforcement bars see section numgnum .
follow additional storage requirements for stainless steel reinforcement as specified in section numinum .
for additional storage and handling requirement for galvanized reinforcement bars see section numhnum .
follow additional storage requirements for uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement as specified in section numjnum .
c field adjustment .
furnish bars with shapes and dimensions as indicated .
do not field bend except to make minor adjustments when approved by the representative .
if field bending or straightening is required see table b .
do not field bend rail or axle steel .
field bend uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars at ambient temperature and do not bend or straighten bars in a manner that will damage the material .
heating of the uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars to facilitate bending is not allowed .
cut uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars by shearing or with a fluidcooled say .
torch cutting of uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars is not allowed .
table b bend and straightening requirements num num bar size carbon equivalent bend temp .
f straighten temp .
f bar size dia .
of former inches min .
num through num unknown num num num num num num num or less and a num num or num num or num num num num num num any num num num num num bending and straightening not recommended num use temperature sticks .
num avoid numf to numf numf and greater note a .
apply heat to sufficient area to encompass bend area .
b .
apply heat for sufficient time to bring bar center to required temperature .
c. maintain temperature while bending andor straightening .
d. allow free rotation .
e. bend with smooth continuous application of force .
f. straighten by moving hickey bar if used progressively around bend .
numd numd num num initial edition d placing and fastening .
num .
general .
accurately place reinforcement bars as indicated and hold it firmly in position during the placing and settling of concrete using metal chairs or acceptable supports .
do not allow bar spacing to vary from the design spacing by more than num inch .
do not allow the distance from the surface of the formwork to the bars to vary more than num inch from the design distance .
do not place reinforcement bars closer than num times the maximum nominal size of the aggregate used in the concrete mix design .
firmly tie bars with annealed iron wire or secure the bars with acceptable metal clips .
tie bars at all perimeter intersections and at all intersections on the top mat of bridge decks and in bridge barriers .
for other intersections when bar spacing is greater than or equal to num inches tie all intersections when bar spacing is less than num inches either tie all intersections or tie alternate intersections in each direction to provide a staggered tie layout .
tie bundled bars together at not more than numfoot centers .
when reinforcement bars are tied together and lifted into place as a unit ensure stability of the unit and maintain proper bar alignment during lifting and placement operations .
for epoxycoated reinforcement bars and galvanized reinforcement bars provide plasticcoated tie wire epoxycoated tie wire metal clips or plastic clips .
when tying stainless steel reinforcement bars together provide tie wire meeting one of the uns designations listed in section numf for stainless steel reinforcement bars .
when attaching stainless steel reinforcement bars to any other dissimilar metals provide num inch thick minimum nylon polyvinylchloride or polyethylene spacers or sheathing to ensure no contact between the reinforcement bars a minimum of num inch extending beyond the point of intersection in all directions .
use nylon or plastic coated wire ties to bind the spacers andor reinforcement .
when attaching uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars to other uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars use nylon or plastic coated wire ties .
when uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars are attached to or may come in contact with any dissimilar metals provide numinch thick minimum nylon polyvinylchloride or polyethylene spacers or sheathing to ensure no contact between the reinforcement bars for a minimum of num inch extending beyond the point of intersection in all directions .
use nylon or plastic coated wire ties to bind the spacers andor reinforcement .
if fabric reinforcement is shipped in rolls straighten it into flat sheets before placing it .
do not weld cross bars tack weld for assembly of reinforcement bars unless authorized in writing by the representative .
num .
support systems .
support reinforcement bars in its proper position by use of mortar blocks wire bar supports supplementary bars or other devices .
supply such devices of proper height and at sufficiently frequent intervals to maintain the distance between the reinforcement bars and the formed surface or the top surface of deck slabs within num inch of that indicated .
support platforms supporting personnel and equipment during concrete placement directly on the forms and not on the reinforcement bars .
for uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars provide plastic supports meeting section numdnum.c or steel bar supports conforming to section numg .
use corrosionresistant supports with plastic coated feet above steel beams or metal stay in place forms .
num.a mortar block supports .
furnish mortar blocks of the same class as the concrete in which they are to be embedded .
ensure that block faces in contact with forms for exposed surfaces do not exceed num inches by num inches in size and that their color and texture will match the concrete surface .
if used on vertical or sloping surfaces provide such blocks with an embedded wire for securing the block to the reinforcement bars .
if used in slabs use either a tie wire or if the gravitational force of the reinforcement bars is sufficient to firmly hold the blocks in place a groove in the top of the block .
for epoxycoated reinforcement bars or galvanized reinforcement bars use plastic coated or epoxycoated tie wires .
num.b wire supports .
furnish wire bar supports such as ferrous metal chairs and bolsters conforming to industry practice as described in the manual of standard practice of the concrete reinforcing steel institute .
ensure that chairs or bolsters that bear against the forms for exposed surfaces are either class num maximum protection plastic protected or class num type b moderate protection stainless steel tipped for which the stainless steel conforms to astm a num type num .
for epoxycoated reinforcement bars or galvanized reinforcement bars provide plastic coated epoxycoated or galvanized wire bar supports and bar clips .
for stainless steel reinforcement bars provide plastic supports meeting section numdnum.c or stainless steel bar supports meeting one of the uns designations numd numg num num initial edition listed in section numf for stainless steel reinforcement bars .
use stainless steel supports with plastic coated feet above steel beams or metal stay in place forms .
num.c plastic supports .
use chairs and bolsters that do not deflect more than num inch under the minimum point load requirement of num poundsforce as described in ptm no .
num .
use supports molded in a configuration that does not restrict concrete flow .
num .
adjustments .
adjust reinforcement used in posttensioned concrete or relocate it during the installation of prestressing ducts or tendons as required to provide planned clearances to the prestressing tendons anchorages and stressing equipment as approved by the representative .
e splicing and lapping .
furnish all reinforcement in the full lengths as indicated unless otherwise allowed by the representative .
do not splice bars except as indicated or directed .
if splicing is allowed lap the reinforcement bars as shown on the standard drawings and as indicated and wire together securely .
do not substitute alternate bars unless allowed by the representative .
stagger splices as far as possible .
in lapped splices place and wire the bars maintaining the minimum distance to the surface of the concrete as indicated .
do not use lapped splices for nos .
num and num bars except as provided in articles num and num of the aashto lrfd specification .
as indicated use welded splices or mechanical splice systems .
for welded splices use butt splices only .
stagger welded splices or mechanical splice system connections if possible .
do not weld uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars .
only use welded splices if indicated or if the chief bridge engineer gives written authorization to do so .
ensure that welding conforms to the structural welding code reinforcing steel aws dnum of the american welding society and applicable special provisions .
do not use welded splices on epoxycoated reinforcement bars or galvanized reinforcement bars .
do not weld so close to epoxycoated reinforcement bars to cause any heating of the coating .
do not use welded splices on uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars .
do not weld close to uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars to prevent any heating of those reinforcement bars .
assemble all mechanical splice systems according to the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish a copy of the manufacturers recommendations to the representative .
mark reinforcing bars with scribe marks or indelible ink before splice attachment to ensure equal embedment .
when epoxy coated or galvanized mechanical splice systems are used clean assemble and repair any visible damage to the coating with an acceptable repair material according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for epoxy coated mechanical splice systems seal off the epoxy coated rebar at the point of entry into the mechanical coupler using an acceptable epoxy repair material .
use a mechanical splice system manufactured from uncoated corrosionresistant steel as specified in section numg to splice uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars as specified in section numg .
do not encase mechanical splices in concrete until visual examination and required testing have been completed and approved .
f epoxycoating exposed stirrups .
if stirrups in precast bridge elements are not epoxycoated during fabrication epoxycoat the exposed portion of the bars .
wire brush the bars before applying the epoxy coating .
if epoxycoated stirrups are expected to be exposed for more than num months cover with opaque polyethylene or other suitable material to prevent ultraviolet damage to the epoxy coating .
g epoxycoated reinforcement bars .
in addition to the above the following requirements apply if using epoxycoated reinforcement bars num .
storage handling and placement .
where possible do not store epoxycoated reinforcement bars at the jobsite for more than num months .
if field storage on site is expected to exceed num months cover the epoxycoated reinforcement bars or bundles with opaque polyethylene or other protective material .
provide ventilation to prevent condensation from forming under the covering .
store handle and place epoxycoated reinforcement bars at the jobsite according to astm d num .
inspect the bars before placement .
if the epoxy coating is damaged and the damages do not exceed num of the surface area in any numfoot section of the epoxycoated reinforcement bars repair all visible damage according to astm d num numg numi num num initial edition before bar placement .
replace epoxycoated reinforcement bars if damage to the surface area exceeds num in any num foot section .
after placement inspect the epoxycoated reinforcement bars again and repair areas damaged during placement .
num .
welding .
do not weld .
num .
appurtenances .
use plasticcoated or epoxycoated tie wire .
epoxy coated appurtenances must have a minimum coating thickness of num mils per crsi manual of standard practice section num .
galvanized appurtenances must be in accordance with astm a num table num with a coating grade consistent with the measured wire diameter or thickness .
h galvanized reinforcement bars .
in addition to the above the following requirements apply if using galvanized reinforcement bars num .
fabricate .
fabricate reinforcement bars after galvanization .
num .
storage handling and placement .
where possible do not store galvanized reinforcement bars at the jobsite for more than num days .
store in accordance with section numb to allow air circulation to prevent the formation of wet storage stain .
if field storage is expected to exceed num days cover bars with opaque polyethylene or other protective material .
provide galvanized reinforcement bars having uniform appearance .
do not use reinforcement bars with visible corrosion deposits uncoated spots spikes or acid flux or black spots .
during galvanization use methods that prevent bars from becoming stuck together .
do not field bend galvanized reinforcement bars except to make minor adjustments when approved by the representative .
do not apply heat to bend or straighten galvanized reinforcement bars .
do not place or store galvanized reinforcement bars in contact with uncoated reinforcement bars or other uncoated steel or stainless steel .
before and after placement inspect the galvanized reinforcement bars and repair areas damaged during placement in accordance with astm a num using paints containing at least num zinc dust in the dry film to a minimum final coating thickness of num mils cured .
prepared damaged areas according to sspcsp num and feather at least num inch of the surrounding undamaged galvanized coating before painting .
num .
welding .
do not weld .
num .
appurtenances .
use plasticcoated or epoxycoated tie wire .
epoxy coated appurtenances must have a minimum coating thickness of num mils per crsi manual of standard practice section num .
galvanized appurtenances must be in accordance with astm a num table num with a coating grade consistent with the measured wire diameter or thickness .
i stainless steel reinforcement bars .
in addition to the above the following requirements apply if using stainless steel reinforcement bars num .
fabricate .
where bent bars are indicated provide plastic polyvinylchloride polyethylene or rubber sleeves around bending pins and contact points during the bending operation to prevent contamination .
num .
welding .
do not weld .
num .
storage handling and placement .
do not band strap or allow direct contact of stainless steel reinforcing bars to nonstainless steel reinforcement bars or other dissimilar metals .
do not store nonstainless steel reinforcement bars or other dissimilar metals above stainless steel reinforcement bars unless adequate protection has been provided to prevent contamination .
provide stainless steel reinforcement bars having a uniform appearance .
do not use stainless steel reinforcement bars with visible surface oxidation or corrosion deposits .
numi numb num num initial edition do not field bend except to make minor adjustments when approved by the representative .
when field bending is required do not permit nonstainless steel bending equipment to come in direct contact with the stainless steel reinforcement .
after placement inspect the stainless steel reinforcement to ensure the no contact and tying requirements of section numd have been met .
j uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars .
in addition to the above the following requirements apply if using uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars num .
fabricate .
where bent bars are indicated provide plastic polyvinylchloride polyethylene or rubber sleeves around bending pins and contact points during the bending operation to prevent contamination .
num .
welding .
do not weld .
num .
storage handling and placement .
do not band strap or allow direct contact of uncoated corrosion resistant steel reinforcing bars to reinforcement bars or other metallic items manufactured from any dissimilar metals .
do not store uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars uncovered at the jobsite for more than num months .
if field storage on site is expected to exceed num months cover the bars or bundles with protective material .
provide ventilation to prevent condensation form forming under the covering .
do not store uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars below or in contact with reinforcement bars manufactured from any dissimilar metals unless adequate protection has been provided to prevent contamination .
provide uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars having a uniform appearance .
do not use uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars with visible surface oxidation or corrosion deposits .
do not field bend except to make minor adjustments when approved by the representative .
when field bending is required do not permit uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement to come in direct contact with bending equipment manufactured form any other dissimilar metals .
after placement inspect the uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement to ensure the no contact and tying requirements of section numd have been met .
num measurement and payment a reinforcement bars .
pound or lump sum as indicated for the type specified .
galvanized coating weight is incidental to the weight of the reinforcement bar .
annealed iron wire chairs ties spacers and sheathing are incidental to the weight of the reinforcement bar .
b mechanical splice system .
each or lump sum as indicated for the type specified .
painting the uncoated threads andor repairing the epoxy coating of the splice area after assembly is incidental if epoxycoated reinforcement bars and mechanical splice systems are used .
num num num num initial edition section numdowel holes num descriptionthis work is the drilling of holes for dowels and the grouting of the dowels in place .
num material nonshrink groutsection nume num constructiondrill holes for dowels at the locations and to the diameter and depth as indicated .
grout the dowels in place using nonshrink grout to form a complete bond between the dowels and the concrete .
repair structure damage caused by dowel operations .
num measurement and paymenteach num numq num initial edition section numpiles num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and the driving of new not previously used test piles test load piles and bearing piles .
the following definitions apply a test pile .
a pile driven to verify the pile hammers capability to determine driving characteristics and to establish the predetermined pile tip elevation before driving test load piles or bearing piles .
b test load pile .
a pile in a pile load test also referred to as a load test pile .
c static pile load test .
a test to determine pile bearing capacity and integrity by the application of a static load .
d dynamic pile load test .
a test to determine pile bearing capacity and integrity by the application of a dynamic load and measuring the force and velocity response via instrumentation of the pile with accelerometers and strain gauges and may include case pile wave analysis program capwap results .
e bearing pile .
a pile driven for the purpose of providing structure support .
f point bearing pile .
a pile that develops bearing capacity primarily by pointbearing on bedrock .
g end bearing pile .
a pile that develops bearing capacity primarily by embedment of the lower portion in a dense or hardbearing stratum .
h friction pile .
a pile that develops bearing capacity primarily from friction with the surrounding soil throughout the pile length .
i penetration .
the length of pile driven into a soil or rock stratum .
j driving resistance .
the resistance of soil or rock strata to pile driving in blows per length of penetration .
k penetration rate .
the rate at which driving advances a pile into a soil or rock stratum in inches per blow .
penetration rate is the reciprocal of the driving resistance .
l estimated pile tip elevation .
the estimated elevation of the pile tip as indicated .
m predetermined pile tip elevation .
the tip elevation determined by the structure control engineer from the pile load test or test piles .
the predetermined pile tip elevation locates the intended bearing strata for point bearing or end bearing piles or establishes the length of friction piles .
predetermined pile tip elevations are used to verify or adjust the estimated pile tip elevations indicated .
n impending damage .
a driving stress above which rupture or excessive deformation of the pile occurs .
the point of impending damage is given as a percentage of the yield point of the material in the pile .
for timber piles impending damage is defined as a driving stress of num of the crushing strength of the timber material as estimated from a waveequation analysis .
o maximum permissible driving resistance for timber piles .
the driving resistance in blows per num inch at which num times the nominal pile capacity predicted by the wave equation analysis is equal to the factored critical load as indicated .
p wave equation .
an equation developed from wave propagation theory used to evaluate the integrity and the bearing capacity of piles by simulating motions and forces in a pile when driven by a hammer .
q pile driving analyzer .
a portable computer used to determine pile bearing capacity and integrity through numq numb num initial edition dynamic testing .
num material a timber piles .
astm d num certify as specified in section numbnum .
provide timber piles of either southern pine douglas fir or western larch cut from live sound and solid trees free from reverse bends and large unsound knots .
timber piles are to be cleanpeeled and pressuretreated .
pressure treat according to aashto m num pressure process .
use preservatives of either creosote oil or creosote coaltar solution .
retain a minimum preservative amount of num pounds per cubic foot of wood if treated by the empty cell process .
furnish an affidavit giving treatment details obtained from the treating company .
use timber piles with minimum numinch thick sapwood at the butt end and at least num inch of clean wood between any two inner bark strips .
do not use timber piles with a defect or combination of defects that will impair the strength of timber piles more than the largest knot .
measure the timber pile circumference or diameter under the bark and limit the maximum and minimum measurements as follows table a maximum and minimum timber pile measurements length feet num feet from butt inches tip inches minimum maximum minimum circum .
dia .
circum .
dia .
circum .
dia .
under num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num over num to num num num num num num num over num to num num num num num num num provide timber piles with acceptable metal points firmly attached to the piles in full contact with the pile tips .
b castinplace concrete piles .
these piles consist of steel shells equipped with steel end closures or other acceptable designs reinforced as indicated then filled with class a cement concrete after driving .
num .
steel shells .
provide the type and size shells as indicated and as follows of watertight construction .
cylindrical uniformly tapered steptapered or a combination of the shapes .
having a nominal diameter not less than num inches for cylindrical shells and not less than num inches for the butt end of uniformly tapered shells .
having a tip diameter of not less than num inches for uniformly tapered shells .
having a diameter at any section of steptapered piles not less than the diameter of a shell of uniform taper from point to butt and having the same butt diameter .
numb numc num initial edition having plain fluted or other acceptable wall design .
submit a certified report showing the base metal chemical and physical properties used in the shells end closures and splice material .
before pile driving obtain the structure control engineers acceptance for end closure details and splicing details .
the wall thickness indicated is the minimum required to satisfy structural design requirements .
increase the thickness as necessary to withstand driving without failure .
if a minimum shell thickness is not indicated use a thickness that will withstand driving without failure .
submit a certification from the manufacturer of steel shell piles stating that the shells end closures and splice material comply with the specification requirements .
forward these certifications within num working days after shipment together with a copy of the certified report showing the chemical and physical properties of the base metal to the structure control engineer for the project file .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num.a thickwall steel shells .
provide shells having a wall thickness of num gage or thicker consisting of steel pipe astm a num grade b astm a num grade b or c astm a num grade a or b astm api numl grade b psl num or psl num xnum or xnum astm a num grade num or num or coldrolled steel tubing basic openhearth steel aise cnum or sae num with a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch .
the use of astm a num or aise cnum or sae num is not recommended when splicing will be utilized a procedure qualification record must be submitted along with a welding procedure specification in accordance with aashtoaws dnum to the structural control engineer for acceptance provide end closures of forged steel cast steel steel plate or other material as follows forged steel aisi num cast steel aashto m num grade unum or astm a num grade num or num .
for flat steel plate end closures provide plates not less than num inch thick according to aashto m num astm a num grade num .
provide end enclosures not extending more than num inch beyond the surface of the shell welded to the shell .
provide shells preferably in one piece without splices .
if splicing is necessary and allowed use extensions between the tip and butt end not less than num feet long .
at the butt ends use extensions at least num feet in length for approximately num of the shells within a footing .
at the tip ends use extensions if necessary at least num feet in length .
num.b thinwall steel shells .
provide shells having a wall thickness less than num gage consisting of steel pipe astm a num grade b astm a num grade a or b astm api numl grade b psl num xnum or xnum astm a num grade num or num or coldrolled steel tubing basic openhearth steel aise cnum or sae num with a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch .
the use of astm a num or aise cnum or sae num is not recommended when splicing will be utilized a procedure qualification record must be submitted along with a welding procedure specification in accordance with aashtoaws dnum to the structural control engineer for acceptance .
the indicated diameter is the diameter of a mandrel that can be inserted in the shell .
provide shell and end closures of basic openhearth steel aisi cnum or sae num or other accepted material .
provide shell thickness that will withstand driving without failure and will support the surrounding material after the shell has been driven but with a minimum thickness of num gage .
provide end closures extending not more than num inch beyond the shell surface .
c steel hpiles .
provide new or stocked unused piles pile sections and splice material according to aashto m num astm a num grade num or astm a num grade num .
provide cast tip reinforcement according to aashto m num astm a num grade num or astm a num grade num or num and fabricated tip reinforcement according to aashto m num astm a num grade num .
preferably provide each pile in one piece without splices .
if splicing is necessary and allowed use extensions between the tip and butt end not less than num feet long .
at butt ends use extensions at least num feet in length for approximately num of the piles in a footing as required .
at the tip ends use extensions at least num feet long .
provide splices that fully develop the yield strength of the pile .
submit a certified report showing the base metal chemical and physical properties used in the piles or pile sections tip reinforcement and splice material .
before pile driving obtain the structure control engineers acceptance of tip reinforcement splice location and splicing details .
submit a certification from the manufacturer of the steel hpiles and pile tip reinforcement as specified in section numbnum .
forward these certifications within num working days after shipment together with a copy of the certified numc numa num initial edition report showing the chemical and physical properties of the base metal to the structure control engineer for the project file .
d other material .
class a cement concretesection num with highrange waterreducing hrwr admixture and a slump of num inches to num inches .
reinforcementsection num .
weldingsection numt .
num construction a equipment .
use piledriving equipment of an acceptable type weight and capacity .
use air compressors of sufficient capacity to provide num more air than shown in the manufacturers specifications for airdriven hammers .
acceptance of the pile hammer and driving equipment will not relieve the contractors responsibility for properly driving piles in satisfactory condition to the driving resistance and tip elevations indicated or directed .
do not use capblocks or cushions containing asbestos .
num .
hammers .
use either dropsteam air diesel or hydraulic actuated piledriving hammers .
use hammers capable of developing at least num footpounds per blow for timber piles and not less than num footpounds per blow for other types of piles unless otherwise allowed .
equip closedend diesel hammers with a dial gage for measuring pressure in the bounce chamber .
provide a hose for the gage long enough to enable reading at ground level .
calibrate the dial gage to allow for losses in the gage hose .
verify the accuracy of the calibrated dial gage to allow for losses in the gage hose .
verify the accuracy of the calibrated dial gage both during driving of the test piles and when directed during driving of the bearing piles .
ensure that cylinder lift occurs when the bounce chamber pressure is consistent with the maximum energy given in the hammer specifications .
do not use closedend diesel hammers that do not attain cylinder lift at the maximum energy bounce chamber relationship given in the hammer specifications .
equip hammers with a suitable drive head or anvil that accurately and securely holds the top of the pile in correct position with reference to the hammer and that distributes the blows from the ram over the entire top area of the pile or mandrel .
within reasonable limits use the optimum type and size of hammer for the indicated pile and subsurface conditions at the structure site .
the structure control engineer will verify the capability of the hammer to properly drive the piles from driving records of test piles at each substructure unit at locations indicated or directed .
if information from indicated soundings dug test pits and auger or test borings is used to analyze subsurface conditions refer to section num for conditions pertaining to use of this information .
use a hammer of a type and size that enables piles to be driven to any driving resistance without pile damage due to driving stresses .
an estimate of the point of impending damage due to driving stresses in piles will be made from a wave equation analysis for the hammer drive head size type of capblock cushion material and length of pile in the leads to be used or by observations during the testpile driving operation .
the point of impending damage in steel piles or shells is defined as a driving stress of num of the yield point of the pile material as estimated from a waveequation analysis or a lesser value if the strength of the pile or shell is governed by the strength of the splice .
the structure control engineer will reject hammers that cause damage in steel piles at any driving resistance .
acceptance of a hammer relative to driving stress damage will not relieve the contractors responsibility for piles damaged because of misalignment of the leads failure of capblock or cushion material failure of splices malfunctioning of the hammer or other improper construction methods .
the structure control engineer will reject piles damaged for these reasons if it is determined that the damage impairs the strength of the completed pile installation .
at least num calendar days before driving test piles submit the hammers operating specifications and pile information for review and acceptance on the pile hammer data form csnum .
measure inlet pressures for doubleacting and differentialacting air or steam hammers using a needle gage numa numb num initial edition at the head of the hammer when driving test piles and if directed when driving bearing piles .
as an alternative to periodic measurements with a needle gage develop a pressure versus speed calibration for the driving conditions at the site .
if a hammer is used for timber piles for which the maximum permissible driving resistance mpdr is less than num blows per num inch do not drive piles beyond mpdr if piles do not reach bedrock .
although point bearing is discouraged if piles are required to reach bedrock or into very dense stratum for capacity do not use a hammer with mpdr less than num blows per num inch .
size the hammer so that mpdr is approximately num blows per num inch .
num .
leads .
construct pile driver leads to allow free movement of the hammer .
hold the leads in true vertical or inclined positions as required by guys or stiff braces to ensure support of the pile during driving .
provide leads of sufficient length so a follower will not be necessary under normal conditions .
with the structure control engineers approval drive bearing piles around cofferdams or in areas where headroom is limited without leads .
b piles .
num .
general .
do not drive piles until the excavation is complete in the areas the piles are to occupy unless otherwise allowed by the structure control engineer .
do not drive piles within num feet of uncured concrete .
use test piles and bearing piles of the types or sizes indicated .
the department may omit any or all test or bearing piles .
furnish each timber pile steel shell for castinplace concrete piles or steel beam pile of the full length indicated and in one continuous unit unless otherwise allowed by the structure control engineer .
if a pile is too short for the intended purposes extend it to the length directed as specified in section nume .
num .
driving test piles .
unless otherwise indicated drive test piles in one continuous operation except for splicing so that they can be incorporated into the permanent work .
drive piles to absolute refusal for point and end bearing piles and end of driving criteria for friction piles unless otherwise indicated or directed .
if test piles extend above ground for the open bent abutment on mechanically stabilized earth wall or integral abutment construction drive each pile with butt within num inches of the location indicated .
num .
driving bearing piles .
do not drive bearing piles until the structure control engineer has established the predetermined pile tip elevation and driving resistance from representative test piles or pile load tests .
drive piles plumb or to the batter indicated .
drive piles to absolute refusal for point and end bearing piles and end of driving criteria for friction piles or to the predetermined pile tip elevation and to the driving resistance established from test piles or pile load tests .
unless otherwise indicated the predetermined pile tip elevation is considered approximate in order to allow for variations in the locations or strength of the stratum from which the pile obtains its primary capacity .
the limit of the approximation is established from pile load tests or test piles .
drive bearing piles for a given structure bridge or foundation unit with the same hammer under the same operating conditions and with the same type and size of capblock and cushion material used to drive the test piles or load test piles .
redrive piles raised by the driving of adjacent piles to the required driving resistance and tip elevation .
the structure control engineer will reject driven piles with a deviation of more than num inches in num feet from vertical or from the batter indicated .
do not drive the piles with their tops more than num inches out of the indicated position after driving .
if piles extend above ground for open bent construction abutment on mechanically stabilized earth wall construction or integral abutment construction drive each pile with the butt within num inches of the location indicated and the longitudinal axis of the pile within numo of the orientation indicated for the length of the pile .
in fulldepth footings enclose piles that are driven closer to the edges of footings than indicated .
extend far enough to obtain the indicated encasement .
add additional reinforcement as directed .
num .
absolute refusal and end of driving criteria .
num.a absolute refusal .
for steel point bearing and end bearing piles absolute refusal is reached when the driving resistance attains an average of num blows per num inch or more .
the total number of blows required to calculate the average driving resistance specified for absolute refusal is determined from test pile driving results .
minimum blow requirements are as follows case num .
piles required to be driven to absolute refusal into sound well defined bedrock numb numb num initial edition point bearing piles .
after the pile tip reaches the predetermined elevation of the intended bearing stratum and after penetration becomes num inch or less for five consecutive blows absolute refusal is reached if the penetration for five additional blows is less than num inch .
case num .
piles required to be driven to absolute refusal into soft or decomposed bedrock or dense or hard soil strata endbearing piles .
after the pile tip reaches the predetermined elevation of the intended bearing stratum and after the penetration becomes num inch or less for ten consecutive blows absolute refusal is reached if the penetration for ten additional blows is num inch or less .
after the pile tip enters the intended bearing stratum if an unreasonably large number of blows is required to increase the driving resistance from num blows per num inch to num blows per num inch the structure control engineer may waive the requirement for driving to absolute refusal .
case num .
piles which attain absolute refusal above predetermined pile tip elevations .
if hard driving is encountered because of dense strata or because of obstructions located above the bearing stratum identified by a predetermined pile tip elevation absolute refusal is not reached until the structure control engineer determines that the total number of blows as the average driving resistance specified for absolute refusal indicates that further driving will not advance the pile through the dense strata or obstructions .
the structure control engineer will determine the acceptability of bearing piles that do not achieve absolute refusal and capacity at the predetermined pile tip elevation for piles intended to bear in soft or decomposed bedrock .
if bearing piles are determined unacceptable continue driving piles to ensure absolute refusal is obtained in accordance with case num absolute refusal .
the structure control engineer will contact the bdtd if the continued driving exceeds the criteria provided in the pile hammer approval letter .
the structure control engineer will determine the acceptability of bearing piles that attain absolute refusal above the predetermined pile tip elevation .
if bearing piles are determined unacceptable drive additional piles at locations directed .
if the additional piles also fail to reach the predetermined pile tip elevation and if directed drive additional test piles to determine whether the predetermined pile tip elevation may have to be adjusted .
perform test borings and pile load tests if directed .
if the predetermined pile tip elevation can not be adjusted and if directed change the type and size of pile .
perform augering predrilling spudding preexcavation or jetting if directed .
if bearing piles attain absolute refusal above the predetermined pile tip elevation due to freezing resulting from discontinuous driving the structure control engineer will reject the piles .
num.b end of driving criteria .
for steel friction piles end of driving criteria is reached when the required resistance is attained and the pile tip reaches the predetermined elevation of the intended bearing stratum .
determine the required resistance based on the plan factored axial resistance and confirm pile capacity by dynamic load testing .
a pile driving analyzer is to be used to confirm that the end of driving criteria i.e .
hammer stroke required resistance pile tip elevation pile stress and blow count have been attained .
if friction piles reach the required resistance above the predetermined pile tip elevation due to freezing resulting from discontinuous driving the structure control engineer will reject the piles .
if friction test piles do not reach the required resistance at the predetermined pile tip elevation or after redrive if redrive is specified splice a numfoot extension and continue driving until the required resistance is attained .
the structure control engineer will set the revised pile tip elevations based on the test pile results .
if the required resistance is still not attained after the additional num feet of driving depth the structure control engineer is to contact bdtd to review geotechnical information and recommend further actions .
num .
castinplace piles .
as indicated or directed for castinplace concrete piles securely weld end closures to the shells of test and bearing piles .
thoroughly clean driven shells of water and debris and obtain the structure control engineers acceptance before placing concrete in them .
use special care in filling the shells to avoid honeycombs and air pockets in the concrete .
num .
timber piles .
avoid injury to timber piles during storage and handling .
protect timber pile butts with metal bands collars or other devices to prevent splitting excessive brooming or other damage to the pile .
do not break the surface of treated timber piles and do not use canthooks dogs or pikepoles .
numb numd num initial edition apply three brush coats of hot creosote oil to all bolt holes cuts daps or chamfers of timber piles made subsequent to the treatment as well as abrasions of the surface before driving and to tops of timber piles after cutoffs for impregnation treatment .
furnish timber piles with sufficient length including the complete removal of material damaged by driving .
drive timber piles to a maximum bearing value of num tons as determined by the wave equation .
num .
jetting piles .
jet piles if directed .
do not jet through embankment areas .
use enough jets and enough volume and pressure of water at the jet nozzles to erode the material adjacent to and below the pile joint .
withdraw jets before the predetermined pile tip elevation is reached .
num .
driving piles through embankments .
drive piles through embankments until they penetrate approximately num feet into original ground unless absolute refusal is obtained in bedrock or in a dense or hard soil stratum less than num feet below original ground .
as indicated or directed spud auger or predrill through the embankment material to the original ground .
num .
splicing piles .
for timber test piles use the lengths indicated .
if indicated lengths are insufficient extend by splicing as required .
do not use timber pile sections less than num feet long .
splice or extend steel piles during the driving operation with the structure control engineers approval .
inspect driven steel shells using a safe light attached to a cord long enough to reach the entire pile length .
make thinwall shell splices and endclosure connections with full perimeter welds or with other acceptable methods that keep the shells watertight after being driven .
splice thickwall steel shells by welding using full penetration butt welds and acceptable backing bars using acceptable sleeves with full perimeter fillet welds or using another accepted design .
provide splices developing the yield strength of the shell based on the indicated shell thickness .
if the shell thickness exceeds the required indicated thickness base the splice strength on the indicated shell thickness unless a stronger splice is needed to resist driving forces .
num .
damaged piles .
remove piles showing damage due to improper driving if the damage would impair the strength of the completed pile and if the pile can not be rebuilt or extended .
backfill the resulting hole if it interferes with other construction .
drive another pile as close as possible to the required location within the indicated distance from the edges of the footing .
fill damaged steel shells left in place with concrete .
num .
pile tip reinforcement .
attach pile tip reinforcement of the necessary types and sizes to bearing piles at locations indicated .
use pile tip reinforcement for test piles and test load piles representative of the bearing piles for which tip reinforcement is indicated .
use prefabricated or cast steel tips as an alternate to the indicated tip reinforcement .
submit details including method of attaching for acceptance .
heavy duty pile tips have an area of at least num times the pile area and steel prongs to penetrate rock .
c cutting off piles .
after piles have been driven and accepted cut them off at the indicated top elevations perpendicular to their axis unless otherwise directed .
cut off timber piles that support timber caps or grillage to conform to the plane of the bottom of the superimposed structure .
d filling shells with concrete .
num .
filling thickwall steel shells .
fill shells with class a cement concrete .
as indicated place reinforcement as specified in section numb .
place and cure the concrete as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
drop the concrete into the shells slowly without forming air pockets .
discharge concrete through hoppers with a short pipe centered on the shell for piles without rebarcages .
do not allow concrete to freefall within the length of the rebarcage .
vibrate concrete within the rebar cage .
num .
filling thinwall steel shells .
as specified in section numdnum and as follows use reinforced concrete for shells num feet in length or shorter for the full length .
reinforce concrete for shells longer than num feet to num feet below the cut off elevation or as indicated .
unless otherwise indicated the minimum vertical reinforcement required is six no .
num reinforcing bars or their equivalent spaced uniformly and numd num num initial edition parallel to the perimeter of the shell with a numinch concrete covering measured from the shell interior surface to the face of reinforcement .
enclose the vertical steel bars with num inch round hoops .
space the hoops on centers num foot or less for a length of num feet at each end of the reinforcement and on centers num feet or less for the intervening portion .
use equivalent spiral reinforcement in place of hoops .
e rebuilding or extending piles .
rebuild or extend by splicing piles driven below the indicated top of pile elevations or piles cut off after being driven if the structure control engineer approves .
however do not splice pile reinforcement unless allowed in writing by the district executive .
splice rebuild or extend timber piles using suitable timber as indicated or as accepted .
rebuild or extend by splicing thickwall shells for castinplace concrete piles and steelbeam piles if both of the following conditions exist the method to be used has been accepted in writing by the district executive .
the lengths of sections are as specified in section num .
splice thinwall shells for castinplace piles at any point if the alignment of the shell is maintained .
however do not splice reinforcement unless allowed in writing by the district executive .
while piles extend above ground for open bent construction do not rebuild or splice between the cutoff elevation and a point num feet into satisfactory material unless otherwise directed .
f pile load tests .
if pile load tests are required the proposal will specify the detailed requirements .
g bearing value of piles .
if piles are not required to be driven to absolute refusal for point and end bearing piles or end of driving criteria for friction piles the structure control engineer will determine driving resistances tip elevations and safe bearing values from pile load tests pile driving analyzer tests or wave equation analysis of the test piledriving results .
num .
static pile load test the product of a resistance factor of num times the pile load test result is greater than or equal to the plan factored axial resistance as indicated .
num .
pile driving analyzer the product of a resistance factor of num times the ultimate pile capacity as established by pile driving analyzer or capwap analysis is greater than or equal to the plan factored axial resistance as indicated .
num .
wave equation the product of a resistance factor of num times the wave equation predicted ultimate pile capacity result is greater than or equal of the plan factored axial resistance as indicated .
for predicting pile capacity using wave equation and pile driving analyzer a maximum permissible driving stress of num of the steel yield should be used .
h pile log .
a detailed and accurate record will be kept during the driving of piles showing the pile numbers types sizes actual lengths before driving sound lengths after driving driving dates lengths in footings penetration rates model of the hammer capblock material capblock inspection dates rebuilt lengths extended lengths and final pay lengths .
i welding .
weld splices pile tip reinforcement or metal endclosures as specified in section numm for the type and position of the welding required .
num measurement and paymentthe department will not pay for unauthorized piles defective piles unsatisfactorily driven piles portions of bearing piles cut off bearing piles not driven or for any costs for such piles or portions of piles .
the following work will be considered extra work under section num unless payment for such work is otherwise provided for in the contract in which event the work will not be considered extra work and will be paid for as otherwise provided in the contract augering predrilling spudding preexcavation jetting below the original ground extracting num numd num initial edition satisfactorily driven piles and test borings related to such work when such work is directed to advance the piles to predetermined pile tip elevations .
when piles installed for integral abutments or abutments on mechanically stabilized walls are damaged by twisting as a result of conditions identified as differing site conditions pursuant to section numb the extraction of such damaged piles predrilling for the driving of piles replacing such damaged piles and the driving of piles replacing such damaged piles the cost of spudding augering or drilling to original ground through embankments placed within this contract is incidental for test piles and bearing piles unless payment for such work is provided in the contract .
the department will not pay for the extraction and replacement of damaged piles .
a test piles .
lump sum the department will pay for test piles at the contract lump sum price per unit or group of units including necessary cutting off splicing and rebuilding to the indicated test pile length .
the price includes necessary excavation for pile splicing rebuilding and extending all pile driving equipment furnished on the project costs of transporting the equipment to the project erecting maintaining and moving the equipment within the project and dismantling and removing the equipment from the project and pile tip reinforcement .
additional test piles and extensions in excess of the indicated number and location and the length of extensions added or placed in the leads to make the piles longer than the indicated test pile lengths will be measured and paid for by the linear foot price of bearing piles .
the length will be measured from the driven end or the beginning of the splice to the top of the pile or cutoff elevation for the corresponding type of bearing pile .
for any test piles specified in the proposal but not required to be placed adjustment of payment will be made as specified in section num .
cutoff portions of test piles will remain the property of the contractor .
costs associated with the use of proximity switches for the monitoring of piles as specified will be incidental to the price bid for test piles .
b bearing piles .
linear foot measured from the pile driven end to the indicated cutoff elevation .
if piles are ordered driven to an elevation other than that indicated measurement will be made from the new pile driven end to the cutoff elevation indicated or directed .
this will not include any portion of the tip reinforcement that extends below the driven end of the pile if tip reinforcement is paid for separately .
the unit price includes costs of furnishing and driving cutting off splicing rebuilding or extending and excavating necessary for splicing and rebuilding or extending .
a bearing pile that is in satisfactory condition after being driven and that meets specifications except for bearing capacity andor stability or because absolute refusal for point and end bearing piles or end of driving criteria for friction piles was attained above a predetermined pile tip elevation will be considered acceptable for payment .
if acceptable piles have to be replaced with another type of construction and are removed or cut off the length below the cut off elevation or the bottom of the other construction is the length for which payment will be made .
piles that reach absolute refusal for point and end bearing piles or end of driving criteria for friction piles above a predetermined pile tip elevation due to freezing resulting from discontinuous driving are unsatisfactorily driven piles and the department will not pay for these piles .
if either augering predrilling spudding preexcavation or jetting is directed because of these unsatisfactory piles the additional work is to be done at no expense to the department .
the department will not deduct the volume of concrete displaced by piles from the foundation concrete quantities .
costs associated with the use of proximity switches for the monitoring of piles as specified will be incidental to the price bid for bearing piles .
c end closures for shells and points for timber piles .
metal end closures for shells for castinplace bearing piles and metal points for timber bearing piles will be included in the contract unit price per linear foot for the pile of which it is a part .
the department will not pay separate or additional compensation .
end closures and points for test piles and test load piles will be included in the contract lump sum prices for those items .
d bearing pile tip reinforcement .
each num num num num initial edition section numdrilled caissons num descriptionthis work is construction of reinforced cement concrete drilled caisson foundations consisting of shaft sections with or without casings left in place and with or without rock sockets or belled footings all formed within drilled excavations .
the following definitions apply a end bearing drilled caisson .
castinplace foundation element consisting of shaft section with or without enlarged bearing area at its base a minimum of num inches in diameter and deriving the majority of its compression load capacity through load transfer to the shaft base .
b bell footing .
enlargement at base of shaft .
c bearing strata .
layers of soil or rock providing principal support at base of shaft .
d rock stratum .
a stratum of geomaterial having an unconfined compressive strength equal to or greater than num pounds per square inch that can not be drilled with conventional earth augers or underreaming tools thus requiring the use of special rock augers core barrels air tools blasting or hand excavation .
e shaft section in soil .
length of caisson shaft from top of shaft to top of rock stratum .
f shaft section in rock .
length of caisson shaft from top of rock stratum to top of rock socket .
g rock socket .
length of caisson in rock stratum below the shaft providing a fixed connection between the caisson and the rock stratum .
h permanent casing .
steel pipe typically of cylindrical shape installed by drilling driving or vibrating that when filled with concrete becomes a permanent part of the drilled caisson .
i temporary casing .
protective steel pipe typically of cylindrical shape installed by drilling driving or vibrating that provides lateral earth support during shaft excavation cleaning and inspection controls groundwater infiltration and is removed as part of the concrete placement operation .
j obstruction .
a natural or manmade object above designated rock socket elevation that can not be drilled with conventional earth augers or underreaming tools and that requires the use of special rock augers core barrels air tools blasting or hand excavation .
num material a casing .
smooth clean rustfree metal casing of sufficient strength to withstand handling and installation stresses and the pressure of concrete water and the surrounding earth and to prevent water seepage .
b class a cement concrete .
section num with highrange waterreducing hrwr admixture and a slump of num inches to num inches .
c reinforcement bars .
section num .
use deformed bars .
d bentonite slurry .
a mixture of fully hydrated bentonite and clean fresh water of adequate unit weight .
submit manufacturers specifications type and properties of the slurry to the representative for approval .
e welding material .
section numt num construction numa nume num num initial edition a excavation .
excavate to the dimensions and elevations indicated or as directed .
unless otherwise indicated bore excavations for vertical caissons plumb to within a tolerance equal to num of the shaft length and for battered caissons as indicated to within a tolerance equal to num of the shaft length but not more than num foot .
if holes are more than num inches out of plumb redesign the footing that is to be supported by the caissons .
if caissons are out of tolerance make needed corrections to the structure at no additional expense to the department .
do not place the top of a caisson out of the indicated position by more than num of the shaft diameter or num inches whichever is less .
if belled footings are required excavate to form a bearing area of the size and shape indicated .
the contractor may blast if allowed by the representative .
submit blasting plan to the representative for review and acceptance at least num weeks before the start of blasting operations .
do not disturb formations below or outside the limits of the caisson under construction or any previously constructed caissons adjacent to the excavation .
do not excavate within three diameters of caissons with new concrete until num hours after concrete placement .
if satisfactory foundation materials are encountered at other than the indicated elevations adjust drilling depths as directed .
if a caving condition or excess groundwater is encountered discontinue the drilling operation and employ a construction method that prevents caving and groundwater infiltration such as the installation of casings .
as an alternate the contractor may drill in a bentonite slurry with removal of cuttings or dewatering or other construction methods that control the size of the excavation provided the contractor can demonstrate the ability to perform such work to the satisfaction of the representative .
remove as directed caked material from the sidewalls and loose cuttings from the bottom of the excavation so that such material will not cause unanticipated settlement reduce caisson capacity or affect concrete strength .
if bentonite slurry is used to support the caisson excavation provide slurry mix design for review and acceptance before caisson construction .
as a minimum provide mix design criteria for density viscosity shear strength and ph and procedures for mixing qc maintaining level in excavation cleaning reuse and disposal .
provide casing through soil and broken or unstable rock at all times during hand cleaning and inspection of the excavation .
if joining two or more sections of casing to obtain the required length weld sections together as specified in section numm to develop the full tensile strength of each section .
b test holes .
for caissons founded on rock drill standard nw nx size core borings at each caisson location to a minimum depth of num feet below the bottom of the excavation caisson or rock socket unless otherwise directed .
drill log store and ship the samples according to the departments standard specification for subsurface boring sampling and testing publication num .
the samples will be used to determine whether there is material of sufficient strength and thickness to support the required load and for proper founding of caissons .
c probe holes .
drill numinch diameter unsampled holes at the specified locations to the specified depth below the bottom of the excavation caisson or rock socket or as directed .
the representative will use the rate of drilling of the holes to determine whether there is satisfactory material or rock of sufficient thickness and type to support the required load and to locate the presence of open joints voids soft rock or other deleterious material that may be inadequate for support of the required load .
d exploratory drilling .
before drilling caissons drill a numinch diameter unsampled hole at each caisson location as indicated or directed .
drill the exploratory holes from existing grade to the top of the rock stratum .
the exploratory drilling will be used to establish the presence of obstructions within the soil shaft of the caisson .
e inspection .
do not place concrete until the foundation excavation has been inspected and accepted .
if access to the bottom of the excavation for visual inspection can not be provided because of inability to dewater the excavation using acceptable pumping methods provide drilling logs and core samples or other acceptable data for determining the condition of the excavation and the quality of the foundation material .
as a minimum inspect each shaft that can not be dewatered with an underwater video camera .
follow safety practices as specified in section num and include as a minimum the following items specifically required for inspection of drilled caisson excavations cover open excavations immediately upon completion or if work is discontinued for any period of time with a cover capable of preventing persons from falling into or entering the excavation without proper authorization .
secure the cover by approved methods .
nume numh num num initial edition provide casing through soil cavities and broken or unstable rock for inspection of the excavation .
f reinforcement .
section num and as follows do not place reinforcement bars until all loose material has been removed from the bottom of the excavation and immediately before the start of concreting operations .
support reinforcement a minimum of num inches above bearing level and from the sides using precast concrete spacer blocks or other approved spacer devices and secure it in position so that the required concrete cover is maintained throughout concrete placement .
vibration of the concrete is required unless the clear distance between bars is more than three times the bar diameter or three times the maximum aggregate size .
unless otherwise indicated or specified place no .
num deformed bars vertically around the circumference at a numinch spacing and no .
num bars as tie bars on numinch centers .
furnish bars with hooks meeting seismic requirements .
g dewatering .
unless otherwise specified dewater all excavations before placing concrete .
a drilled caisson excavation is considered dry if less than num inches of groundwater is present in the bottom of the excavation at the start of concrete placement and the groundwater infiltration rate is less than num inch rise per minute .
remove water that has accumulated in the excavation after final inspection and before concrete placement using approved methods .
h concrete placement .
submit the method of concrete placement including details on equipment rate of placement concrete head etc .
to the representative for review and acceptance three weeks before anticipated first placement .
do not start concrete placement without written acceptance .
mix place vibrate and cure concrete as specified in section num .
place concrete within num hours of the completion of excavation and within three hours of final inspection .
keep the excavation free from accumulated seepage water and loose material until concrete is placed .
place the concrete for each caisson in one continuous operation .
thoroughly work and vibrate the upper num feet of concrete .
if the representative determines that water seepage will be detrimental to the quality of the caisson or hinder proper placement of concrete by the free fall method fill the excavation to the surrounding groundwater level with clean fresh water and place concrete to the cutoff elevation by the tremie method as specified in section numknum.c in one continuous operation .
provide documentation to satisfactorily demonstrate experience in the use of tremie or pumping procedures for placement of concrete for drilled caissons and submit details of the placement method for review and acceptance .
do not allow concrete to come in contact with aluminum during placement .
num .
placement by free fall method .
place concrete by free fall only in dry clean unobstructed excavations that are at least num inches in diameter .
provide a hopper and a section of rigid pipe not less than num feet long and num inches in diameter to direct concrete fall and avoid impact with reinforcement on the sides of the excavation .
unless otherwise directed limit depth of free fall to num feet .
num .
placement by tremie method .
place concrete using a rigid watertight ferrous metal tremie pipe as specified in section numknum.c .
begin placement with the tremie pipe discharge within num inches off of the bottom of the excavation .
maintain a concrete head of at least num feet above the discharge at all times .
num .
placement by pumping method .
pump only if concrete placement can not be done by other means .
place concrete by pumping as specified in section numknum through a flexible ferrous metal rubber or plastic pipe with a minimum diameter of num inches .
do not allow the concrete to segregate during pumping .
if directed pump num cubic foot of concrete into a container so that the inspector may verify that the concrete is not segregating during the pumping operation .
begin pumping with the pipe discharge positioned not more than num inches off of the bottom of the excavation .
maintain a concrete head of not less than num feet above the discharge at all times .
keep the pump hopper continuously filled with concrete to prevent entrapment of air in the discharge .
num .
placement within casing .
use the free fall or tremie method to place concrete in dewatered excavations supported by casing .
pump concrete within casing only if placement can not be done by other means .
use the tremie method to place concrete under water in casing supported excavations .
if the top of shaft elevation is below ground level at the time of concrete placement provide an oversized casing from ground elevation to a point below the top of shaft to prevent extraneous material from falling into fresh concrete during and after placement .
keep the oversized casing in place until concrete has cured at least num hours .
for permanently cased drilled caissons that carry lateral loads grout the area between casing and excavation to provide adequate bearing .
numh numj num num initial edition num .
placement under bentonite slurry .
use the tremie method to place concrete in excavations supported with bentonite slurry .
pump concrete under bentonite slurry only if placement can not be done by other means .
displace slurry with concrete beginning at the bottom of the excavation and proceeding upward forcing the slurry out of and away from the top of the excavation .
i casing removal .
if temporary casing is used withdraw each section except the final section in partial stages as concrete is deposited at a rate that keeps the bottom of the casing below the top of the fresh concrete .
during removal ensure that there is no reduction in shaft crosssection and that displacement of steel reinforcement is less than num inches upward and less than num inches downward per num feet of shaft length .
maintain the specified numinch reinforcement bar clearance at bearing level and on the sides during casing removal .
if observations indicate otherwise reduce the rate of casing removal and establish a head of concrete within the casing sufficient to offset the forces tending to cause concrete arching or displacement of the reinforcing cage .
as concrete is deposited withdraw the final section of casing to a point num feet below existing ground elevation and allow it to remain for approximately num hours depending on the temperature .
then completely withdraw the section or cut it off flush with existing ground .
if cavities or unstable materials are encountered and the danger exists of losing concrete or of the concrete becoming mixed with extraneous material cut off the casing at the top of shaft elevation and leave in place .
j records .
prepare and submit detailed inspection reports for each shaft and include the following information accurate location and dimensions of the excavation .
accurate top and bottom elevations .
measurement data for plumbness .
methods of excavation used .
description of materials encountered during excavation .
description of groundwater conditions encountered .
description of obstructions encountered and whether or not obstruction removal was achieved .
description of temporary or permanent casing placed including purpose length and wall thickness and anchorage or sealing methods used if any .
measurements of slurry quality including as a minimum density viscosity shear strength and ph .
elevation at which bearing material was encountered .
description of bearing material .
probe holes made along with method of probing rate of drilling in rock samples taken tests made and conclusions reached with regard to adequacy of bearing material .
shaft bell footing and rock socket measurements .
description of cleanout methods and adequacy of initial cleanout and final cleanout just before concrete placement .
record of depth of water in excavation and rate of water infiltration before concrete placement .
record of reinforcing steel inspection for position and adequacy .
method of concrete placement and casing removal if any .
record of concrete head during numj nume num num initial edition removal of casing .
record of concrete elevation when vibration started .
difficulties encountered including soil inclusion voids shaft squeezein and casing collapse .
concreting curves showing actual versus theoretical volume of concrete required to fill caisson excavation .
condition of concrete delivered to site including record of slump density air content and other tests .
record of cylinders made for compression testing .
any deviations from the specifications .
k qualifications .
construct the caissons with a supervisor and workforce experienced in the construction of drilled caissons and meeting the following qualifications submit a list containing at least five projects that together demonstrate a minimum of three years experience in the construction of drilled caissons including the proposed method of concrete placement .
include a brief description of each project and the name and telephone number of owners representative knowledgeable in each project listed .
furnish the name of a professional engineer registered in the state with at least num years of experience in the design and construction of drilled caissons who is to direct the work .
furnish the names of drill operators and onsite supervisors under the direction of the professional engineer .
each drill operator and onsite supervisor must have at least num year of experience in the construction of drilled caissons .
do not use only the company names of consultants or manufacturers to meet the requirements of this section use the names of the personnel .
submit documentation of staff qualifications to the representative and allow at least num calendar days for approval .
num measurement and payment a drilled caissons shaft section .
num .
shaft section in soil .
linear foot measured from the shaft top to the top of rock .
num .
shaft section in rock .
linear foot measured from the top of rock to the shaft bottom .
b drilled caissons bell footing .
each c drilled caissons rock socket .
linear foot measured from the shaft bottom to the socket bottom .
for uneven rock surfaces measure length of rock excavation from the rock surface at shallowest depth to the socket bottom .
d permanent casing for drilled caissons .
linear foot the department will measure and pay for temporary casing left in place as specified in section numi as permanent casing .
e test holes .
linear foot nume numh num num initial edition augering through overburden from existing ground surface to the elevation at which nw nx core boring is to begin bottom of caisson or rock socket excavation as specified in section numb is incidental to this work .
f probe holes .
linear foot g exploratory drilling .
linear foot h obstructions .
linear foot the unit price includes mobilization of drilling equipment .
num num num num initial edition section numpreformed neoprene compression joint seal for bridges num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of preformed neoprene compression seals for bridge joints .
num material a seal and lubricant adhesive .
section numd and from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
notify the district executive as to the brand of seal to be furnished .
do not change the brand except with written permission from the district executive .
b premolded expansion joint filler .
section num c foam joint fillers .
section nume or f except that the dimensions specified in section numf do not apply .
num construction a general .
construct the joint as indicated by forming or sawing .
b basic joint .
place two strips of foam joint filler in the joint with one strip placed tightly on top of the other .
provide a depth of the upper strip equal to the depth of the seal plus num inch .
after the joint is sawed remove this upper strip of foam with the broken concrete .
c seal groove .
the opening into which the seal is to be installed is the seal groove .
the width of the seal groove is equal to the basic joint width plus the two seal seating ledge widths .
make joints true to alignment num inch with their faces vertical and uniform in width throughout their length .
num .
deck slab .
if a sawed joint is used saw as soon as practical the seal groove in the deck slab using a doublebladed selfpropelled concrete saw to the width and depth indicated .
begin the sawcut at the centerline of the bridge and proceed beyond the gutter line in one operation .
use a saw speed that minimizes spalling .
after sawing remove the concrete to produce smooth even seal seating ledges .
num .
curb on sidewalk section .
form or saw cut the seal groove in the curb sidewalk and barrier section as indicated or as shown on the standard drawings .
d seal installation .
before installing the seal thoroughly clean the joint to remove foreign material including broken concrete .
keep the joint in a dry or dampdry condition .
swab the lubricant adhesive on the faces of the groove according to the material manufacturers instructions .
while the adhesive is wet install the seal according to the manufacturers instructions .
for curb and sidewalk installations the contractor may notch the seal to allow bending .
install the seal with the top surface continuous .
at walls place the top of the seal in contact with the deck joint at a uniform depth of num inch minimum to num inch maximum below the deck surface .
waterproof the intersection of the vertical and horizontal seals at the gutter line .
do not install cocked or twisted seals .
unless indicated do not make field joints in seals .
the contractor may use watertight factoryspliced bonded joints .
if necessary to stretch the seal during installation do not exceed num elongation .
if the seal is damaged during installation remove and install a new seal .
seal or cap the ends of the seal .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured outtoout along centerline of seal including horizontal vertical inclined or curved portions .
num numb num num initial edition section numpedestrian railing num descriptionthis work is the construction of a pedestrian railing .
num materialbefore fabrication submit shop drawings of the railing for review and acceptance .
a railing .
aluminumalloy castingastm b numb numm alloy sgnumatnum or astm b num alloy sgnuma tnum .
aluminumalloy boltsastm b numb numm alloy numtnum .
aluminumalloy nutsastm b numb numm alloy numtnum .
nylon washerssection numjnum bolt headsregular hexagon ansi bnumm ansi bnum .
nuts .
finished hexagon ansi bnumm ansi bnumthreads class num numg or numh threads class num numa or numb .
aluminum alloy balusters astm b numb numm alloy numtnum .
post assembly and panel to post aluminum washers astm b num alloy numtnum .
cast aluminum post base astm b numb numm alloy sgnumatnum or astm b num b numm alloy sgnumatnum .
other aluminum alloyssection numa certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
c caulking compound .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
before erection thoroughly coat the surface of aluminum alloys in contact with other metals stone masonry or concrete with caulking compound .
after erection and alignment seal openings between metal surfaces and concrete with caulking compound .
after the concreting and other operations have been completed thoroughly clean the railing .
remove accumulations of oil grease dirt or foreign materials using a solvent cleaner .
b assembly .
assemble as shown on the accepted shop drawings and the standard drawings .
make cuts true smooth and free from burrs or ragged edges .
filletdrill all reentrant cuts before cutting .
do not flame cut .
to facilitate bending the contractor may heat material to a temperature of numf for a period not exceeding num minutes .
drill rivet and bolt holes or subpunch num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the fastener then ream to size .
num num num num initial edition num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from center to center of end posts .
the department will not deduct gaps at lighting pole foundations .
num num num num initial edition section numaluminum bridge railing num descriptionthis work is the construction of an aluminum bridge railing .
num materialbefore fabrication submit shop drawings for review and acceptance .
a railing .
cast aluminum railing postsastm b num alloy anumtnum or astm b numb numm alloy sgnumatnum .
aluminumalloy extruded bars rods shapes and tubesastm b numb numm alloy numtnum or numtnum .
aluminumalloy drawn seamless tubesastm b numb nummalloy numtnum .
aluminumalloy seamless pipe and seamless extruded tubeastm b num alloy numtnum numtnum or aluminumalloy extruded structural pipe and tube astm b num alloy numtnum .
aluminumalloy sheet and plateastm b numb nummalloy numtnum num or alclad numtnum .
aluminumalloy bars rods and wireastm b numb numm alloy numtnum numtnum or numtnum .
alloy numtnum with an anodic coating of num inch minimum thickness and dechromate or boiling water seal .
aluminumalloy standard structural shapes rolled or extrudedastm b numb nummalloy numtnum toggle boltssection numa miscellaneousaluminum wedges shims end caps washers and nuts of acceptable material .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
c caulking compound .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
section numa b assembly .
section numb except at bend areas do not vary the diameter of rail tubes by more than num of the outside diameter when rail tubes are bent to the radii indicated .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from centertocenter of end posts .
the department will not deduct gaps at lighting pole foundations .
num num num num initial edition section numsteel bridge railing num descriptionthis work is the construction of a steel bridge railing .
num materialgalvanize materials as specified in section nums .
before fabrication submit shop drawings for review and acceptance .
a railing .
steel railsrails may be either pipe conforming to astm anum type e or s grade b or tubing conforming to astm anum or anum .
railing postsastm anumanumm grade num grade num or astm anum grade num .
toggle boltsan acceptable galvanized type capable of supporting a numpound load in tension when tested through a numinch round hole .
toggle bolts may be cadmiumplated to conform to the requirements of astm bnum class num in place of galvanizing .
miscellaneousmalleable iron wedges shims end caps washers and nuts of acceptable material .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
c caulking compound .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
before erection use caulking compound to thoroughly coat surfaces of posts in contact with concrete .
after erection and alignment use caulking compound to seal openings between metal surfaces and concrete .
b assembly .
remove blemishes and scratches from exposed surfaces .
for areas that have been damaged exposing base metal paint with two coats according to astm anum .
assemble the rail members to grade and the posts normal to grade .
make cuts true smooth and free from burrs or ragged edges .
filletdrill all reentrant cuts before cutting .
as indicated provide slotted holes for expansion .
the diameter of holes in the posts for anchor bolts may exceed the nominal bolt diameter up to num with a maximum measurement of num inch greater than the nominal bolt diameter .
place joints as indicated .
at bend areas do not vary the diameter of rail tubes by more than num of the outside diameter when rail tubes are bent to the radii indicated .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from centertocenter of end posts .
the department will not deduct gaps at lighting pole foundations .
num numd num num initial edition section numprotective barrier num descriptionthis work is the construction of a protective barrier on bridges over electrified railroads .
num materialbefore fabrication submit shop drawings for review and acceptance .
a barrier .
aluminumalloy extruded sectionastm b numb numm alloy numtnum or numtnum .
aluminumalloy sheet and platealloy numtnum aluminumalloy bolts astm b num alloy numtnum or numtnum aluminumalloy nutsastm b numb numm alloy numtnum .
nylon washerssection numjnum bolt headsregular hexagon .
ansi bnumm bnum nutsfinished hexagon ansi bnumm bnum thread class num numg or numh num numa or numb other aluminum alloyssection numa certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
c caulking compound .
section num d miscellaneous connection elements .
num .
used for barrier attachment at pa ht bridge barrier pa type numm bridge barrier and pa bridge barrier high strength bolts .
astm a num as specified in section numd galvanized as specified in section nums .
elastomeric pads and washers .
section numh type i fabric bushing material section numh type ii anchor bolts .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
num .
used for barrier attachment at pa ht bridge barrier and pa type numm bridge barrier .
galvanized plate channel assembly cnum x num num inch fill plate and num inch x num inch x num foot num inches connection plate .
astm a numgrade num as specified in section numa galvanized as specified in section nums .
num .
used for barrier attachment at pa bridge barrier .
numd num num num initial edition num inch fill plate as specified in section numa galvanized as specified in section nums .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as specified in section num .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from endtoend of barrier .
num num num num initial edition section numprotective fence num descriptionthis work is the construction of barrier protective fences and sidewalk protective fences .
num materialbefore fabrication submit shop drawings for review and acceptance .
a protective fence steel .
num .
fabric .
section numa size of mesh num inch .
num .
fabric tie wire .
no .
num gage aluminum wire or no .
num gage steel wire galvanized conforming to astm f num or aluminized conforming to astm a num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num .
posts rails and fittings .
end corner and line posts top and bottom rails and brace rails to be heavy industrial steel fence pipe astm f num grade ic num pounds per square inch minimum yield strength with plain ends .
substitution of high strength astm f num grade num num pounds per square inch yield strength schedule num pipe is allowed at no additional cost to the department .
fittings and hardware as specified in section numa .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
c caulking compound .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
fasten fabric to the line posts top and bottom rails and brace rails using tie wires spaced not more than num inches apart fasten to end and corner posts using numinch by numinch stretcher bar bands .
use stretcher bars with square edges attached by threading through the fabric attached with clamps or attached by other positive mechanical means .
use brace bands and stretcher bar bands num inch by num inch with numinch diameter by num num inches long non removable bolts .
do not use bent or damaged posts or rails .
place moistureproof post tops .
position linepost tops to pass the top rail through the post tops .
place top rails in numfoot lengths with couplings or expansion devices joining the lengths to form a continuous brace for each stretch of fence .
fasten top rails to end and corner posts by means of rail ends and brace bands .
use brace rails at end and corner posts midway between the top and bottom rail extending from the end or corner post to the adjacent line posts .
fasten bottom rails and brace rails to end to corner and to line posts using rail ends brace ends and brace bands .
place truss rods num inch in diameter with turnbuckles between the brace ends of the brace rail and the bottom rail .
b steel welding .
according to aws .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from centertocenter of end posts .
the department will not deduct gaps at lighting pole foundations .
num numb num num initial edition section numpressure mortar pointing and surfacing num descriptionthis work is the pointing and the surfacing of areas of structures .
num material a cement .
section num b fine aggregate .
type a section num c water .
section num d reinforcement bars .
section num e fabric reinforcement .
aashto m num astm a num .
use fabric reinforcement consisting of galvanized welded straightline fabric conforming to one of the following no .
num gage wire spread num inches in each direction no .
num gage wire spaced num inches in each direction or as indicated .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
f burlap .
section numd g liquid membraneforming curing compound clear .
section numa h expansion bolts .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num construction a preparation of structure .
thoroughly clean the surfaces and voids of rust scale grease loose and disintegrated particles and material that might impair the bond between the surfaces to be covered and the mortar mixture .
remove unsound concrete and mortar as directed .
clean by means of compressed air and waterblasting by handscraping and by sandblasting if necessary .
b placing reinforcement .
lap adjacent sheets of fabric at least num inches for numinch mesh and at least num inches for numinch mesh .
fasten fabric together with wire ties at intervals of not more than num inches .
num .
steel surfaces .
place fabric on the top sides and bottom of steel members .
bend the fabric to conform to the outlines of the members and hold approximately num inch away from the surface of the members or as directed .
place numinch diameter bars vertically on each side of the webs then tie in place using holes in the webs or clip plates .
space on numfoot centers or as indicated .
tie the fabric outside of and to the bars on approximately numinch centers .
place the fabric or bars clear of the surface of the members .
numb numf num num initial edition num .
masonry surfaces .
in areas of buildup for the replacement of disintegrated material unless otherwise indicated or directed place a layer of fabric for each numinch layer of mortar or fraction thereof .
more than one layer of fabric may be attached to an anchor bolt provided the bolt is long enough .
hold the fabric in place by means of leadcollared expansion bolts either num inch by num inches or num inch by num inches .
use longer bolts where necessary .
space numinch diameter bolts approximately num inches centerto center in each direction starting num inches from the outside edges of the areas to be pressuremortared .
space numinch diameter bolts approximately num inches centertocenter in each direction starting num inches from the outside edges of the areas to be pressure mortared .
fasten the fabric to the expansion bolts away from the prepared surface with num inch clear below the finished surface of the repair .
where existing reinforcement is exposed due to removal of deteriorated concrete fabric may be tied to this reinforcement at numinch intervals to form a cage to position and support the fabric within num inch of the finished surface of repair .
avoid excessive fabric layers which may create planes of weakness or internal stresses .
c mixing mortar .
mix the mortar of one part cement and num num parts fine aggregate .
thoroughly drymix the mortar in a batch mixer .
screen the drymix and remove material retained on a no .
num sieve before placing the mixture in the hopper of the mortar pressure gun .
do not mix more than num hours supply of mortar at a time .
keep the mixture in the gun bin thoroughly stirred .
d pressures .
at the gun supply air pressure of at least num pounds per square inch when shooting the mixture .
increase the air pressure as necessary when the lift is greater than num feet or when using more than num feet of hose .
maintain uniform air pressure .
at the nozzle maintain a uniform water pressure of at least num pounds per square inch greater than the air pressure at the gun .
supply pressure in the lower gun chamber to produce a nozzle velocity of num feet per second to num feet per second with a num numinch tip opening .
vary these pressures and velocities only when directed .
determine the nozzle pressure and velocity from the nozzle velocity meter attached to the gun .
e moisture content of mortar .
use approximately num to num moisture by weight when shooting of approximately num num gallons of water per bag of cement .
do not use a greater quantity of water than necessary to produce a proper mixture .
when using reinforcement fabric supply a moisture content of approximately num for mortar below the fabric and approximately num to num above the fabric .
f application .
perform pressure mortar work under the continuous supervision of an experienced pressure gun foreperson using only experienced personnel as gun and nozzle operators .
when pointing masonry saturate the surfaces with clean water before applying mortar .
when surfacing structural steel keep the outer edges of the mortar at the flanges and stiffeners square and true to line by using shooting strips placed to maintain the specified dimensions without trapping the rebound .
use guide strips at corners and other places where necessary to ensure true lines corners and the placement of specified thickness dimensions and designs .
bring mortared surfaces to a reasonably true plane then finish the entire mortared area with a pressuregun finish .
apply the main body of the mortar in at least two coats .
apply bottom surfaces in at least two coats to obtain proper adhesion and to avoid sagging .
bring the last main coat to within num inch of the proposed surface then correct irregularities and remove high spots with trowels .
give the entire surface a thin coat of mortar but do not trowel or float .
if directed give the final surfaces a finish using a longbristled brush saturated with clean water then dragged over the surfaces .
do not work the surfaces with the brush .
for masonry pointing or pointing and surfacing fill voids with mortar making the surface flush with the adjacent face of the structure .
after completing the pointing clean the face of the masonry .
shoot mortar at right angles to the surface holding the gun nozzle approximately num feet from the surface when using a numinch or a numinch nozzle or num feet from the surface when using a num numinch nozzle .
use a shorter distance only where working space requires closer shooting .
remove deposits of loose fine aggregate .
if any deposit of loose fine aggregate is covered by succeeding layers of mortar remove the surfacing and replace with suitable mortar .
at the end of a days work or at other required stopping periods slope off the mortar to a thin edge .
do not use square joints .
before shooting the adjacent section joining new work to old work or placing additional coats clean this sloped portion old work or previous coat .
numf numb num num initial edition saturate the previous coat by a combination of air and water blasting .
do not place mortar unless the air temperature or the surface on which it is placed is numf or higher .
g curing .
immediately after initial hardening saturate mortar and keep wet for a period of at least num hours .
protect pressure mortar pointing and surfacing on masonry surfaces and where practical on structural steel with burlap .
keep burlap wet during this curing period .
if allowed as an alternative to burlap curing apply liquid membrane forming curing compound clear as specified in section numpnum.a .
cure in cool and cold weather as specified in section nump .
h backfilling .
for spaces excavated around areas being pointed and surfaced backfill with acceptable embankment material in layers no more than num inches in depth .
thoroughly compact mechanically as specified in section numf .
num measurement and payment a pressure mortar surfacing .
square yard b pressure mortar pointing .
linear foot num numa num num change no .
num section numremoval of existing bridges or culverts num descriptionthis work is the removal and disposal of existing bridges culverts or superstructures .
num material topsoilsection num seeding and soils supplementssection num mulchingsection num num construction a general .
submit a plan to the district executive showing or describing the demolition and removal methods to be used for the removal of an existing bridge or culvert as indicated .
demolition is considered to be the point in time when a portion of the structure is being cut sawed drilled or impacted through excavation or other means that could affect the stability of the structure .
provide at a minimum the following information within the plan methods of protection and safety for the general public inspection personnel and construction personnel .
location and method of protection of utilities .
phasing and sequence of operations indicating construction equipment to be used for the intent of the operation being performed .
location and weights of equipment during demolition .
weights of equipmentmaterials to be stagedstockpiled on the structure .
consider the condition of the existing structure when proposing to place loads on the portion of the structure to be demolished .
when and how critical sections of the structure are to be removed i.e .
fracture critical components arches rigid frames and provide analysis as required by the representative to determine the structural stability of partial or complete parts of the structure being demolished .
method of providing temporary support for elements which will become unstable .
demolition plan submissions for bridge removal are to be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state if one or more of the following criteria apply to the structure being removed over a roadway span length exceeds num feet existing structures without plans with span length over num feet arches or rigid frame structures with span length over num feet fracture critical structures structures on under or adjacent to a railroad or specifically called for in the contract .
do not proceed with demolition work until the plan has been reviewed and accepted .
acceptance of the demolition plan by the representative will not relieve the contractor of liability for safe demolition andor removal of the structure .
a predemolition meeting is to be held at the project site prior to the start of demolition with the representative structure control engineer contractors superintendent and the person responsible for development of the demolition plan if requested by a party with involvement in the demolition .
if the structure to be removed is over or under a railroad submit the accepted demolition plan to the railroad companys area engineer .
do not proceed with the demolition work until written acceptance is received from the railroad company .
provide a copy of this written acceptance to the department .
notify the railroad company num days before starting demolition work .
failure to obtain the railroad companys acceptance will require an alternate plan numa numc num num change no .
num submittal to the department and the railroad company for review and acceptance .
after removing the existing structure backfill the area where the existing bridge or culvert was removed as specified in section numf .
grade into the existing topography .
if directed place topsoil .
seed and provide soil supplements as specified in section num .
use a type and rate of seeding and soil supplements typical for project .
mulch with the type and rate of mulch typical for project as specified in section num .
where the removal area coincides with new construction backfill voids below the elevation of the bottom of the proposed footings using acceptable material then compact as specified in section numf .
if indicated leave in place portions of the existing substructure that do not interfere with new construction landscaping or other operations .
provide documentation photographs survey notes for portions of the structure to remain in place if blasting is used as a method of removal .
b structures retained by the department .
if indicated remove members or parts of the structure to be retained by the department .
matchmark the members or parts and place them within the right of way at an indicated or directed location within num feet of the existing structure .
if indicated load the members or parts haul them to and unload them at the indicated location .
if indicated load the members or parts on railroad cars ready for shipment .
c structures retained by the contractor .
if not otherwise indicated the department will not retain structures or parts of structures .
remove and dispose of the structure or parts of the structure in a satisfactory manner .
num measurement and payment a removal of existing bridge .
lump sum when removal area coincides with excavation area of new construction the pay limit for removal extends num foot horizontally beyond the outer limits of the structure being removed .
the department will pay for backfilling of voids below the indicated elevation of the bottom of proposed footings for new construction as specified in section numf .
b removal of existing culvert .
lump sum when removal area coincides with excavation area of new construction the pay limit for removal extends num foot horizontally beyond the outer limits of the structure being removed .
the department will pay for backfilling of voids below the indicated elevation of the bottom of proposed footings for new construction as specified in section numf .
c removal of existing bridge superstructure .
lump sum num numb num num initial edition section numprotective coating for reinforced concrete surfaces num descriptionthis work is applying a protective coating on concrete surfaces .
num material a boiled linseed oil .
section num certify as specified in section numbnum .
b epoxy resin for abutments pier caps and endwalls .
a twocomponent epoxy resin system as follows num .
general .
an epoxytype base polymer thermosetting resin as follows composed of num reactive constituents condensation products of the reaction of epichlorohydrin with bisphenol a .
essentially pure diglycidylether of bisphenol a containing no more than trace amounts of hydrolyzable chlorine .
epoxide equivalent between num and num .
reacting system consisting of a blend of condensation polymers of dimerized and trimerized unsaturated fattyacids and an aliphatic polyamine .
pigmentation added so the cured coating conforms to the federal color standard num and as indicated .
nonskid material added if directed .
num .
physical requirements of the mixed epoxy system .
viscositynum centipoises to num centipoises at numf pot lifea minimum of num hours at numf minimum solids contentnum a cured system that does not exhibit amine blushing or sweating .
when the pigmented finished coats are tested for abrasion according to astm d num a minimum of num l of sand is required to abrade a nummil thickness of coating .
a num nummil dry film thickness of the coating tested by astm d num is required to pass a numinch diameter mandrel test without splitting the film or causing loss of bond .
num .
sampling .
a representative sample of each component will be taken for the required tests either from a well blended bulk lot before packaging or by withdrawing thief samples from no less than num of the containers comprising the lot or shipment .
unless the samples show evidence of variability they may be blended into a single composite sample to represent that component .
package materials may be sampled by random selection of containers or each component from each lot .
the entire lot of both components may be rejected if samples fail to meet any specified requirements .
numb numa num num initial edition num .
packaging and marking .
furnish the two components in separate containers that are nonreactive with the contained materials .
if directed provide a container size so the recommended final mixture proportions can be obtained by combining one container of a component with one or more containers of the other component .
have containers marked as base polymer and reacting system showing the mixing directions and usable temperature range .
have each container marked with the name of the manufacturer the lot or batch number the date of packaging pigmentation if any and the quantity in pounds and gallons .
indicate the potential hazards on the package according to the federal hazardous products labeling act .
num .
certification .
if directed certify as specified in section numbnum .
provide either a copy of the manufacturers dated test report or a statement accompanied by a copy of the dated test results showing the system has been sampled and tested .
c penetrating sealers for reinforced concrete substructure surfaces .
furnish a penetrating sealer from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num as follows silicates in water .
epoxies dispersed in water .
only use on surfaces that the sealer does not totally encapsulate the structural unit being treated .
organosilicon compounds in solvent .
resins in mineral spirits .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d penetrating sealers for bridge superstructure .
a onecomponent penetrating sealer material composed of a minimum of num silane or siloxane material with no petroleum distillates meeting the following properties water absorption .
the final average percent water absorbed for concrete coated with the protective sealer not greater than num of the final average percent water absorbed by the uncoated reference concrete .
moisture vapor transmission .
the final average percent moisture loss for concrete coated with the protective sealer not less than num of its final average percent water absorption .
chloride ion penetration .
the final average absorbed chloride ion content for concrete coated with the protective sealer not greater than num of the final average absorbed chloride ion content of the uncoated reference concrete .
durability .
the protective sealer does not show any signs of weathering discoloration or deterioration after num months of exposure to atmospheric conditions .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num construction a boiled linseed oil .
num .
areas and preparation .
numa num num num initial edition num.a general .
thoroughly dry and clean the surfaces of dirt debris oil grease and foreign matter that would prevent protective coating penetration adhesion or drying .
do not use membraneforming curing compound where linseed oil treatment is to be applied .
apply the protective coating as soon as possible after completion of a structure or portion of a structure .
num .
application .
section numb num .
safety precautions .
section numc b epoxy resin .
num .
substructures subject to staining .
if indicated apply epoxy resin protective coating as follows num.a surface preparation .
clean sound dry new concrete surfaces of laitance or other potential bondinhibiting matter .
do not apply epoxy until num days after placing concrete unless allowed to apply sooner .
do not use membraneforming curing compounds where epoxy treatment is to be applied .
clean old concrete surfaces of oil grease and potential bondinhibiting matter by acid etching using a num to num muriaticacid solution .
spread the acid solution and allow it to react for num minutes to num minutes or until bubbling has subsided .
flush the surface with clear water and allow to dry .
where in the representatives opinion acid etching is insufficient to clean the concrete sandblast or use another acceptable method of mechanical abrading .
sandblast steel surfaces until bright metal is exposed .
then immediately apply the protective coating to prevent the reoccurrence of oxidation .
num.b mixing .
measure and mix as recommended by the manufacturer of the epoxy in a clean mixing container .
thoroughly mix the epoxy using a num rpm to num rpm low speed numinch electric drill and paddletype mixer .
after mixing let the material stand for an induction period of one hour before application .
num.c application .
apply the mix by brush roller or spray .
if applied by roller use a firstquality longnap roller for rough surfaces and a shortnap roller for smooth surfaces .
if applied by spray use an externally atomized spray gun .
for spray application use a thinner of the type and quantity recommended by the manufacturer of the epoxy .
apply two thin uniform coats of the mixed material each approximately num mils to num mils dry film thickness num mils to num mils wet thickness .
apply the second coat num hours after the application of the first coat .
use a rate of cover recommended by the manufacturer of the epoxy .
apply at temperatures between numf and numf .
c penetrating sealers .
num .
substructures .
num.a surface preparation .
thoroughly dry and clean the surfaces of dirt debris oil grease and foreign matter that would prevent protective coating penetration adhesion or drying .
num.b application .
apply penetrating sealer which does not discolor the concrete to areas indicated according to the manufacturers instructions .
num .
bridge superstructure .
provide a penetrating sealer meeting the material requirements of section numd and apply according to the manufacturers recommended application procedures to exposed concrete surfaces of bridge decks curbs sidewalks and divisors and to inside and top surfaces of barrier .
apply the penetrating sealer after the completion of the specified concrete wet cure period followed by an initial drying period of a minimum of num days after the wet curing period and the concrete surface is dry .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard for the type indicated .
num num num num initial edition the department will pay for additional maintenance and protection of traffic if necessary for the application of additional protective coating to bridge decks experiencing excessive cracking as specified in section numd .
num numg num num initial edition section numtooth expansion dam with drain trough num descriptionthis work is construction of a tooth expansion dam with fabric reinforced drain troughs for bridge joints .
num material a fabricated structural steel .
section numanum shop painted as specified in section num. b high strength bolts .
section numd c stainless steel bolts and studs .
astm f num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d stainless steel washers and locknuts .
astm f num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
e galvanizing .
section nums f polyester or nylon fabric .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
conform to the following requirements number of plies num minimum fabric weight oz.sq .
yd .
num minimum tensile strength lb.in .
astm d num num g rubberized trough material .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
furnish butadiene acrylonitrile elastomer conforming to the following requirements hardness shore a astm d num minimum maximum num durometer minimum tensile strength psi astm d num num minimum elongation at break astm d num num oven aging num hours at numf astm d num maximum elongation loss num maximum tensile strength loss num maximum hardness points change num brittleness to heat aging astm d num numf tear resistance lb.in .
die c astm d num num resistance to ozone aging astm d num method b bent loop no cracks num hours numf and num ppm ozone oil swell astm d num num hours numf using irm num oil mass change maximum num numh num num num initial edition h fabric composite properties .
preformed fabric material consisting of the multiply polyester or nylon fabric and rubberized trough material vulcanized to form a laminate with the following properties minimum thickness in .
num minimum composite tensile strength of the fabric reinforced num bridge trough lb.in .
astm d num maximum elongation ultimate tensile strength num astm d num maximum resistance to water absorption less than num num weight gain for num days of water immersion numf astm d num procedure for change in mass with liquid on one surface only num constructionconstruct as shown on the standard drawings and as follows prepare shop drawings as specified in section numd .
obtain acceptance of the shop drawings before beginning fabrication .
use a prequalified fabrication shop as specified in section numa .
weld as specified in section numm .
fabricate and erect the expansion dam according to the shop drawings and as appropriate for the bridge deck grade and crown .
preset the dam opening before shipment and assemble with temporary shipping angles .
install the dam as indicated .
after erection remove the temporary shipping angles and grind plates smooth .
place concrete under the expansion dams vibrate until the concrete is forced through air holes and strike off excess concrete .
after the concrete has cured clean air holes and fill with an approved sealer .
do not splice the drain trough unless indicated .
if splices are indicated use splices vulcanized by the manufacturer .
do not use longitudinal splices .
before trough installation apply the intermediate and finish coats of paint to all areas that will be inaccessible after the trough is installed .
install the trough with stainless steel fasteners .
num measurement and paymentpound num num num num initial edition section numarmored preformed neoprene compression dam num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of armored preformed neoprene compression dams for bridge joints including the necessary fabricated structural steel .
num material a general .
use a prequalified fabrication shop as specified in section numa .
b preformed neoprene compression seal and lubricant adhesive .
section numd from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. c structural steel .
section numanum painted as specified in section num or hotdip galvanized as specified in section nums .
the galvanization in the retainer extrusion must be of uniform thickness and free of excessive buildup which would hinder the installation of the dam .
d studs .
section nume num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows before fabrication submit shop drawings as specified in section numd showing complete details dimensions size type and compressiondeflection characteristics of the seal as well as other information and data necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of the dam .
obtain acceptance of shop drawings before beginning manufacture .
the seal may be installed in the shop at the width determined for the erection temperature .
for a shopinstalled seal make final width adjustment on the completed seal if necessary in the field for the temperature at the time when the dam is securely fastened to beams .
no field adjustment will be needed for a numf variation in temperature from the temperature for which the joint width was adjusted in the shop .
after width adjustment the seal may be installed in the field .
before installing the seal clean metal surfaces in direct contact with the seal to remove foreign material and to provide for proper bond between the seal and the metal surfaces .
clean as specified in section numb .
swab the lubricantadhesive on the faces of the angles forming the groove according to the material manufacturers instructions .
while the adhesive is wet install the seal as recommended by the manufacturer .
do not splice the seal unless indicated .
if splices are indicated use splices vulcanized by the manufacturer .
if stretching of the seal during installation is unavoidable do not exceed num elongation .
place the top of the seal at the walls in contact with the deck joint structural steel at a uniform depth of num inch minimum to num inch maximum below the deck surface .
the department will not accept cocked or twisted seal installations .
remove and replace seals that are damaged during installation .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot for the movement specified .
measured outtoout along the centerline of the exposed surfaces of the seal and the steel plates including sidewalks if applicable following the vertical and sloped faces of curbs and barriers resulting in a true length not a horizontally projected length .
num num num num change no .
num section numsteel bridge hand railing num descriptionthis work is construction of a steel bridge hand railing .
num material a railing .
pipe for the railsastm anum type f schedule num certified as specified in section numbnum .
platesaashto m num astm anum grade num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
welding materialsection numt b toggle bolts .
use an acceptable galvanized type capable of supporting a numpound load in tension when tested through a numinch round hole .
toggle bolts may be cadmiumplated to meet the requirements of astm bnum class num in place of being galvanized .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
c malleable iron wedges shims end caps washers and nuts .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d anchor bolts and nuts and washers for anchor bolts .
section numcnum e caulking compound .
section num f galvanizing .
section nums num constructionconstruct as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
submit shop drawings for review and acceptance before starting fabrication .
before erection coat the surface of posts in contact with concrete or masonry using caulking compound .
after erection and alignment use caulking compound to seal openings between metal surfaces and concrete .
after the concreting and other operations have been completed clean the railing .
use an acceptable solvent cleaner to remove accumulations of oil grease dirt and foreign materials .
b assembly .
remove blemishes and scratches from exposed surfaces .
assemble the rail members with the rails parallel to grade and with the posts normal to grade .
place joints as indicated .
make cuts true smooth and free from burrs or ragged edges .
fillet drill all reentrant cuts before cutting .
c welding .
section numm num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from center to center of end posts .
the department will not deduct gaps at lighting pole foundations .
num num num num change no .
num section numaluminum bridge hand railing num descriptionthis work is construction of an aluminum bridge hand railing .
num material a railing .
pipe for the railsastm bnumalloy numtnum numtnum or astm bnumalloy numtnum numtnum .
platessection numa certify as specified in section numbnum .
b toggle bolts .
use an acceptable galvanized type capable of supporting a numpound load in tension when tested through a numinch round hole .
toggle bolts may be cadmiumplated to conform to the requirements of astm bnum class num in place of being galvanized .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
c aluminum wedges shims end caps washers and nuts .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d anchor bolts and nuts and washers for anchor bolts .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
e caulking compound .
section num num constructionconstruct as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
before fabrication submit shop drawings for review and acceptance .
before erection coat surfaces of aluminum alloys in contact with other metals stone masonry or concrete using caulking compound .
after erection and alignment seal openings between metal surfaces and concrete using caulking compound .
after the other bridge construction operations have been completed clean the aluminum bridge hand railing .
remove accumulations of oil grease dirt or foreign materials using an acceptable solvent cleaner .
b assembly .
assemble the rail members .
place joints as indicated .
make cuts true smooth and free from burrs or ragged edges .
fillet drill all reentrant cuts before cutting .
do not flame cut .
weld according to aws .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from center to center of end posts .
the department will not deduct gaps at lighting pole foundations .
num num num num initial edition section nummodification of existing barriers num descriptionthis work is the modification of existing bridge barriers for the type indicated .
num material class aa cement concretesection num reinforcement barssection num concrete bonding compoundsection num threaded rods and couplings and steel platessection numanum .
galvanizingsection nums welding materialsection numt nuts and washersastm a num for nuts certified as specified in section numbnum and section numcnum.b for washers .
dowel holessection num caulking compoundsection num joint backing materialsection num overlay materialsection num .
use material of the same type as the deck overlay material .
num constructionin the field verify sizes dimensions and types of materials as necessary to satisfactorily complete work .
before beginning barrier modification submit plans for review and acceptance to the chief bridge engineer .
on the plans show the method of modification proposed including modification of open joints expansion dam and the deck at the existing scuppers .
satisfactorily repair any damage done to the existing structure beyond the indicated removal limits .
straighten existing reinforcement that is to remain in place within the limits of removal .
if necessary cut and bend the existing reinforcement .
wire brush clean and paint the existing reinforcement with a coating of neatcement semiliquid mixture of cement and water .
satisfactorily dispose of debris resulting from the removal operation .
the department will retain the bridge barrier railings posts and miscellaneous hardware .
remove and store within the right of way for removal from the project site by department forces .
when removing railings and posts from the structure bundle and stack in piles .
store nuts bolts washers and shims in boxes or barrels with the railing elements .
store the bundles and boxes or barrels in a manner to be picked up and moved with a fork lift .
if necessary provide additional deck overlay .
modify the deck portions of the existing expansion dam then warp the deck to existing scuppers when indicated .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot for the type indicated measured from end to end along the inside face of the completed barrier with no deductions for expansion dams or joint areas .
num num num num initial edition section numneoprene strip seal dam num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of neoprene strip seal expansion dam for bridge joints including the necessary fabricated structural steel extrusions and sliding plates .
num material a general .
use a prequalified fabrication shop as specified in section numa .
b structural steel .
section numanum painted as specified in section num or hotdip galvanized as specified in section nums .
the galvanization in the retainer extrusion must be of uniform thickness and free of excessive buildup which would hinder the installation of the seal .
have the expansion dam fabricator demonstrate that the seal can be installed properly before shipment .
c anchor bolts and washers .
section numc d studs .
section nume e neoprene strip seal and lubricant adhesive .
section numd from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
num constructionconstruct as shown on the standard drawings and as follows before fabrication submit shop drawings as specified in section numd showing complete details dimensions size and type of seal as well as other information and data necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of the dam .
before installing the seal clean metal surfaces in direct contact with the seal to remove foreign material and to provide for proper bond between the seal and the metal surfaces .
clean as specified in section numcnum .
do not splice the seal unless indicated .
if splices are indicated use splices vulcanized by the manufacturer .
if stretching of the seal during installation is unavoidable do not exceed num elongation .
the department will not accept cocked or twisted seal installation .
remove and replace seals that are damaged during installation .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot for the movement specified .
measured outtoout along the centerline of the final in place exposed surfaces of the seal fabricated structural steel extrusion and the steel sliding plates including sidewalks if applicable following the vertical and sloped faces of curbs and barriers resulting in a true length not a horizontally projected length .
nonexposed surfaces will not be included in the final inplace measurement .
num numg num num initial edition section numtimber structures num descriptionthis work is the construction of all timber structures except hardwood gluelaminated glulam structures .
num material a structural timber .
douglas firlarch hemfir southern pine beech birch hickory mixed maple red maple northern red oak red oak mixed oak white oak and yellow poplar .
provide select structural no .
num or no .
num grade lumber and timber .
provide sawn lumber and timber conforming to the specifications for structural timber lumber and piling aashto m num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
accept only pieces consisting of sound wood free from decay .
avoid boxed heart timber .
use structural timber complying with the american softwood lumber asl standard ps num for manufacture of dressedsized lumber and timber products .
grade douglas firlarch and hemfir using west coast lumber inspection bureau wclib or western wood products association wwpa inspection rules .
grade douglas fir larch north and hemfir north using national lumber grades authority nlga inspection rules .
grade southern pine according to southern pine inspection bureau spib inspection rules .
grade beechbirchhickory mixed maple red maple northern red oak red oak mixed oak and white oak according to northeast lumber manufacturers association nelma grade rules .
grade yellow poplar according to northern softwood lumber bureau nslb rules .
adequately protect structural timber during transport .
accept only kiln dried dimension lumber at num average moisture content and num maximum moisture content .
accept only solid sawn timbers that have been air seasoned or dried to an average moisture content not exceeding num .
accept only softwood gluelaminated timbers with a maximum num moisture content .
preservative treat lumber and timber by pressure treatment process according to the awpa cnum all timber products preservative treatment by pressure processes .
treat structural timbers for highwaybridge construction according to awpa cnum wood for highway construction preservative treatment by pressure processes .
minimum retention of creosote preservative for wood species not covered under awpa cnum is num pounds per cubic foot .
treat piles as specified in section numa and according to the awpa cnum piles preservative treatment by pressure processes .
provide treated lumber and timber products with permanent symbol imprints or documentation to identify the treating company treatment type year of treatment and certification of conformance with awpa .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
accept treated structural timber that conforms to appropriate recommended awpa treatment requirements .
b adhesives glulam fabrication .
provide adhesives conforming to ansiaitc anum structural glued laminated timber section num .
provide wetuse adhesives .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
c hardware .
furnish bolts nuts washers timber connectors drift pins dowels nails screws spikes other metal fasteners and wire rope as necessary .
provide bolts and nuts as specified in section numcnum .
provide machine head bolts and nuts of regular hex series and coarse thread series class numg and numh class num tolerances all conforming to applicable ansi standards .
provide cast iron ogee malleable iron plate or cut washers as indicated .
galvanize all hardware except cast and malleable iron .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d galvanizing .
section nums .
galvanize hardware after fabrication .
e structural steel .
section numa f painting .
paint all structural steel except hotdip galvanized material as specified in section num. g laminated girders and deck panels .
numg numa num num initial edition num .
fabrication .
num.a mechanically laminated panels .
perform all possible fabrication of mechanically laminated members before preservative treatment .
treat mechanically laminated girders and deck panels for highway construction according to awpa cnum .
num.b glued laminated members .
fabricate structural glued laminated softwood timber according to ansiaitc num structural glued laminated timber and aitcnum manufacturing standard specifications for structural glued laminated timber of softwood species .
treat glued laminated timbers for highway construction according to awpa cnum .
num .
tolerances .
provide laminated structural members with net width depth and length as indicated on the structural drawings and with tolerances according to the ansiaitc anum aitc num standard for dimensions of structural glued laminated timber or tolerances as follows width .
num inch of the indicated width .
depth .
num inch per foot of indicated depth .
length .
num inch up to numfoot length with a numinch allowance for every num feet of additional length .
squareness .
provide a cross section for all glued laminated structural members which is square within num inch per foot of depth of member unless a special shape is indicated .
beam camber .
num inch for lengths up to num feet .
add numinch allowance for each additional numfoot length .
provide industrial appearance grade glued laminated timbers according to aitc num standard appearance grades for structural glued laminated timber .
accept only glued laminated timbers in standard dressed widths according to aitc num. h membrane waterproofing .
section num i superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma wearing course .
section num wma wearing course .
section num j timber piles .
section numa k cement concrete .
class a and class aa .
section num. l wood preservative .
aashto m num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
use only oilborne preservatives with hardwood lumber and timber .
num construction a storing and handling .
store lumber and timber neatly in piles on skids above ground .
protect from exposure to the elements if stored for prolonged periods of time .
store material so that it can be readily inspected .
numa numc num num initial edition handle in a manner to avoid injury or breakage .
handle treated lumber with nylon or other nondamaging rope slings .
do not use cant hooks peaveys or other sharp instruments in handling treated timber .
provide corner protection for banded material .
the department will reject treated lumber unduly injured in handling .
b workmanship .
cut all lumber and timber accurately and frame to a close fit to provide for even bearing of joints over the entire contact surfaces .
make joints without shimming .
field drill only as indicated or as allowed .
num .
bored holes .
treat all bored drilled or reamed holes with approved field treatment according to awpa mnum standard for the care of preservativetreated wood products .
plug unfilled holes after field treatment with treated timber plugs .
bore holes in untreated lumber num inch in diameter less than the pin or dowel .
bore holes num inch in diameter larger than the bolt .
bore holes for lag screws not larger than the base of the thread .
bore holes in small timbers with the same diameter as the spike shank when necessary to prevent splitting .
do not field drill or nail except for railing .
num .
installation of connectors .
provide one of the following timber connector types as indicated split ring shear plate or spike grid .
install split ring and shear plate types in precut grooves of dimensions as indicated or as recommended by the manufacturer .
force spike grids into the wood so that timbers are in firm contact .
use pressure equipment that does not damage the wood .
highstrength bolts or rods fitted with low friction ballbearing washers made for this purpose may be used .
replace the highstrength bolts with specified bolts for the final installation .
embed all connectors of this type at a joint simultaneously and uniformly .
cut connector grooves in timber concentric with the bolt hole conforming to the crosssectional shape of the rings and providing a snug fit .
supply an inside groove diameter larger than nominal ring diameter so that the ring will expand slightly during installation .
see table a num .
bolts and washers .
use a washer of the size and type indicated under all bolt heads except for timber bolts with economy type heads and nuts that would otherwise come in contact with wood .
after final tightening lock the nuts of all bolts .
c substructure .
construct as indicated and as follows num .
bent piles .
drive piles as accurately as possible in the correct location vertical or to the batter indicated and as specified in section num .
make cutoffs accurately to ensure uniform bearing between the sills and piles of a bent .
treat cut pile ends according to awpa mnum .
num .
framed bents .
bed mudsills firmly and evenly upon solid bearing material and tamp into place .
construct concrete pedestals for the support of framed bents as specified in the applicable portions of section num .
finish pedestals carefully to provide full and even bearing for sills or posts .
provide for true and even bearing of sills on mudsills piles or pedestals .
if possible remove all earth from contact with sills to provide for free air circulation around them .
num .
bearing sill caps .
place timber caps to secure an even and uniform bearing over the tops of the supporting posts or piles and to secure an even alignment of their ends .
secure all sills as indicated .
for sills secured using drift bolts place drift bolts approximately in the center of the post or pile .
num .
bracing .
properly align bents before placing bracing .
bolt the ends of bracing through the pile post or cap .
furnish bracing of sufficient length to provide a minimum distance of num inches between the outside bolt and the end of the brace .
numc numc num num initial edition table a typical dimensions of timber connectors dimensions in in .
split rings size num num in .
num in .
split ring inside diameter at center when closed thickness of metal at center depth of metal width of ring num num num num num num groove inside diameter width depth num num num num num num bolt diameter bolt hole diameter num num num num washers standard round cast or malleable iron diameter round mild steel diameter thickness square plate mild steel length of side thickness num num num num num num num num num num num num shear plates size num num in .
num num in .
num in .
num in .
shear plate material diameter of plate diameter of bolt hole thickness of plate depth of flange pressed steel num num num num light gage num num num num malleable num num num num malleable num num num num use steel straps or shapes for use with shear plates designed according to accepted engineering practices .
hole diameter in straps or shapes for bolts num num num num circular dap dimensions a b c d e f g h i num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bolt holediameter in timber num num num num washers standard round cast or malleable iron diameter round medium steel minimum diameter thickness square plate length of side thickness num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numd numg num num initial edition d superstructure .
construct as indicated and as follows num .
timber stringers .
place stringers for bridge decks better edge down .
provide for even bearing of the floor on the stringers .
use butt joints for outside stringers centered over caps of floor beams .
lap interior stringers to take bearing over the full width of cap or floor beams at each end .
frame crossbridging between stringers neatly and accurately and fasten securely .
provide for full bearing of each end of crossbridging members against the sides of stringers .
unless otherwise directed place crossbridging at the center of each span and at supports .
num .
glued laminated timber stringers .
place stringers according to beam fabricators top mark .
provide for even bearing of the deck on all stringers at piers as indicated but allow no less than num inch clearance between butt ends to allow for air circulation .
treat all field drilled holes or reamed holes before installation of hardware according to awpa mnum .
treat all fielddrilled holes before installing diaphragms .
provide for close fit full bearing of diaphragm between stringer beams .
place diaphragms or cross bracing as indicated .
num .
wheelguards rail and barrier .
frame and align wheel guards rail posts rails and barriers accurately and as indicated .
num .
paneltopanel connections .
provide a snug fit for all paneltopanel connections on interconnected decks .
field drill or ream connections only if directed .
treat all fielddrilled or reamed holes according to awpa mnum .
e surface treatment of timber .
do not paint wood treated with oilborne preservatives .
using pressure process treat portions of rail posts that are to be embedded in earth or concrete and where faces of timber bulkheads will be in soil contact with a num pounds per cubic foot retention of creosote preservative for softwoods and num pounds per cubic foot to num pounds per cubic foot retention of creosote for hardwoods .
apply a twocoat finish sealer to treated structural timber railings where prolonged exposure to direct human contact is likely .
acceptable sealers include latex epoxy urethane shellac or other finishes with effective coating agents that adhere to treated rails .
when framing cutting or boring of treated timber is performed after treatment swab all cuts daps and holes thoroughly with two applications of accepted wood preservative treatments according to awpa mnum .
f posttensioning .
perform posttensioning operations as directed .
stress to num of the required tensioning force at the time of installation stage num .
restress to num of the required tensioning force num week after completion of stage num stage num .
restress to num of the required tensioning force num to num weeks after completion of stage num .
pressure inject protective sheathing with noncorrosive material or with material containing a corrosion inhibitor .
g superpave asphalt mixture design hma wearing surface .
clean the deck of the heavier excretions and surface residues of the treatment solution before constructing the bituminous leveling course .
spread a blotter of fine material silt and sandy silt over the surface .
use a mixture consisting of num crushed material passing a num mm no .
num sieve and num material passing a num m no .
num sieve .
spread at a rate of num kgmnum to num kgmnum num pounds per square yard to num pounds per square yard .
broom off the blotter material .
repeat process until the surface is free of exudates .
construct the superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma leveling course as indicated and as specified in section num or section num .
use only nonvibratory rollers for compaction of the superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma leveling course .
for stressedlaminated timber decks prepare the superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma leveling course surface and construct waterproofing membrane as indicated .
construct the superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma surface course as specified in section num or section num .
use only nonvibratory rollers for compaction of the superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma surface course .
provide geotextile class num fabric as specified in section num for glued laminated timber decks .
no leveling course is necessary for glued laminated decks .
num numh num num initial edition num measurement and paymentlump sum a fabricated structural steel .
section num b structural timber .
cubic foot c membrane waterproofing .
section num d guide rail .
section num e geotextiles class num .
section num f piles .
section num g superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma wearing course .
section num wma wearing course .
section num h cement concrete .
section num num numc num num change no .
num section numhardwood glulam timber structures num descriptionthis work is the construction of structures with hardwood gluelaminated glulam timber .
num material a structural timber .
section numa b adhesives .
section numb c hardware .
section numc d galvanizing .
section numd e structural steel .
section numa f painting .
section numf g geotextiles .
section num h superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma wearing course .
section num wma wearing course .
section num i timber piles .
section numa j cement concrete .
class a and class aa .
section num k wood preservative .
section numd num construction a storing and handling .
section numa b workmanship .
section numb c substructure .
section numc d superstructure .
section numd e surface treatment of timber .
section nume f superpave asphalt mixture design hma or wma wearing surface .
section numg num measurements and payment a fabricated structural steel .
section num b structural timber .
cubic foot c steel guide rails .
section num numd numg num num change no .
num d geotextile class num .
section num e piles .
section num f superpave asphalt mixture design .
hma wearing course .
section num wma wearing course .
section num g cement concrete .
section num num numc num num change no .
num section numconcrete bridge deck repair num descriptionthis work is removing and patching designated areas of deteriorated concrete of the bridge deck .
concrete bridge deck repair is classified into three types as follows a type num .
areas where deteriorated concrete extends to a maximum depth of the top of the top mat of reinforcement bars and no reinforcement bar is exposed .
b type num .
areas where deteriorated concrete extends beyond the depth of the top of the top mat of reinforcement bars or where reinforcement bars are unbonded .
c type num .
areas where deteriorated concrete or patching extends to the full depth of the deck including deck overhang areas and areas where curb barrier or deck ends need to be patched as part of the repair .
type num repairs over adjacent box beams extend to the top of the beam .
num material a patching material .
class aaap cement concretesection num except use no .
num coarse aggregate .
when the quantity of concrete is not enough to obtain delivery from a mix supplier bag mix may be used .
concrete bonding compoundtype ii grade num astm cnum epoxy as specified in section num wearing surface material for patchingsection num b reinforcement bars .
section num num construction a deck sounding .
provide a chain drag num feet in width with chain drops spaced every num inches for department use .
as directed provide assistance to the representative for the purpose of sounding the entire deck surface with the chain drag before and after scarification .
b preparation of surface .
the representative will determine and delineate the type and extent of the repair areas .
outline the areas with a numinch deep vertical sawcut before scarifying operations .
repair work may begin before scarifying operations .
if after scarifying another area or areas of deteriorated concrete are found beyond the initial sawcut peripheries make new sawcuts for repair limits .
sandblast or waterblast to remove partially loosened chips of concrete .
sandblast waterblast or wire brush exposed reinforcement bars to remove rust and corrosion .
remove all portions of damaged or heavily corroded reinforcement bars and replace with the same type of bars as specified in section num and as directed .
for type num repairs remove concrete to a depth that provides a minimum of numinch clearance around all reinforcement bars in the top mat regardless of concrete deterioration .
if the removal reaches the top level of the lower reinforcing mat continue the removal until fulldepth removal is achieved and perform a type num repair .
during removal for type num repairs provide shielding to prevent debris from falling below the deck .
prevent damage to underlying beams .
c equipment .
power driven hand tools for removal of deteriorated concrete are required and are subject to the following restrictions do not use pneumatic hammers with more weight than nominal numpound class .
do not operate pneumatic hammers or mechanical chipping tools at an angle in excess of num degrees numc numf num num change no .
num relative to the surface of slab .
do not place pneumatic tools in direct contact with reinforcing steel .
tripleheaded tampers fitted with star drills not less than num inches in diameter in the tamper sockets may be used in the vertical position .
use hand tools such as hammers and chisels or small air chisels to remove final particles of unsound concrete or to provide necessary clearances around reinforcement bars .
d cleaning .
blow all removal areas clean with oilfree compressed air and protect them against any contaminate detrimental to the bond of the patching material .
satisfactorily repair any damage to the structure beyond the limits of this work due to the construction operations at no expense to the department .
e concrete bonding .
coat contact surfaces of type num type num and type num repairs with concrete bonding compound .
do not coat surface to receive a new surface course .
remove concrete bonding compound from surface to receive the surface course at no expense to the department .
num .
epoxy bonding compound .
place concrete against contact surface while epoxy bonding compound is still tacky to ensure bond between contact surface and fresh concrete .
wire brush or sandblast hardened epoxy before recoating with fresh epoxy .
use epoxybonding compound as specified in numa .
num .
other bonding compound .
place concrete against contact surface within the compound manufacturers recommended time frame .
when recommended time frame has expired follow manufacturers recommendations for recoating contact surfaces .
f patching .
num .
patching in preparation of latex overlay placement .
num.a type num .
patch areas of repair with the material used for the overlay wearing surface and make the patch concurrently with the overlay operation .
place overlay as specified in section num .
num.b type num .
construct type num patches before the overlay operation unless allowed to patch simultaneously with the overlay .
method num .
patching before overlay operation .
patch areas of repair with modified class aaap cement concrete .
vibrate material in repair areas internally with a pencil vibrator in addition to surface screed vibration .
after patches have attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch sandblast or waterblast patch surfaces to remove laitance .
perform scarification either before or after patching as directed .
if scarification is performed before patching roughtexture patch surfaces by shotblasting .
if scarification is performed after patching do not begin scarification until the patches have attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
if after scarifying additional areas of deteriorated concrete are discovered make repairs as directed .
take precautions to prevent contamination of the scarified deck surface .
method num .
patching simultaneously with overlay operation .
if allowed patch type num repairs up to num inches deep with overlay material placed monolithically with the overlay .
place overlay as specified in section num .
num.c type num .
patch areas of repair with modified class aaap cement concrete .
use removable formwork of sufficient strength to prevent lateral or vertical deflection .
provide side forms including dripstrip and chamfering .
vibrate material in repair areas internally with a pencil vibrator in addition to surface screed vibration .
after patches have attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch sandblast or numf numb num num change no .
num waterblast patch surfaces to remove laitance .
perform scarification either before or after patching as directed .
if scarification is performed before patching roughtexture patch surface by shotblasting .
if scarification is performed after patching do not begin scarification until the patches have attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
do not place type num patches simultaneously with overlay .
num .
patching without overlay placement .
num.a type num .
do not construct type num patches .
remove concrete to a depth that provides a minimum of num inch clearance around all reinforcement bars in the top mat regardless of concrete deterioration and construct a type num patch .
num.b type num .
patch areas of repair with modified class aaap cement concrete .
vibrate material in repair areas internally with a pencil vibrator in addition to surface screed vibration .
finish patches to match the existing deck surface .
num.c type num .
patch areas of repair with modified class aaap cement concrete .
use removable formwork of sufficient strength to prevent lateral or vertical deflection .
provide side forms including dripstrip and chamfering .
vibrate material in repair areas internally with a pencil vibrator in addition to surface screed vibration .
g curing patches .
cure patches made with modified class aaap cement concrete as specified in section nump but do not use liquid membrane curing unless allowed .
do not apply live loads to patches until concrete has reached a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
num measurement and payment a patching .
square foot for the type indicated .
b reinforcement bars .
section num num num num num initial edition section numscarification num descriptionthis work is scarifying existing concrete bridge decks to a minimum numinch uniform depth and a maximum uniform depth as indicated in preparation for placing a concrete or mortar wearing surface or hydrodemolition .
num materialnot used .
num construction a general .
before scarification perform a precondition survey of the existing concrete bridge deck cracks to locate potential reflective cracks in the wearing surface .
scarify the existing concrete bridge deck in num inch maximum uniform depth passes to the required depth as indicated .
if hydrodemolition will be performed after the scarifiction operation the required depth may be removed in one pass .
saw cutting and chipping with pneumatic hammers may be used to remove surfaces on areas inaccessible to a scarifying machine .
do not use pneumatic hammers larger than nominal numpound class .
do not use tripleheaded tampers fitted with star drills less than num inches in diameter .
completely remove by hand power broom vacuum or other approved means all broken concrete and laitance resulting from the scarifying operation and satisfactorily dispose of this material .
do not flush debris .
remove debris at the end of each work day .
clean debris from scuppers and downspouts as needed .
do not allow construction vehicles or equipment other than power brooms on the scarified deck surface unless the surface is adequately protected to prevent contamination .
b equipment .
scarify using a selfpropelled machine capable of preparing num square yards per day .
the equipment used for scarification is required to remove num inch across the cutting path in one pass .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard for numinch uniform depth of scarification satisfactorily completed .
when depths greater than num inch are specified the department will pay for each numinch increment of depth separately regardless of how many passes are made with the scarifying equipment .
num numg num initial edition section numlatex modified mortar or concrete wearing surface num descriptionthis work is construction of a one course wearing surface of latex modified mortar or concrete on inservice bridge decks .
the indicated or specified depth of the wearing surface is the minimum .
num material a cement .
type i ip is or ii mh section num. b fine aggregate .
type a section num. c coarse aggregate .
type a no .
num section num. d water .
section num e latex emulsion admixture .
section nume f latex modified mortar or concrete mix design .
use latex modified mortar for depths less than num num inches .
use latex modified concrete when the depth is num num inches or more .
provide a concrete technician as specified in section numdnum .
provide testing facilities and equipment as specified in section numdnum .
the term latex as used in this section refers to latex modified mortar or concrete unless otherwise specified .
provide latex conforming to the following requirements latex modified mortar or concrete mix design requirements requirements mortar concrete cement content bagscu .
yd .
num num latex emulsion admixture modifier galbag of cement num num air content of plastic mix aashto t num num num num num watercement ratio by weight num num num num slumpnum inches aashto t num num num num num percent fine aggregate as percent of total aggregate by weight num num num cementfine aggregatecoarsenum aggregate ratio by weight num num to num numday compressive strength psi ptm nos .
num num num num num numday compressive strength psi ptm nos .
num num num num num num discharge the sample from the mixer and transport it to a point unaffected by vibration .
deposit the sample on the deck in a suitable container and do not disturb for five minutes .
then remix the sample and perform the slump test according to aashto t num .
num dry basis aggregate specific gravity num .
the dry weight ratios are approximate and should produce good workability but due to gradation changes the ratios may be adjusted within limits by the representative .
num cure specimens according to ptm no .
num section num except strip after the first num hours num hours and air cure as specified in section numd table a .
num .
compatibility testing during mix design .
verify the compatibility of the mix components during mix design and ensure that the mix provides sufficient time of workability to satisfactorily finish and texture the surface .
reverify compatibility whenever there is a change in mix components .
provide a technical expert from the latex admixture manufacturer for the design process if directed .
g mix designs using potentially reactive aggregates .
section numg num numa num initial edition num construction a equipment .
obtain acceptance of all equipment for the deck preparation mixing placing and finishing of the latex wearing surface before start of wearingsurface work .
include equipment specifications in the qc plan specified in section numc .
num .
surface preparation equipment .
of the following types num.a sandblasting or water blasting equipment .
capable of removing partially loosened chips of concrete and removing rust and corrosion from reinforcement bars .
water blasting equipment must have a minimum rated capacity of num pounds per square inch .
num.b powerdriven hand tools .
section numc num .
proportioning and mixing equipment .
provide selfcontained mobile equipment capable of continuous mixing with the capacity to deliver a minimum of num cubic yards of latex per hour and subject to the following num.a mixing equipment .
provide equipment with a metal plate or plates permanently attached in a prominent place plainly marked with the gross volume of the unit in terms of mixed mortar operating speed auger mixing angle and the weightcalibrated cement constant of the machine in terms of a revolution counter or other output indicator all as rated by the manufacturer .
num.b compartments .
provide separate compartments to carry the necessary ingredients needed for the production of latex modified mortar or concrete .
cover aggregate bins at all times .
provide cement bins free of moisture and contamination at all times .
provide suitable means to carry water and additives on the truck and to incorporate the additives with the mixing water in the mix .
num.c feed systems .
provide a unit with a feeder system mounted under the compartment bins to deliver the ingredients to the mixing unit .
provide each bin with an accurately controlled individual gate to form an orifice for volumetrically measuring the material drawn from each respective bin compartment .
maintain belt feeders and scrapers to prevent leakage of materials onto the deck .
set the cement bin feeding mechanism to discharge continuously and at a uniform rate a given volumetric weight equivalent to cement during the mixing operation .
coordinate the aggregate feeding mechanisms with the cement feeding mechanisms to deliver the required proportions .
num.d mixing unit .
provide an augertype mixing unit incorporated into the trucks discharge chute or other suitable mixing mechanism capable of producing latex of uniform consistency and discharging the mix without segregation .
num.e dials and measuring devices .
equip the unit with an accurate revolution counter indicator allowing the reading of the volumetric weight equivalent to cement discharged during the mixing operation .
equip the counter with a ticket printout to record this quantity .
use aggregate dials that allow the setting of required openings for volumetric proportioning .
equip the unit with a cumulative water meter and a water flow gauge to accurately indicate the discharge rate of water by volume gallons per minute entering the mix .
provide an approved device on the mixing unit for the representative to use to check the rate of flow of the latex modified admixture entering the mix along with the total amount of latex modified admixture contained in the mix .
coordinate the water and additive measuring devices with the cement and aggregate feeding mechanisms .
equip the flow meters with scales appropriate for the type and amount of material being added .
mount a tachometer on the mixing unit to indicate the drive shaft speed .
place all required indicating devices in full view and near enough to be accurately read or readjusted by the operator while latex is being produced .
provide the operator with convenient access to all controls .
num.f calibration .
provide a unit constructed to allow convenient calibration of the gate openings and numa numa num initial edition meters .
have the calibration conducted by the supplier of the latex in the presence of representatives and recalibrate after every num cubic yards of production for each unit .
document the calibration of form csnum and keep with the mobile mixer .
have the supplier of the latex make satisfactory arrangements with the representative at least num calendar days in advance of calibration .
provide platform scales calibrated annually .
calibrate using the maximum watercement ratio cement and aggregates listed on the approved mix design .
verify compatibility of components and mix workability time while performing a yield test at the conclusion of the calibration process if directed .
conduct a recalibration in the event of a change in source of aggregates .
conduct additional calibration as directed .
have each approved unit carry a copy of the calibration certificate .
in addition to calibration perform a yield test according to aashto t num if directed .
an additional check may be made using the following procedure with the cement meter set on zero and all controls set for the desired mix activate the mixer discharging mixed material into a num cubic yard container num inches by num inches by num inches .
when the container is levelstruck full making provision for settling the material into all corners the cement meter is required to show a discharge of num bags of cement for modified mortar num bags per cubic yard mix or num bags of cement for modified concrete num bags per cubic yard mix .
num.g mixing and delivery control .
proportion measure and batch cement and aggregates by a volumetric weight equivalent method .
in operation the entire measuring and batching mechanism is required to produce the specified proportions of each ingredient .
establish volumeweight relationships during the calibration of the measuring devices .
provide tolerances in proportioning the various ingredients as follows cement weight num to num fine aggregate weight num coarse aggregate weight num water weight or volume num latex weight or volume num during mixing maintain the drive shaft speed as indicated by the tachometer at operating speed num rpm .
set the auger mixer angle in the range determined by the manufacturer .
do not exceed onehalf hour for the interval between the continuous placement of successive batches .
equip the mixer to spray water .
num.h loading .
charge aggregate bins no more than num hours before time of scheduled placement unless otherwise approved by the representative .
ensure the aggregate is maintained in a uniform wet condition before loading .
determine the amount of free water on the aggregates at the time of loading by performing aggregate moisture tests according to aashto tnum andor astm c num .
adjust mix proportions to account for the amount of available free water .
empty bins and recharge if not utilized within num hours or if conditions contribute to variable moisture content of the aggregate .
stock aggregates in a manner that prevents contamination .
upon arrival at the project site empty all bins of aggregate that were charged before coming to the current project .
empty the cement bin and latex tank unless use on a previous project can be verified in writing by a department representative or in the presence of the representative obtain a sample of the liquid latex admixture and cement being used in the mixture and deliver the samples to the representative for testing .
the representative will submit the samples to lts for testing .
circulate and mix latex tank as recommended by the latex manufacturer .
num .
placing and finishing equipment .
provide hand tools for placing and brushingin freshly mixed latex and for distributing latex overlay to approximately the correct level for striking off with the screed .
use approved handoperated vibrators and screeds to place and finish small areas of work .
do not use gaspowered vibrators .
use an approved finishing machine complying with the following requirements for finishing all large areas of work use a finishing machine that is selfpropelled and capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control .
make provision for raising all screeds to clear the screeded surface for numa numc num initial edition traveling in reverse .
use a revolvingdrum type finishing machine with one or more rotating roller augers preceded by a num vpm to num vpm vibratory pan .
verify frequency with a tachometer .
for small placements the finishing machine may be of the type designed to finish the overlay with a vibrating screed .
provide variable vibration frequency with positive control between num vpm and num vpm .
use screeds with a metalcovered bottom face no less than num inches wide .
provide the screeds with positive control of the vertical position .
consolidate latex with a handoperated vibrator .
use a suitable portable lightweight or wheeled work bridge behind the finishing operation .
b surface preparation .
remove unsound concrete and repair as specified in section num .
not more than num days before the placement of the overlay scarify the deck surface to a minimum depth of num inch as specified in section num .
not more than num hours before placement begins clean the entire surface by an approved method including edges of previously placed lanes of latex to remove any trowelcut surfaces and promote bond .
clean the surface thoroughly with a detergent waterblast and rinse or sandblast and air blast using clean oil free compressed air to remove all dust slurry blast media weak or fractured concrete petroleum stains leaves paint other debris rust from any exposed bars oil or other foreign materials detrimental to achieving bond if necessary .
protect the entired prepared deck surface against contamination by covering with clean full width polyethylene sheeting until the overlay operations are completed .
include cleaning methods in qc plan as specified in section numc .
allow num hours of curing to elapse before scarifying or chipping is performed on adjacent concrete within num feet of previously placed latex .
c placing and finishing .
prepare and submit a field operation qc plan for review and acceptance by the representative as outlined on csnum .
submit the field operation qc plan at least num days before the proposed start of placing the wearing surface .
do not proceed with latex placement until the qc plan has been accepted .
include in the plan the method of operations and a sketch describing the equipment and showing complete details of supports for the equipment .
include a list of key personnel and relevant experience .
raise expansion dams and scuppers as indicated before placing the wearing surface .
provide anchorage for supporting rails for horizontal and vertical stability .
do not treat screed rails with parting compound to facilitate their removal .
provide all necessary finishing tools equipment and manpower at the site of work and ensure that key personnel are experienced in the placement of latex wearing surfaces .
adjust screeds to finished grade before placing the wearing surface .
for superelevated bridges adjust screed guides to compensate for the curvature .
determine the finished grade by raising the existing grade by the amount indicated .
provide a final setting of the screeds such that a smooth riding surface is achieved .
do not lower the screed to compensate for any wear on the existing deck or for over scarifying .
immediately before placement of the latex thoroughly wet the clean surface for a period of not less than one hour .
vacuum or blow out all standing water in depressions holes or areas of concrete removal with clean oilfree compressed air .
do not allow two cycle gasoil powered equipment on the prepared deck .
maintain prepared deck in a damp puddlefree condition .
use a foggermister to dampen any visible dry spots before the latex placement .
first brush latex grout on to the damp prepared surface .
when using latex concrete collect and discard excess aggregate .
do not overextract grout from the mix to the point that the grout becomes diluted .
if directed apply a second broomed coat of grout to areas where grout is diluted by excessive surface moisture .
immediately remove any material from the deck that is not properly mixed or proportioned or lacks any component material and regrout the area .
ensure that all vertical and horizontal surfaces receive a thorough even coating and that the rate of progress is limited so that the brushed material does not become dry before it is covered with additional material as required for the final grade .
complete all type num deck repairs and type num deck repairs exceeding num inches in depth as specified in section num before placement of the latex overlay .
type num deck repairs as specified in section num less than num inches in depth can be placed concurrently with the latex overlay .
fill and consolidate each type num deck repair area less than num inches in depth before the advancement of the overlay placement operation .
numc numd num initial edition place and strikeoff the mixture to approximately num inch above final grade .
use spud vibration at the edges adjacent to joint bulkheads and expansion dams in depressions and in areas of bridge deck repair .
finish to final grade with the approved finishing equipment .
handfinishing with a float may be required along the edge of the placement or on small areas of repair .
edgetooling is required at joints except next to metal expansion dams curbs and previously placed lanes .
place latex continuously and complete the finishing of each area within num minutes after the initial brooming .
provide finish with a closed surface free of pock marks ridges tears and other defects .
when placing latex against latex that has not achieved initial set but has formed a surface crust or film remove the surface crust until plastic latex is exposed place fresh latex against the exposed surface and consolidate both until homogeneous .
separate screed rails and construction bulkheads from the newly placed material by passing a pointing trowel along their inside face .
do not separate metal expansion dams from the wearing surface .
ensure that this trowel cut is made for the entire depth and length of rails after the mixture has stiffened sufficiently .
conduct all operations behind the finishing machines or screeds from work bridges suspended above the wearing surface .
provide bridges of rigid construction .
do not allow work bridges to come into contact with the surface of the latex .
straightedge and edge while the latex is still workable as specified in section numknum .
after the straightedge testing and surface corrections have been completed and before the latex becomes nonplastic texture the surface as specified for concrete pavements in section numknum .
cure the wearing surface as soon as possible without marking the fresh latex .
if mechanical texturing is indicated wait num days after placing latex before applying texturing .
after the latex has hardened test the surface again as specified in section numo .
resound the deck if directed .
provide adequate lighting as indicated on the field operation qc plan for any placement not completed in the daylight .
ensure lighting allows proper placement testing and inspection operations of the entire surface area and until curing covers are placed over the surface area .
d curing and protection .
begin curing as soon as the latex has been placed finished and textured if applicable .
do not use membraneforming or monomolecular curing compounds num .
curing temperatures and records of temperature .
sections numpnum numpnum and as follows maintain cure temperatures of numf or greater throught the wet and dry cure period .
do not count as a curing day a day on which the curing temperature drops below numf at any time during that day .
if at any time during the curing period the curing temperature falls below numf the department will consider the work unsatisfactory and it will be rejected .
protect the overlay using methods prescribed in section numpnum during cool weather and section numpnum during cold weather .
num .
wet cure .
promptly cover the surface with a single layer of clean wet burlap as soon as the surface will support it without deformation .
within num minutes of covering with wet burlap place a layer of white polyethylene film num mil minimum thickness on the wet burlap and cure the surface as specified in table a .
secure the edges of the polyethylene film to prevent wind intrusion .
keep the burlap material saturated during the wet cure period .
wet burlapbacked white polyethylene sheets may be substituted for the polyethylene film with the approval of the representative but do not use them to replace the initial wet burlap .
num .
dry cure .
after wetcuring remove the curing covers and dry cure for an additional period as specified in table a .
maintain the surface of the overlay in a dry condition for the entire dry cure period .
cover the surface with waterproof coverings as required .
if the overlay surface becomes wet during the dry period extend the dry cure period to the equivalent time that the overlay surface was wet .
numd numf num initial edition table a curing times and application of live load depth wet cure hours dry cure hours live load application total cure time hours live load application comp .
strength psi num inches num num num num num inches num num num num e limitations of operations .
place the latex during periods where the ambient and substrate deck temperatures are between numf and numf .
at ambient temperatures above numf conduct the overlay placement at night or early morning hours when directed by the representative if in their opinion a satisfactory placement can not otherwise be achieved .
if the ambient temperature is expected to reach numf at any time num hours before the overlay placement take any steps necessary but not limited to the following to mitigate the mix component temperatures that are acceptable to the representative cover the latex admixture tanker and cement tanker with wet burlap or station the latex admixture tanker and cement tanker in shaded areas condition aggregates with cool water cover with lightcolored tarps andor stockpile in shaded areas charge the water tank on the mobile mixer with cool water as close to the time of placement as possible or condition with ice park mobile mixes in shaded areas or cover with wet burlap before the placement .
place latex at a plastic latex mixture temperature between numf and numf .
stop the placement at any time the represenative determines that a satisfactory surface finish is not being achieved .
install a bulkhead in case of a major delay in the placement operation resulting in the formation of a surface film .
during minor delays protect the placement from drying with several layers of wet burlap .
take adequate precautions to protect freshly placed latex from rain .
stop all placement operations when it starts to rain .
the representative may order removal of any material damaged by rainfall .
do not place latex when the evaporation rate exceeds num pound per square foot per hour as determined by aci numr figure num .
wind breaks sunshades or fogging may be used to reduce evaporation to below the maximum allowable rate .
discontinue any placement when the representative determines that flash set of the latex does not provide a suitable placement or finish .
submit redesign and corrective action plan as directed .
f testing and acceptance .
num .
concrete field testing technician .
section numdnum.a num .
testing facilities and equipment .
section numdnum num .
qc and acceptance testing .
num.a qc sampling and testing of plastic latex .
perform testing according to the accepted qc plan .
include in the qc plan testing and sampling frequencies and target points to initiate corrective measures .
furnish a copy of the qc plan to be maintained in the departments field office .
test each num cubic yards of latex for plastic air content temperature and slump .
continue testing the load until control is established .
do not wait for the completion of the initial test before collecting subsequent samples .
perform slump tests as specified in section numf and air content tests according to aashto t num .
notify the inspector when sampling and qc testing are to be performed .
the inspector will witness the sampling and qc testing .
report test results to the inspector promptly .
coordinate and facilitate changes as needed in a timely manner .
do not incorporate any latex into the work that does not conform to specification requirements .
immediately separate and remove nonconforming material from the deck surface .
numf num num initial edition num.b acceptance testing .
latex will be accepted on a lotbylot basis .
test for plastic air content according to aashto t num temperature and compressive strength according to ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num .
each lot will consist of num cubic yards or a days placement whichever is less .
the inspector will select acceptance samples nnum according to ptm no .
num .
obtain samples of fresh latex at the point of placement under the direction and supervision of the inspector and according to ptm no .
num .
acceptance testing of plastic concrete will be performed at a site near the point of placement as selected by the inspector .
latex will be tested for yield as directed .
latex not conforming to specification requirements at the point of placement will be rejected .
if the results of testing the plastic latex conform to specification requirements mold a sufficient number of acceptance cylinders for numday compressive strength tests .
compressive strength cylinder molds of numinch diameter by numinch height may be substituted for cylinder molds of numinch diameter by numinch height .
perform compressive testing according to ptm no .
num .
the inspector will identify the cylinders as acceptance cylinders .
field cure cylinders as specified in section numf .
the compressive strength of the sample will be determined as the average of the compressive strength of two individual cylinders .
the lot will be accepted when the numday compressive strength meets or exceeds num pounds per square inch .
g application of live loads .
after latex placement do not allow heavy equipment or vehicular traffic on the latex surface until the end of the period specified in section numd table a and until the latex has achieved the minimum strength specified in section numd table a. h defective work .
sections num and numu and as follows when latex overlays exhibit cracking or surface tears perform an investigation with the representative to determine the type of cracking source of cracking and extent of cracking .
measure the width depth and length of each crack and establish the locations of the ends of each crack with respect to permanent reference points .
coring may be necessary if crack depths can not be accurately determined using a mechanical probe .
if coring is required obtain two cores at each location submit one core to an independent laboratory for analysis of the cracks and submit one core to the representative for analysis of the cracks at the lts .
if the investigation indicates the type of cracking to be nonstructural cracks plastic shrinkage drying shrinkage temperature related or surface tears caused by finishing and texturing that are evidence of defects in materials or workmanship repair surface cracks and tears greater than num inch depth and between num inch and num inch width at no expense to the department .
use a high molecular weight methacrylate penetrating crack sealer a low viscosity epoxy resin or other suitable material to repair the surface cracks and tears .
submit for review a detailed quality control and action plan that includes at a minimum the proposed crack sealing material data sheet from the manufacture and conditions for use including ambient and substrate temperature and moisture conditions .
do not perform any crack sealing before the quality control and action plan has been reviewed by the representative .
keep cracks clean covered and dry until the crack sealing operation is performed to the satisfaction of the representative .
unless directed in writing by the district executive remove and replace wearing surface deficient in surface tolerance as specified in section numo defective in air content as specified in section numf defective in compressive strength as specified in section numfnum.b failing to bond to the substrate exhibiting nonstructural cracks or tears greater than num inch depth and greater than num inch width or showing surface defects resulting from the effects of rain improper finish improper cure or honeycombing which in the representatives opinion can not be repaired .
num measurement and paymentsquare yard as indicated for the type specified for the item indicated .
the department will pay for grade adjustments of expansion dams and scuppers and scarification separately .
the department will pay for repairs to the bridge deck separately under the respective type of concrete bridge deck repair items .
num numa num num change no .
num section numshotcrete num descriptionthis work is the production application and construction of pneumatically applied shotcrete according to aci num .
shotcrete may be produced by either drymix or a wetmix process .
num material a shotcrete .
num .
cement .
section num num .
pozzolans .
section num .
use a quantity of silica fume from num to num by weight of the total cementitious material .
for prepackaged dry mix shotcrete use silica fume that is preblended by the manufacturer .
num .
water .
section num num .
aggregates .
type a section num .
for shotcrete mix designs using potentially reactive aggregate evaluate aggregate for reactivity and if using aggregates that are deemed potentially reactive use according to section numg .
conform to the composite gradation envelope in table a .
other gradations according to aci num table num may be approved by the representative .
table a aggregate gradation sieve size total percent passing numinch num numinch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num .
admixtures .
section num .
use a migrating corrosion inhibitor according to aashto m num from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
provide a dosage according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
fibers .
astm c num type ii or iii .
provide a minimum dosage of num pounds per cubic yard .
use fibers that are a minimum of numinch length monofilament or collatedfibrillated microfibers .
num .
mix design performance requirements .
proportion shotcrete to meet the mix design requirements in table b .
table b shotcrete mix design requirements test description test method age days specified requirements maximum watercementitious materials ratio num air content as shot aashto t num num num slump at discharge into pump inches aashto t num num num num num minimum compressive strength psi ptm no .
num num num numa numb num num change no .
num num num compensate for air entrainment loss during shooting according to aci num num .
design basis .
section numc and aci num .
aggregate and cement may be batched by weight or volume according to aashto m num or aashto m num .
for prepackaged drymixes provide mixes according to astm c num and from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. b reinforcement .
section num as indicated .
use annealed iron wire astm a num for fastening .
c burlap .
section numd .
d liquid membraneforming curing compound clear or white .
section numa .
e wedge expansion anchors .
as indicated from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
num construction a general .
apply shotcrete according to aci num and aci cpnum .
assign a shotcrete crew supervisor that has at least num years experience in shotcrete repair work on projects of similar size and character .
provide nozzlemen who are certified by the aci for application of the proposed shotcrete process for both vertical and overhead surface and who have successfully completed three projects of similar size and character .
submit written documentation to the structure control engineer at least num working days before start of shotcrete work which provides the following proof of experience for shotcrete crew supervisor and nozzlemen .
submit three references for crew supervisor and nozzlemen from persons who were responsible for supervision of these projects .
mix designs and test records showing all material sources and indicating conformance to project specifications for all shotcrete materials .
details of proposed forming bracing falsework or temporary support systems .
a field qc plan provide in the field qc plan at a minimum the following a list of the proposed shotcreting equipment including water supply pumps valves and mixing equipment .
provide brand name model and capacity of proposed pump or gun and air compressor .
details of proposed means of preparing existing concrete substrate in areas to receive shotcrete .
details of proposed means of controlling line grade and reinforcement cover .
details of proposed methods for control and disposal of waste materials including demolition slurries blasting grits concrete debris waste shotcrete rebound and overspray .
details of the proposed curing procedures do not start shotcreting work until the structure control engineer has reviewed and approved all submittals .
b preparation of structure .
thoroughly clean the surfaces and voids of rust scale grease loose and disintegrated particles and material that might impair the bond between the surfaces to be covered and the shotcrete mixture .
remove unsound concrete and mortar as directed .
after removal of unsound material clean by dry abrasive blasting to a sound surface .
clean existing reinforcement to sspcspnum cleaning standards using dry abrasive blasting .
numb nume num num change no .
num water blasting may be used if the same results are achieved as those of dry abrasive blasting .
saturate the prepared concrete substrate with clean water the day before shotcrete application .
bring wetted surfaces to a saturated surface dry ssd condition before application of shotcrete .
do not apply shotcrete to a dry surface or to a surface with free surface water .
c placing reinforcement .
provide reinforcement including wire fabric meeting the general and storage requirements of sections numa and numb .
lap adjacent sheets of wire fabric a minimum length of num inches for numinch mesh and a minimum length of num inches for numinch mesh .
fasten wire fabric together with wire ties at intervals of not more than num inches .
num .
steel surfaces .
section numbnum or as indicated .
num .
concrete and masonry surfaces .
in areas of buildup for the replacement of unsound material unless otherwise indicated or directed place a layer of wire fabric for each numinch layer of shotcrete or fraction thereof .
more than one layer of fabric may be attached to an expansion anchor provided the anchor is long enough .
hold the wire fabric in place by means of wedge expansion anchors either num inch diameter by num to num num inches in length or num inch diameter by num num to num inches in length .
use longer numinch diameter anchors where necessary unless otherwise indicated .
space num inch diameter anchors approximately num inches centertocenter in each direction starting num inches from the outside edges of the areas to be shotcreted .
space numinch diameter anchors approximately num inches centertocenter in each direction starting num inches from the outside edges of the areas to be shotcreted .
fasten the fabric to the wedge expansion anchors away from the prepared surface with num inch clear below the finished surface of the repair .
where existing reinforcement is exposed due to removal of deteriorated concrete wire fabric may be tied to this reinforcement at numinch intervals to form a cage to position and support the fabric within num inch of the finished surface of repair .
avoid excessive wire fabric layers which may create planes of weakness or internal stresses .
d weather restrictions .
num .
cold weather .
unless otherwise allowed in writing discontinue shotcreting operations when the descending air temperature away from artificial heat falls to numf or less .
do not resume operations until the air temperature away from artificial heat rises above numf .
for mix proportioning in cold weather do not let water with a temperature above numf come in direct contact with the cement until the cement has been mixed with the aggregates .
place shotcrete when the mix temperature is between numf and numf .
do not use materials containing frost lumps or crusts of hardened materials .
do not place shotcrete on surfaces which are less than numf .
num .
hot weather .
when the air temperature in the immediate vicinity of operation rises to numf or above take thermometer readings of the plastic concrete at numhour intervals and at the conclusion of the mixing cycles .
discontinue shotcrete operations if the plastic concrete temperature exceeds numf for wet mix or numf for dry mix .
lower the temperature of reinforcement and receiving surfaces below numf before shooting .
num .
protection from elements .
protect all shotcrete applications and completed surfaces from damage due to environmental conditions such as wind and rain .
e batching and supply .
num .
wetmix shotcrete .
mix prepackaged dry mix materials with water added at site according to section num .
for plant or truck mixed material produce according to section num .
apply all shotcrete within num minutes after addition of mix water to the batch .
do not use shotcrete that has exceeded num minutes without agitation .
utilize shotcrete delivery equipment capable of delivering a steady stream of uniformly mixed material to the discharge nozzle at the proper velocity and rate of discharge .
num .
drymix shotcrete .
mix dry material with equipment as specified in aci num .
apply all drymix shotcrete within num minutes of the first contact of cement with water .
discard aged materials and do not apply them in the work .
provide shotcrete delivery equipment capable of delivering an uninterrupted flow of predampened material to the discharge nozzle at sufficient velocity .
use a rotary gun or pressure vessel with predampening equipment .
numf numj num num change no .
num f preconstruction trial .
perform a preconstruction trial to evaluate the ability of the proposed materials shotcrete mixture equipment and crew to produce shotcrete conforming to the project specifications .
acceptance of the preconstruction trial results is required before application of any shotcrete on the project .
perform the preconstruction trial with the certified nozzlemen proposed for use on the project .
nozzlemen who have not been prequalified may not apply shotcrete on the project .
use the same materials shotcrete mixture and equipment proposed for use on the project and approximate working conditions reinforcement and shooting positions vertical and overhead .
obtain num cores from each mockup at locations selected by the representative .
at least two of the cores must contain reinforcement when the work represented by the panels contains reinforcement .
the representative will visually examine the cores for defects .
if defects are evident the representative will grade the cores according to the requirements of aci num .
a test mockup with any single core grade exceeding core grade num or with more than two of the num cores having a core grade num will be considered a failure .
in addition to the mockup prequalify the shotcrete mixture by shooting a plain nonreinforced test panel minimum num inches x num inches according to astm c num .
perform compressive strength testing on num cores from the test panel according to ptm no .
num .
mixture will be approved for application on the project if all num cores meet the num day minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
if the preconstruction test specimens fail to meet the project performance requirements make the necessary adjustments in shotcrete materials mixture design or application and reshoot test panels .
do not start shotcrete work on the project until the preconstruction performance testing requirements have been met .
g construction testing .
shoot one construction test panel minimum num inches x num inches per lot .
establish new lots daily .
a lot is each num cubic yards of shotcrete production or portion thereof .
shoot the test panel in the same position as the work being done .
produce store handle and field cure construction lot test panels in the same manner as the permanent work .
extract num cores from each test panel according to astm c num for compressive strength testing .
perform num day acceptance testing on the extracted cores according to astm c num and ptm no .
num .
acceptance of the lot represented will be based on the compressive strength testing of the num day acceptance cores .
if the results of the average nnum fails to meet a minimum num day compressive strength of num pounds per square inch adjustments to payment will be made according to section numd using the minimum compressive strength requirements of class aaa concrete .
h shotcrete application .
all areas prepared for shotcrete application are to be reviewed and approved by the representative before the application of any shotcrete .
for restoration and repair work finish shotcrete to match existing surfaces .
for finishing on bridge piers caps soffit and abutments trim shotcrete with a cutting rod or other suitable device to the specified line and grade .
unless otherwise specified finish shotcrete to a sandy texture as approved by the representative using a rubber float or other suitable finishing tools .
tolerance of finished surface must not exceed numinch under a numfoot straightedge in any direction .
abrupt surface irregularities must not exceed numinch .
continuously remove accumulations of rebound and overspray using blowpipe or other suitable devices in advance of deposition of new shotcrete .
protect all fixtures and adjacent concrete surfaces from buildup of rebound overspray and shotcrete trimmings .
remove all such materials on a daily basis .
construct construction joints to a num degree tapered edge .
cut plastic shotcrete with a trowel or other suitable tool to form a construction joint .
do not featheredge construction joints .
for large applications requiring multiple layers remove curing compound on previously placed shotcrete surfaces by sandblasting .
install approved depth gauges to indicate the thickness of the shotcrete layers .
install depth gauges on numfoot centers longitudinally and transversely with no less than two gauges per increment of surface area to receive shotcrete .
moisten all surfaces .
i curing .
section numpnum.b and as follows on completion of finishing water cure using double thickness burlap andor fogging for num days .
keep shotcrete and burlap fully saturated during the entire curing period .
assure num contact between the burlap application and shotcrete material .
as an alternate two applications of liquid membraneforming curing compounds may be used only when water curing is not feasible and approved by the representative .
j hot and cold weather protection .
section nump and as follows maintain the air temperature of the shotcrete surfaces at numf or greater for the first num days after application of shotcrete and above numf for the last num days of the curing period .
do not count a day on which the minimum curing temperatures are not maintained as a curing numj num num num change no .
num day .
do not utilize cold weather curing until the representative reviews the proposed means of maintaining the curing temperature .
do not use unvented heaters that may cause carbonation .
if at any time during the curing period the curing temperature falls below numf the department will consider the work unsatisfactory and will reject it .
k shotcrete acceptance and repair .
shotcrete not conforming to specifications will be rejected .
deficiencies during the shotcrete application process such as but not limited to the following constitute a cause for shotcrete rejection failure to properly control and remove buildup of overspray and rebound incomplete consolidation of shotcrete around reinforcing steel incorporation of sand lenses excessive voids delaminations sags or sloughing failure to apply shotcrete to the required line grade and tolerance perform remedial work to correct deficiencies while shotcrete is still plastic .
the hardened shotcrete will be examined by the representative for any evidence of excessive plastic or drying shrinkage cracking tears featheredging sloughs or other deficiencies .
the representative will sound the material to check for delaminations .
if delaminations are discovered during sounding or if directed by the representative conduct bond pulloff tests according to astm c num at locations and a frequency selected by the representative .
the average of a set of three bond pulloff strengths must exceed num pounds per square inch with no individual result less than num pounds per square inch .
if the bond pulloff strength results fail to meet the specified requirement the work will be rejected .
when test results or the assessment of plastic or hardened shotcrete indicate deficiencies or nonconformance to the specifications the representative will implement a program to evaluate the inplace shotcrete .
provide all labor materials and equipment necessary to perform the evaluation at no cost to the department .
correct deficiencies to the satisfaction of the representative .
remove and replace deficient or nonconforming shotcrete at no cost to the department .
num measurement and paymentsquare foot num numb num num change no .
num section numsteel bridge superstructure num descriptionthis work is the construction of a steel bridge superstructure .
num material a deck and barriers .
cement concrete structuressection num preformed neoprene compression joint sealsection num pedestrian railingsection num aluminum bridge hand railingsection num steel bridge hand railingsection num protective barriersection num protective fencesection num protective coating for reinforced concrete surfacessection numa armored preformed neoprene compression damsection num tooth expansion dam with drain troughsection num reinforcement barssection num neoprene strip seal damsection num b fabricated structural steel .
section num c paint .
section num d neoprene bearing pads .
sections num and numg e highload multirotational bearings .
section num f polymer modified mortar for beam seat leveling .
section nume num construction a general .
the superstructure consists of all indicated portions of the bridge above the bridge seat and includes bearings bearings and anchors set in the substructure abutment backwalls cheekwalls bridge drainage down to but not including the drain box and portions of wings and appurtenances above the horizontal construction joint nearest the bridge seat .
b superstructure .
construct the superstructure as indicated as shown on the standard drawings and as follows fabricated structural steelsection num numb numc num num change no .
num cement concrete structuressection num reinforcement barssection num preformed neoprene compression joint seal for bridgessection num tooth expansion dam with drain troughsection num neoprene strip seal damsection num armored preformed neoprene compression damsection num pedestrian railingsection num aluminum bridge hand railingsection num steel bridge hand railingsection num protective barriersection num protective fencesection num protective coating for reinforced concrete surfacessection numa c erection .
num .
handling and storing materials .
place material stored at the job site on skids .
keep it clean and properly drained .
place girders and beams upright and shore them .
support long members such as columns and chords on skids placed near enough together to prevent injury from deflection .
if the contract is for erection only check material turned over against the shipping lists and promptly report in writing any shortage or injury discovered .
the contractor is responsible for the loss of any material while in the contractors care or for any damage caused to it after being received by the contractor .
num .
falsework design and construction .
design and construct falsework according to aashto num num aashto publications guide design specifications for bridge temporary works and construction handbook for bridge temporary works and as specified in section numc .
num.a general .
provide all tools machinery and equipment necessary to erect the falsework .
falsework is considered to be any temporary structure that supports structural elements of concrete steel masonry or other materials during their construction or erection .
form travelers as used in segmental cantilever construction are considered to be a combination of falsework and forms .
have a professional engineer registered in the state sign and seal the working drawings for the falsework if the height of falsework exceeds num feet or if traffic other than workmen involved in constructing the bridge will travel under the bridge .
furnish falsework of sufficient rigidity and strength to safely support all forces imposed and to produce in the finished structure the lines and grades indicated .
num.b design loads .
ensure that the design load for falsework consists of the sum of dead and live vertical loads and any horizontal loads .
as a minimum include in the dead loads the gravitational force of the falsework and all construction material to be supported .
assume the combined density of concrete reinforcing and prestressing steel and forms to be not less than num pounds per cubic foot of normal density concrete or num pounds per cubic foot of lowdensity concrete that is supported .
for live loads include the actual force of any equipment to be supported applied as concentrated forces at the points of contact and a uniform force of not less than num pounds per square foot applied over the area supported plus num pounds per linear foot applied at the outside edge of deck overhangs .
for the design of the falsework bracing system use the sum of the horizontal forces due to equipment construction sequence including unbalanced hydrostatic forces from fluid concrete stream flow when applicable and numc numc num num change no .
num an allowance for wind .
however do not allow the horizontal force to be resisted in any direction to be less than num of the total dead load .
do not exceed the loadcarrying capacity of the structure or portion of structure as computed using aashto lrfd specifications article num by imposing forces on existing new or partially completed portions of structures due to construction operations .
for the compressive strength of concrete fc in computations of the loadcarrying capacity use the lesser of the actual compressive strength at the time of loading or the specified compressive strength of the concrete .
num.c clearances .
unless otherwise provided for roadways that are to remain open to traffic supply minimum dimensions for clear openings through falsework at least num feet wider than the width of the approach traveled way measured between barriers when used and num feet high except over interstate routes and freeways use num feet for the minimum vertical clearance .
num.d erection drawings .
submit drawings illustrating the proposed method of erection .
show details on the drawings of all falsework bents bracing guys deadmen lifting devices and attachments to the bridge members .
show the sequence of erection location of cranes and barges crane capacities location of lifting points on the bridge members and masses weights of the members .
supply plans and drawings complete in detail for all anticipated phases and conditions during erection .
if required furnish calculations to demonstrate that allowable stresses are not exceeded and that member capacities and final geometry will be correct .
do not proceed with erection until the drawings have been accepted .
num.e construction .
construct falsework and set it to grades that allow for its anticipated settlement and deflection and for the vertical alignment and camber indicated or ordered by the representative for the permanent structure .
use variable depth camber strips between falsework beams and soffit forms to accomplish this if directed .
use suitable screw jacks pairs of wedges or other devices at each post to adjust falsework to grade to allow minor adjustments during the placement of concrete or structural steel should observed settlements deviate from those anticipated and to allow for the gradual release of the falsework .
provide telltales attached to the forms and extending to the ground or other means for accurate measurement of falsework settlement during the placing and curing of the concrete .
support falsework or formwork for deck slabs on girder bridges directly on the girders so that there will be no appreciable differential settlement during placing of the concrete .
brace and tie girders to resist any forces that would cause rotation or torsion in the girders caused by the placing of concrete for diaphragms or deck .
do not weld falsework support brackets or braces to structural steel members or reinforcing steel unless specifically allowed .
num.f removal .
section numq num .
erection procedure .
num.a conformance to drawings .
ensure that the erection procedure conforms to the erection drawings .
have a professional engineer registered in the state sign and seal these drawings .
for falsework drawings submit as specified in section numcnum.d .
any modification to or deviations from this erection procedure will require revised drawings and verification of stresses and geometry .
num.b erection stresses .
account for any erection stresses that are induced in the structure as a result of the use of a method of erection or equipment which differs from that indicated or specified and which will remain in the finished structure as lockedin stresses .
provide additional material at no additional cost to the department to keep both temporary and final stresses within the allowable limits used in design .
provide temporary bracing or stiffening devices to accommodate handling stresses in individual members or segments of the structure during erection .
num.c maintaining alignment and camber .
during erection support segments of the structure in a manner that will produce the proper alignment and camber in the completed structure .
install cross frames and diagonal bracing as necessary during the erection process to provide stability and ensure correct geometry .
provide temporary bracing if necessary at any stage of erection .
num .
bearings and anchorage .
numc numc num num change no .
num num.a general .
this work consists of furnishing and installing bridge bearings .
bearing types include but are not limited to elastomeric pad rocker roller pot spherical disk and sliding plate bearings .
included as components of bearings are masonry sole and shim plates bronze or copperalloyed bearing and expansion plates anchor bolts ptfe sheets or surfacing lubricants and adhesives .
the furnishing and installation of bedding materials used under masonry plates is also included in this work .
construct bearings according to the indicated details .
if complete details are not provided furnish bearings that conform to the limited indicated details and provide the design capacities for loads and movements shown or specified and the performance characteristics specified .
num.a.num working drawings .
if complete details for bearings and their anchorages are not indicated prepare and submit working drawings for the bearings .
show all details of the bearings and of the materials proposed for use on such drawings and have the drawings approved before fabrication of the bearings is begun .
num.a.num packaging handling and storage .
before shipment from the point of manufacture package bearings in such a manner to ensure that during shipment and storage the bearings will be protected against damage from handling weather or any normal hazard .
clearly identify each completed bearings components securely bolt strap or otherwise fasten its components to prevent any relative movement and mark on its top its location and orientation in each structure in the project in conformity with the plans .
do not dismantle bearings at the site unless absolutely necessary for inspection or installation .
store all bearing devices and components at the work site in an area that provides protection from environmental and physical damage .
ensure that bearings are clean and free of all foreign substances when installed .
num.a.num manufacture or fabrication .
unless otherwise specified or indicated furnish the surface finish of bearing components that come into contact with each other or with concrete but are not embedded in concrete as specified in section numq .
num.a.num construction and installation .
install bearings to the positions indicated .
at the time of installation set bearings to the dimensions prescribed by the manufacturer the representative or as indicated .
adjust bearings as necessary to take into account the temperature and future movements of the bridge .
set bridge bearings level in exact position and to have full and even bearing on all bearing planes .
for bearing surfaces located at improper elevations or set not level and true to plane either grind the surface grout pack bearings or modify the bearing such that intended bearing placement is as originally designed with the least amount of bearing modification .
use a filler or fabric material as specified in section numh to bed on the concrete metallic bearing assemblies not embedded in the concrete .
set elastomeric bearing pads directly on properly prepared concrete surfaces without bedding material .
for bearings seated directly on steel work machine the supporting surface so as to provide a level and planar surface to place the bearing .
num.b preparation of bearing areas .
prepare bearing areas as specified in section numknum and furnish bedding material as specified in section numh .
num.c elastomeric bearings .
elastomeric bearings include unreinforced pads consisting of neoprene only and reinforced pads with steel or fabric laminates .
furnish bearings with the dimensions material properties neoprene grade and type of laminates indicated .
num.c.num setting bearing pads .
set bearing pads as specified in section numcnum and as indicated .
where elastomeric bearings are used at piers of continuous bridges provide full contact between the beam the bearing pad and the beam seat unless the plans indicate that a liftoff condition is expected when the beam is initially set on the pad .
num.c.num resetting bearing pads .
if indicated reset expansion bearings after all dead loads have been placed .
submit a plan showing and describing the jacking procedure for review and acceptance at least num weeks before proceeding with the jacking operations .
provide calculations showing actual and allowable bearing stresses in the bearing plates and bearing areas at the jacking locations .
have the plans and calculations sealed and signed by a professional engineer registered in the state .
before resetting truck mixers and slipforming equipment necessary for placement of barriers and numc numc num num change no .
num sidewalks will be allowed on the structure .
do not allow other construction equipment or traffic on the structure until the bearings are reset .
coordinate the resetting operation with the installation of onbridge hardware including conduits utilities expansion dams and drainage to prevent damage to these components when the beams are jacked and lowered .
furnish jacks with a working capacity at least equal to the jacking forces indicated .
jack beams at expansion bearings to achieve a numinch gap between the bottom of beam or sole plate and the top of the entire bearing pad .
place jacks at jacking points indicated .
unless indicated otherwise jack all beams simultaneously .
limit the differential rise between all beams to num inch during jacking .
after jacking center the pad beneath the sole plate or beam bearing area as indicated .
lower the beams onto the bearings in the same manner as they were jacked .
reset bearings when the ambient temperature is above numf and below numf .
num.d anchor bolts .
num.d.num fabrication .
furnish swedged or threaded anchor bolts to secure a satisfactory grip upon the material used to embed them in the holes .
num.d.num setting anchor bolts .
set by template to the indicated elevation and alignment .
as an alternate set in preformed holes num inches larger than the bolt diameter .
clean the holes set and fix the bolts and fill the holes with nonshrink grout as specified in section nume .
use drilled holes as a substitute for preformed holes in abutments and solid piers only .
protect the holes against water entry during freezing periods .
limit the threaded projection above the nut to between num inch and num inch .
num.e setting bearings .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows align masonry plates and set them so they will be centered with the rockers rollers sole plates and bearing plates at numf and under full dead load .
make adjustment for the difference in temperature from numf at time of erection .
compensate for the change in length of the bottom chord or flange due to the later addition of dead loads .
maximum deviation of the top of rockers from a vertical position and maximum eccentricity of the parts of sliding bearings is numl num inch where l in inches is the horizontal distance between the expansion bearing and the fixed bearing .
num.f spherical bearings .
fabricate test and install spherical bearings as indicated .
num.g separate contracts for substructure and superstructure .
if the substructure and superstructure are built under separate contracts proceed as follows num.g.num substructure contractor .
accurately place the anchor bolts and grind the bearing areas to the correct plane and elevation .
at the completion of the substructure make an asbuilt survey to accurately show the asbuilt versus the plan location of all substructure centerlines girder centerlines anchor bolt group centerlines anchor bolts bearing elevations and any other elements or items that may affect the layout or placement of the work to be furnished by the superstructure contractor .
show all of the pertinent asbuilt survey information including dimensions elevations and angles on suitable drawings as specified for shop drawings together with the corresponding design drawing information for direct comparison .
submit the original drawings or equal to the department as soon as practical after completion of the survey .
conduct the survey and have the survey drawings signed by a surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state .
provide documented evidence to show that the bearings can be set properly within the tolerances specified in section numcnum.d .
num.g.num superstructure contractor .
use the asbuilt survey information furnished by the substructure contractor for the accurate layout of the connecting parts of the work .
verify location level and elevation of all bearing seats and anchor bolts as soon as possible .
verify before the fabrication of any metal work in cases where the substructure is completed before award of the superstructure contract or before erection of the metal work in cases where fabrication has been started before completion of the substructure .
furnish and install bedding bearings and nuts and washers for anchor bolts .
num.h highload multirotational bearings .
if required construct as follows numc numc num num change no .
num provide complete erection and installation procedures for acceptance before installation .
evenly support bearings over their upper and lower surfaces under all erection and service conditions .
lift bearings by undersides only or by specially designed lifting lugs .
take care to avoid damage to and contamination of bearing surfaces during installation .
align the centerlines of the bearing assembly with those of the substructure and superstructure .
on guided bearings take special care to properly align the guiding mechanism with the designated expansion direction of the structure .
leave bearing straps or retaining clamps in place as long as possible to ensure parts of bearing are not inadvertently displaced relative to each other .
take care to remove straps or clamps before any normal structural movement takes place such as posttensioning .
set offsets of upper and lower bearing parts as indicated .
under dead load the distance between the upper and lower bearing plates is not to be out of parallel by more than num inch measured from edge to edge .
make the mating surface of the superstructure level within a slope of num .
have no local irregularities exceeding num inch .
during welding of sole plates to girders limit the temperature of the metal adjacent to neoprene and ptfe to a maximum of numf .
use temperature indicating markers .
num.h.num bearing seats .
provide bedding material for steel bearings as specified in section numh .
num .
straightening material .
if allowed straighten plates angles other shapes and builtup members .
use methods that will not produce fracture or other injury to the metal .
straighten distorted members by mechanical means or if allowed by carefully planned procedures and supervised application of a limited amount of localized heat .
heat straighten grades numw num and numw steel members only under rigidly controlled procedures each application subject to approval .
do not allow the maximum temperature to exceed the following values steel grade distance from weld max .
temp .
numw num inches numf numw num inches numf num or numw num inches numf num or numw num inches numf in all other steels do not allow the temperature of the heated area to exceed numf as controlled by temperature indicating crayons liquids or bimetal thermometers .
ensure that parts to be heatstraightened are substantially free of stress and from external forces except stresses resulting from mechanical means used in conjunction with the application of heat .
evidence of fracture following straightening of a bend or buckle will be cause for rejection of the damaged piece .
num .
field assembly .
accurately assemble the parts as indicated or shown on the erection drawings and follow any matchmarks .
carefully handle the material so that no parts will be bent broken or otherwise damaged .
do not hammer members if it will injure or distort them .
clean bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact before the members are assembled .
fill onehalf of the holes of splices and field connections with bolts and cylindrical erection pins half bolts and half pins before installing and tightening the balance of highstrength bolts .
fill three fourths of the holes of splices and connections carrying traffic during erection before installing and tightening the balance of highstrength bolts .
fittingup bolts may be the same highstrength bolts used in the installation .
if other fittingup bolts are used supply fittingup bolts of the same nominal diameter as the highstrength bolts but supply cylindrical erection pins num inch larger .
num .
connections using highstrength bolts .
make connections as specified in section numj and as follows num.a general .
obtain the snug tight condition as defined in section numcnum.d for any method of final tightening except directtensionindicator dti tightening .
assemble fasteners of appropriately assigned lot numbers together when installed .
protect such fasteners from dirt and moisture at the job site .
take only as many fasteners as are anticipated to be installed and tightened during a numc numc num num change no .
num work shift from protected storage .
return fasteners not used to protected storage at the end of the shift .
do not clean lubricant from fasteners that is required to be present in asdelivered condition .
before installation clean and relubricate fasteners for slipcritical connections which accumulate rust or dirt resulting from job site conditions .
if relubrication is required use a lubricant recommended by the fastener manufacturer .
provide a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or other equivalent bolt tension measuring device at each job site during erection .
perform periodic testing at least once each working day if calibrated wrench method is used to ensure compliance with the installation test procedures specified herein for turnofnut tightening calibrated wrench tightening installation of alternate design bolts and direct tension indicator tightening .
bolts that are too short for the skidmorewilhelm calibrator may be tested using dti devices .
in that case calibrate the dti devices in the skidmorewilhelm calibrator using longer bolts .
install fasteners together with washers of size and quality specified located as required below in properly aligned holes and tighten by any of the methods specified in sections numcnum.d through numcnum.g to at least the minimum tension specified in table a when all the fasteners are tight .
when it is impractical to turn the nut tighten the fastener by turning the bolt while the nut is prevented from rotating .
if impact wrenches are used provide adequate wrench capacity and sufficient air supply to perform the required tightening of each bolt in approximately num seconds .
do not reuse galvanized astm anum fasteners .
reuse other astm anum bolts only if approved .
do not consider as reuse touching up or retightening previously tightened bolts that may have been loosened by the tightening of adjacent bolts provided the snugging up continues from the initial position and does not require greater rotation including the tolerance than that required by table b .
num.b rotationalcapacity tests .
perform the rotational capacity test on each boltnutwasher assembly lot as specified in section numdnum immediately before the start of bolt installation in the fabrication shop or at the project site .
document test results according to ptm no .
num .
if testing and installation is performed in the fabrication shop submit test results to lts .
if testing and installation is performed at the project site submit test results to the representative .
all jobsite rotational capacity tests are to be performed by the contractor and witnessed by the inspector .
hardened steel washers are required as part of the test although they may not be required in the actual installation .
mark fastener containers for each assembly lot after testing to indicate their acceptance .
num.c requirement for washers .
where the outer face of the bolted parts has a slope greater than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis use a hardened beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
for american standard beams and channels use hardened beveled washers that are square or rectangular that conform to astm fnumm and that taper in thickness .
where necessary clip washers on one side to a point not closer than num of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer .
hardened washers are not required for connections using astm anum bolts except as follows use hardened washers under the element turned in tightening when the tightening is to be performed by calibrated wrench method .
hardened steel washers are required as part of rotationalcapacity tests even if they are not required in the actual installation .
where astm anum bolts are to be installed in a long slotted hole in an outer ply provide a plate washer or continuous bar of at least numinch thickness with standard holes .
furnish washers or bars of sufficient size to completely cover the slot after installation .
use a single hardened washer conforming to astm fnum but with a minimum thickness of num inch or use a washer or bar of structural grade material .
do not use multiple hardened washers to achieve a thickness of num inch .
as an alternate satisfying the requirements for washers use alternate design fasteners conforming to the requirements specified in section numcnum.c.num with a geometry that provides a bearing circle on the head or nut with a diameter equal to or greater than the diameter of hardened washers conforming to the requirements of astm fnum .
such fasteners may be used without washers .
numc numc num num change no .
num num.c.num alternate fasteners .
if alternate fasteners are allowed proceed as specified in section numcnum.h and as follows if allowed use other fasteners or fastener assemblies that conform to the materials manufacturing and chemical composition requirements of astm anum and that conform to the mechanical property requirements of the same specification in fullsize tests and that have body diameter and bearing areas under the head and nut or their equivalent not less than those provided by a bolt and nut of the same nominal dimensions specified in section numd .
such alternate fasteners may differ in other dimensions from those of the specified bolts and nuts .
num.d turnofnut tightening .
if turnofnut tightening is used hardened washers are not required except as specified in section numcnum.c .
check a representative sample of not less than three bolt and nut assemblies of each diameter length and grade to be used in the work at the start of work in a device capable of indicating bolt tension .
using the test demonstrate that the method for estimating the snug tight condition and controlling the turns from snug tight to be used by the bolting crew develops a tension not less than num greater than the tension required by table a .
perform periodic retesting if ordered by the representative .
install bolts in all holes of the connection and bring them to a snug tight condition .
snug tight is defined as the tightness that exists when the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
use a few impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a man using an ordinary spud wrench to attain the snug tight condition .
snug tighten the bolts of the connection by progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges and then retighten the bolts in a similar systematic manner as necessary until all bolts are simultaneously snug tight and the connection is fully compacted .
following this initial operation further tighten all bolts in the connection by the applicable amount of rotation specified in table b .
during the tightening operation do not allow rotation of the part not turned by the wrench .
systematically tighten the bolts progressing from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
num.e calibratedwrench tightening .
use calibrated wrench tightening only if installation procedures are calibrated on a daily basis and if a hardened washer is used under the element turned in tightening .
standard torques determined from tables or from formulas which are assumed to relate torque to tension are not acceptable .
when calibrated wrenches are used for installation set them to provide a tension not less than num in excess of the minimum tension specified in table a. calibrate the installation procedures at least once each working day for each bolt diameter length and grade using fastener assemblies that are being installed in the work .
perform calibration in a device capable of indicating actual bolt tension by tightening three typical bolts of each diameter length and grade from the bolts being installed and with a hardened washer from the washers being used in the work under the element turned in tightening .
recalibrate wrenches if significant difference is noted in the surface condition of the bolts threads nuts and washers .
verify during actual installation in the assembled steel work that the wrench adjustment selected by the calibration does not produce a nut or bolt head rotation from snug tight greater than that specified in table b .
if manual torque wrenches are used turn nuts in the tightening direction when torque is measured .
when calibrated wrenches are used to install and tension bolts in a connection install bolts with hardened washers under the element turned in tightening bolts in all holes of the connection and bring them to a snug tight condition .
following this initial tightening operation tighten the connection using the calibrated wrench .
tighten the bolts by progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
use the wrench to again tighten previously tightened bolts that may have been relaxed as a result of the subsequent tightening of adjacent bolts until all bolts are tightened to the prescribed amount .
num.f installation of alternate design bolts .
when fasteners that incorporate a design feature intended to indirectly indicate the bolt tension or to automatically provide the tension specified in table a and that have been qualified under section numcnum.c.num are to be installed check a representative sample of not less than three bolts of each diameter length and grade at the job site in a device capable of indicating bolt tension .
include flat hardened washers in the test assembly if required in the actual connection arranged as those in the actual connections to be tensioned .
use the calibration test to demonstrate that each bolt develops a tension not less than num greater than the tension specified in table a .
follow the manufacturers installation procedure for installation of bolts in the calibration device and in all connections .
perform periodic retesting when ordered by the representative .
when alternate design fasteners that are intended to control or indicate bolt tension of the fasteners are used install bolts in all holes of the connection and initially tighten them sufficiently to bring all plies of the joint into firm contact but without yielding or fracturing the control or indicator element of the fasteners .
then further tighten all fasteners progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges in a manner that will minimize relaxation of previously tightened fasteners .
in some cases to properly tension the bolts perform more than numc numc num num change no .
num a single cycle of systematic partial tightening before final twistoff of the control or indicator element of individual fasteners .
replace any individual fastener assembly if twist off occurs before the final tensioning cycle .
num.g direct tension indicator tightening .
when tightening of bolts using dti devices is used assemble a representative sample of not less than three devices for each diameter and grade of fastener to be used in the work in a calibration device capable of indicating bolt tension .
include flathardened washers in the test assembly if required in the actual connection arranged as those in the actual connections to be tensioned .
use the calibration test to demonstrate that the device indicates a tension not less than num greater than that specified in table a .
after tightening in the calibrating device use a torque wrench to verify the torque required for proper tightening .
tighten the nut of each assembly five degrees past the initial required tension record the respective load reading on the torque wrench dial and determine the average of the sample assemblies .
this average torque will be the inspection torque used on completed connections and is to be determined each day that inspection of completed connections is performed .
follow manufacturers installation procedure for installation of bolts in the calibration device and in all connections .
give special attention to proper installation of flathardened washers when dti devices are used with bolts installed in oversize or slotted holes and when the load indicating devices are used under the turned element .
when bolts are installed using dtis conforming to the requirements of astm fnum install bolts in all holes of the connection and bring them to snug tight conditions .
snug tight is indicated by partial compression of the direct tension indicator protrusions .
provide a maximum gap of num inch after installation .
then tighten all fasteners progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges in a manner that will minimize relaxation of previously tightened fasteners .
table a required fastener tension minimum bolt tension in pounds bolt size inches astm anum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num equal to num of specified minimum tensile strength of bolts according to astm specifications for tests of full size astm anum bolts with unc profile threads loaded in axial tension rounded to the nearest kip .
table b nut rotation from the snugtight conditionnum geometry of outer faces of bolted parts bolt length measured from underside of head to end of bolt both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other face sloped not more than num .
bevel washer not used .
both faces sloped not more than num from normal to bolt axis .
bevel washers not used .
up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diametersnum num turn num turn num turn num nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
for bolts installed by num turn and less the tolerance should be num degrees for bolts installed by num turn and more the tolerance should be plus or minus num degrees .
numc num num num change no .
num num applicable only to connections in which all material within grip of the bolt is steel .
num no research work has been performed by the research council riveted and bolted structural joints to establish the turnofnut procedure if bolt lengths exceed num diameters .
therefore the required rotation must be determined by actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating the actual conditions .
in some cases proper tensioning of the bolts may require more than a single cycle of systematic partial tightening before final tightening to deform the protrusion to the specified gap .
num.h lockpin and collar fasteners .
install lockpin and collar fasteners using approved methods and procedures .
num.i inspection .
in the presence of the inspector inspect the tightened bolts using a calibrated torque wrench .
at the representatives option this inspection can be performed either by the inspector or the contractor .
individually place three bolts of the same grade size and condition as those under inspection in a device calibrated to measure bolt tension .
perform this calibration operation at least once each inspection day .
provide a washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt if washers are used on the structure .
if washers are not used on the structure furnish the material used in the tension measuring device which abuts the part turned of the same specification as that used on the structure .
in the calibrated device tighten each bolt to the specified tension by any convenient means .
apply the calibrated torque wrench to the tightened bolt to determine the torque required to turn the nut or head five degrees approximately num inch at a numinch radius in the tightening direction .
take the average of the torque required for all three bolts as the jobinspection torque .
for final acceptance of connections installed using highstrength bolts inspect num num minimum of the bolts in the connection using a calibrated torque wrench .
select bolts to be inspected according to ptm no .
num .
then apply the jobinspection torque to each with the calibrated torque wrench turned in the tightening direction .
if this torque turns no bolt head or nut the bolts in the connection will be considered to be properly tightened .
but if the torque turns one or more bolt heads or nuts apply the jobinspection torque to all bolts in the connection .
tighten and reinspect any bolt whose head or nut turns at this stage or retighten all the bolts in the connection and resubmit it for inspection .
num .
pin connections .
use pilot and driving nuts in driving pins .
drive pins so that the members will take full bearing on them .
screw pin nuts up tight and burr the threads at the face of the nut with a pointed tool .
num .
misfits .
the correction of minor misfits involving minor amounts of reaming cutting and chipping will be considered a legitimate part of the erection .
however errors in the shop fabrication or deformation resulting from handling and transporting will be cause for rejection .
the contractor is responsible for all misfits errors and damage .
make the necessary corrections and replacements to correct misfits errors and damage .
d painting .
apply intermediate and finish coats of paint as specified in section num .
num measurement and paymentlump sum .
the price includes the following component items .
fabricated structural steel .
pound the cost of welds in excess of those indicated and allowed by the chief bridge engineer due to the contractors request is incidental to the other fabricated structural steel work .
the cost of all nondestructive testing including equipment supplies and technicians is also incidental to the other fabricated structural steel work .
cement concrete structures .
section num preformed neoprene compression joint seal .
section num pedestrian railing .
section num num num num num change no .
num aluminum bridge hand railing .
section num steel bridge hand railing .
section num protective barrier .
section num protective fence .
section num protective coating for reinforced concrete surfaces .
section num armored preformed neoprene compression dam .
section num tooth expansion dam with drain trough .
section num reinforcement bars .
section num neoprene strip seal dam .
section num high load multirotational bearings .
each for the type indicated .
neoprene bearing pads .
each for the type indicated .
reset expansion bearings steel superstructure .
each num num num num initial edition section numdownspouting num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of downspouting .
num materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows fabricated structural steelsection num galvanized as specified in section nums .
fiberglass pipe and fittingsastm d num rtrp with a num pounds per square inch minimum shorttime rupture strength hoop tensile stress .
use concrete gray as the final color of the reinforced fiberglass pipe unless otherwise specified .
use a coating that protects the pipe from ultraviolet damage .
use manufacturer recommended paint and fittings .
pvc schedule num pipeastm d num num constructioninstall downspouting including the drain box as indicated and as shown on the standard drawings .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot num num num num change no .
num section nummetal curb drain num descriptionthis work is construction of an aluminum or steel drain facility to dispose of bridge deck drainage by free drop through curb barrier .
num material a aluminum .
astm bnumbnumm alloy numtnum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b structural steel .
section numanum c zinc chromate primer .
federal specification ttpnum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d galvanizing .
section nums num constructionconstruct in accordance with standard drawing bcnumm as indicated and as directed .
a general .
fabricate the drain from either cnum by num aluminum channels or cnum by num steel channels welded together with full penetration welds to form a rectangular section .
alternatively fabricate a rectangular section num inches by num num inches out of numinch steel plates .
b aluminum drain .
coat all surfaces of the drain to be in contact with concrete with two coats of bituminous paint or zinc chromate primer .
c steel drain .
galvanize the entire drain after welding according to astm anum .
num measurement and paymentincidental to concrete bridge barrier .
num num num num initial edition section numfabricated structural steel num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of fabricated structural steel for repair rehabilitation or modification of steel structures .
num material a fabricated structural steel .
section num b paint .
section num num constructionas indicated and as specified in the applicable parts of section num .
num measurement and paymentpound the pay weight will be based upon nominal weights for rolled and formed sections nominal dimensioned plates and other items as listed in current aisc handbooks .
payment will be made only for actual new fabricated structural steel permanently installed in the rehabilitated structure excluding the weights listed in the following paragraphs the weight of the bolts nuts washers welds and weld materials incorporated into the finished work are incidental to the weight of the installed fabricated structural steel .
the weight of the cuts copes bolt holes or other material not incorporated into the finished work are incidental to the weight of the installed fabricated structural steel .
num numa num num initial edition section numshop painting structural steel num descriptionthis work is the cleaning and priming of structural steel in the shop using a selfcuring inorganic zincrich primer and the application of intermediate and finish coats in the shop and in the field .
a prequalification .
when shop painting structural steel use only bulletin num approved paint shops that are certified by the aisc under its sophisticated paint endorsement spe quality program or by the society for protective coatings sspc under its qpnum quality program .
use shops certified to the enclosed shop category .
use shops that are fully certified for the duration of time they are performing surface preparation and coating application .
apply complete coating system in an enclosed shop except for touch up painting .
for shop removal and disposal of hazardous coating including but not limited to lead based paint use only shops certified to sspcqpnum and listed in bulletin num as approved paint shops .
num material a coating system for plain carbon steel .
use an approved proprietary selfcuring inorganic zinc system from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num consisting of a selfcuring inorganic zinc primer an epoxy or urethane intermediate coat and an aliphatic urethane finish coat do not mix components or coats from different systems .
use the products of one manufacturer for the entire system .
num .
submittal requirements .
submit the following information to the district executive infrared curves num microns to num microns for the zinc primer intermediate coat and finish coat including curves for the vehicle binder of each component and for the mixed paint mass per liter weight per gallon at numf for zinc primer vehicle and the intermediate and finish coat paints viscosity in krebs units at numf for the zinc primer vehicle and the intermediate and finish coat paints percent solids by weight of the zinc primer vehicle and the intermediate and finish coat paints percent of metallic zinc by weight in the cured zinc primer coat dry film percent of metallic zinc by weight in the zinc pigment component finish coat color chips for selection of color by the district bridge engineer and technical data sheets safety data and specific application instructions for all coats .
in the event of a conflict between the datainstruction sheets and these specifications the specification requirements will govern .
work will not be allowed to proceed until this information is received .
num .
technical representation .
furnish the services of a paint or a painting technical representative from the paint manufacturer at the beginning of operations and when required .
num .
damage prevention and repair procedures .
furnish a damage prevention plan with the structural steel shop drawings that describes the procedures and protective materials to be used to prevent damage to paint coats .
have the plan cover the period of time from when paint coats are applied in the shop until erection is completed in the field .
numa numb num num initial edition furnish the manufacturers recommended surface preparation coating application and coating repair procedures .
include the manufacturers recommended surface preparation methods coating material application methods and application conditions .
include the manufacturers recommended methods for correction of damage to one or more coats including correction of damage caused in handling shipping and erection correction of deficient or excessive coating thickness correction of runs sags peeling and poorly adhered coating and removal of zinc salts and other contaminants that would be detrimental to succeeding coats .
b coating system for galvanized steel .
use an approved twocoat paint system from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num consisting of an epoxy polyamide as an intermediate coat and an aliphatic urethane as a finish coat .
select colors for the intermediate and finish coat before fabrication .
do not use the system prime coat .
do not mix components from different systems .
if a wash primer is used provide the manufacturers certification of compatibility with the selected paint system .
furnish submittals as specified in section numanum for intermediate and finish coats .
furnish technical representation as specified in section numanum .
furnish damage prevention and repair procedures as specified in section numanum .
num construction a general .
num .
protection of structure persons and property .
when applying the full intermediate and finish coats in the field or when repairing coating damage in the field protect pedestrians vehicles and other traffic upon or under the bridges the bridge superstructure and substructure and surrounding property surfaces buildings and grounds .
protect against damage or disfigurement from surface preparation media and spatters splashes overspray and smirches of paint or material .
as necessary furnish adequate canvas or other suitable containment materials for protection .
for field coating work remove paint dropped on surfaces not designated to be coated .
remove debris from cleaning operations empty paint containers and other refuse .
num .
pollution controls .
prevent environmental pollution including stream and air pollution caused by paint paint sprays paint chips dust or other harmful materials .
comply with the regulations of the dep and the state fish commission .
do not proceed with work until the department receives written acknowledgement that the regional office of the dep was contacted and is aware of the controls to be exercised to complete the work in compliance with its regulations .
no extension of contract time will be allowed for delays caused by failure to make a timely submission for this acknowledgement .
do not claim for costs to comply with requirements of regulatory agencies .
conviction of a criminal summary complaint issued by the dep may be cause for suspension of prequalification .
b surface preparation .
num .
solvent cleaning .
where oil and grease are present remove according to the sspc surface preparation specification using no .
num solvent cleaning sspcspnum .
perform cleaning before blasting .
if contamination remains after blasting reclean with solvent .
num .
other cleaning .
remove soil concrete spatter drawing compounds salts or other foreign matter by brushing with stiff fiber or wire brushes by scraping by cleaning with solutions of biodegradable cleaners provided such cleaners are followed by a fresh water rinse or by a combination of these methods .
satisfactorily remove detrimental deposits from new weld areas .
when directed remove water soluble salts by high pressure water blast cleaning gage pressure of num psig minimum .
numb numc num num initial edition num .
blast cleaning .
blast clean all steel to a nearwhite condition as defined in sspcsp num .
determine the nearwhite blast condition by use of a maryland pictorial standard if shot blast is used or sspcvis num if sand or grit is used .
blast clean to leave an anchor pattern num num mils to num num mils deep in a dense uniform pattern of depressions and ridges .
determine pattern depth by the keanetator surface profile comparator or testex replica tape .
grind laminations raised by the blasting operation to a flush surface and reblast the ground area to obtain the specified anchor pattern .
num .
preparing galvanized surfaces for painting .
prepare entire surface according to sspcspnum .
remove unsightly areas including rough andor heavy galvanizing as directed according to sspcspnum and sspcspnum .
apply wash primer compatible with galvanizing and selected paint system or brushoff blast the entire surface as indicated on the approved drawings .
do not use steel shot for brushoff blast .
use a blast media with a low level of aggressiveness such as crushed walnut shells corn cobs or bicarbonate of soda for example but not inclusive .
num .
cleaning concrete .
after completing the superstructure work remove rust stains on the substructure concrete using an acceptable concrete rust remover in the manner recommended by the manufacturer of the rust remover .
flush with water after application of rust remover .
c painting .
num .
mixing paints .
num.a primer .
mix the primer with a high shear mixer such as a jiffy mixer according to the manufacturers recommendations to a smooth lump free consistency .
do not use paddle mixers or paint shakers .
mix in the original containers .
continue mixing until all of the metallic powder or pigment is in suspension .
ensure that all of the coating solids that might have settled to the bottom of the container are thoroughly dispersed .
num.b subsequent coats .
mix each subsequent coat to achieve and to maintain a homogeneous mixture .
num.c strain the mixture through num mesh to num mesh screen openings to remove large particles .
equip paint containers with a mechanical agitator so the mixture is in motion throughout the application period .
num .
thinning paint .
thin the paint only as recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
conditions for painting .
apply paint only on clean and dry surfaces and only during periods of favorable weather .
do not paint when the temperature of the air paint or metal is below numf and at no time below that described in the technical data sheet when the air is misty or when conditions are otherwise unsatisfactory .
do not paint damp or frosted surfaces or surfaces hot enough to cause the paint to blister to produce a porous paint film or to cause the vehicle to separate from the pigment .
paint only when the surface temperature is at least numf above the dewpoint .
determine the dewpoint with the use of a psychrometer and psychrometric tables .
allow each coat of paint to dry before applying the succeeding coat .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for drying time unless a longer drying time is required .
in damp or cold weather keep the shop work under cover until thoroughly dry or until weather conditions allow exposure .
num .
application .
apply primer and subsequent coats immediately after inspection and acceptance of the surface .
apply primer the same day the metal is cleaned .
if the metal is blast cleaned and remains unpainted overnight blast clean it again before priming .
spray apply inorganic zincrich primer according to the manufacturers recommendations .
striping of the inorganic zincrich primer is not required .
for application of the intermediate and finish coats wet stripe all edges bolts welds rivets corners crevices and other irregularities either by brush or by a separate and distinct spray operation before the application of the full coat .
provide safe access for inspection as requested by the representative before application of the full coat over the striped areas .
do not apply the full coat until approval of the striping is provided .
numc numc num num initial edition apply intermediate and final coats to areas of steel that will be inaccessible before the stage of construction that prevents access .
apply the complete project site .
other types of prime coats may be substituted for the galvanized coating only if prior approval is received from the department .
submit the written approval request at the preconstruction conference .
follow the paint manufacturers recommendations to ensure compatibility between the prime coat and the intermediate coat and to ensure adhesion when the surface of the prime coat has been contaminated for example by boltnut lubrication .
num .
shop painting .
apply the primer after shop fabrication inspection and acceptance but before shipment .
do not apply primer to galvanized surfaces .
paint field contact surfaces and surfaces to be in contact with concrete with primer only .
do not paint within num inches of location of design field welds .
coat machinefinished metal surfaces subjected to movement with either corrosionpreventive compound conforming to the requirements of military specification milcnumd grade num or other acceptable material as soon as possible after acceptance and before removal from the shop .
paint other surfaces of metal either milled or finished with primer .
certify the coating material as specified in section numbnum .
paint or stencil the required dates weight markings and erection markings only on previously primed or painted surfaces .
use a suitable paint that does not react with other primer or paint coats and one that is not visible after the final field paint coat .
allow the paint to dry completely before loading and shipping .
protect the paint from damage and from contamination .
use coverings and proper storage handling shipping and erection techniques .
repair damaged and contaminated coatings according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
field painting .
before paint is applied clean dust and dirt and other contamination from the freshly painted surfaces .
if concreting or other operations have damaged the coatings reclean and if directed repaint the damaged areas .
clean unpainted surfaces including bolts and field welded areas as specified in section numb and prime according to the recommendations of the manufacturer of the selfcuring inorganic zincrich system .
painting of shear connectors is not required .
do not apply field coats between october num and april num unless otherwise permitted in writing by the district executive .
apply intermediate and final coats according to the manufacturers recommendations consistent with environmental constraints .
use acceptable brushes rollers spray equipment or any combination of equipment that gives satisfactory results .
num.a spray painting .
if air spray is used provide suitable traps or separators to exclude oil and water from the air .
keep the paint thoroughly mixed by continuous mechanical agitation .
num.b roller painting .
use rollers that do not leave a stippled texture in the paint film .
use rollers only on flat even surfaces to produce a paint film of even thickness with no skips runs sags or thin areas .
num.c brush painting .
use flat brushes not wider than num num inches or round or oval brushes .
manipulate the paint under the brush to produce a uniform even coat .
work the paint into corners and crevices .
move the brush in a series of small circles to thoroughly fill irregularities in the surface then brush out and smooth by a series of parallel strokes until the paint film has an even thickness .
num.d painting inaccessible areas .
thoroughly cover surfaces inaccessible to normal painting methods by use of sheepskin daubers spray or other means to ensure thorough coverage .
numc num num num initial edition num.e stenciling .
after the final coat of paint has dried stencil the following information on the inside face of the right fascia member at the near abutment ends unless directed otherwise the bridge identification number the month and year of completion the specification identification of the cleaning method and the list identification of the paint system .
stencil using suitable black paint to provide uniform block lettering num inches to num inches high .
num .
thickness of coats .
the cumulative dry film thickness will be determined by use of a magnetic dry film thickness gage or the thickness of each coat will be determined by the use of a tooke gage or equal .
increase the thickness of coating if directed by the inspectorincharge to ensure a finish that is uniform in color and appearance .
apply the threecoat system as follows num.a primer .
spray apply as recommended by the manufacturer in a single application employing multiple spray passes to a dry film thickness of num mils to num mils above the anchor pattern .
the thickness will be determined with a magnetic dry film thickness gage and measured according to sspcpanumt .
a dense and uniform appearance is required after the applied coating has cured .
for areas deficient in coating thickness and areas exhibiting mudcracking repair as recommended by the manufacturer .
num.b intermediate coat .
for an epoxyurethane system apply the intermediate coat to a minimum dry film thickness of num mils .
for all other systems apply the intermediate coat to a minimum dry film thickness of num mil .
use a color that contrasts with the colors of the zinc and finish coats .
num.c finish coat .
for an epoxyurethane system apply the finish coat to a minimum dry film thickness of num mils .
for all other systems apply the finish coat to a minimum dry film thickness of num mils .
num .
removal of unsatisfactory paint .
the painting is unsatisfactory if rusting occurs the paint coat lifts blisters wrinkles has excessive runs or sags or shows evidence of application under unfavorable conditions the workmanship is poor impure or unauthorized paint has been used or for other reasons determined by the representative .
remove unsatisfactory paint clean the metal and repaint as specified .
num measurement and paymentpainting structural steel is incidental to the items of work painted .
num numd num num change no .
num section numpainting existing structural steel num descriptionthis work is the cleaning and painting of existing bridges using a threecoat system including an organic zincrich primer .
this work includes abrasive blastingpaint removal waste disposal soluble saltchloride remediation and application of the threecoat paint system .
num material a coating system .
obtain material from a paint system listed in bulletin num listed under approved threecoat organic zincrich systems .
use a system conforming to the following requirements prime coatorganic zinc primer epoxy or urethane with pigment primarily consisting of zinc dust .
intermediate coatepoxy or urethane formulated without using any heavy metal materials listed in the resource conservation and recovery act rcra regulations for toxic characteristics .
finish coataliphatic urethane formulated without using any heavy metal materials listed in the rcra regulations for toxic characteristics .
obtain the three parts of the threecoat system from one manufacturer .
do not mix components or coats from different systems of the same manufacturer or other manufacturers .
b submittal requirements .
provide submittals to the district executive a minimum of num calendar days before beginning the painting .
do not begin painting until submittals have been accepted .
include the following num .
finish coat color chips .
provide color chips of the indicated color .
num .
coating certifications .
provide the brand names of the products selected for the system in use .
for each batch delivered provide the production lot number of the batch on the certification specified in section numd .
copies of the certification will be provided to the representative and chief chemist of cmd .
num .
manufacturers data sheets and instructions .
provide current technical data sheets and msds for each coat .
provide specific application instructions for all coats including thinning coating repair procedures as specified in section numdnum and recoat times at various temperatures .
in the event of a conflict between the datainstruction sheets or procedures and the specifications the specifications will govern unless directed otherwise .
num .
dep notification .
provide written acknowledgement that the regional office of the dep was notified of the painting and that it is aware of the controls that will be exercised .
num .
soluble salt remediation .
provide a written procedure for the removal of chloride and other soluble salts and the steps that will be taken to properly clean the steel before painting if wet methods are employed .
num .
qc plan .
submit a qc plan as specified in section numanum .
include written procedures for review and acceptance of the quality of surface preparation cleaning and the application of the paint coats .
include the procedure and inspection points for each inspection specified in section numdnum .
num .
concrete rust remover .
provide the name of the product that will be used to remove rust stains from concrete and the procedures that will be followed to use and remove the product including containment and disposal of the waste .
c technical representation .
furnish the services of a technical representative from the paint manufacturer at the beginning of operations and when required during operations .
d certification .
section numbnum modified as follows numd numc num num change no .
num submit a dated certification form csnum from the manufacturer that each batch of the coating system meets specifications .
include in the certification the product name for each coat of the system being supplied and the production lot number of the batch being certified .
num construction a general .
num .
protection of structure persons and property .
conduct activities associated with the coating work according to applicable federal osha epa state and local based on bridge location safety regulations and sspc pa guide num a guide to safety in paint application .
use scaffolding and rigging conforming to osha regulations and providing safe and ready access to work areas for inspection purposes .
protect pedestrian vehicular and other traffic upon or under bridges bridge superstructures and substructures surrounding property surfaces and buildings against damage or disfigurement from surface preparation media spatters splashes overspray and smirches of paint or material .
furnish canvas or other suitable containment materials for protection as necessary .
remove paint dropped on surfaces not designated to receive coatings debris from the cleaning operations empty paint containers and other refuse .
correct damage resulting from the painting operations .
num .
pollution controls .
prevent environmental pollution including stream and air pollution caused by surface preparation media paint spills or overspray paint chips dust or other harmful materials .
comply with the regulations of the dep and the pennsylvania fish commission .
do not begin work until the department receives written acknowledgement that the regional dep office was contacted and is aware of the controls to be exercised to complete the work in compliance with dep regulations .
the department will not extend the contract time for delays caused by a failure to make a timely submission of this acknowledgement .
conviction of a criminal summary complaint issued by dep may be cause for suspension of prequalification .
b surfaces to be painted .
unless otherwise specified paint all surfaces previously painted and all surfaces of new metal .
do not paint aluminum and galvanized metal surfaces unless otherwise specified .
do not apply intermediate and finish coats to surfaces that will be in contact with concrete .
coat those surfaces with a single coat of organic zinc primer only .
if new pregalvanized bolts are used proceed as specified in section numdnum for galvanized surfaces .
c surface preparation .
num .
solvent cleaning .
remove oil and grease present on bare steel according to sspc surface preparation specification no .
l solvent cleaning sspcspnum before blasting .
if contamination remains after blasting reclean with solvent before painting .
if grease oil or similar contaminants become deposited on any coat that will receive another coat remove according to sspcspnum before the application of the subsequent coat .
num .
other surface cleaning .
remove soil concrete spatter drawing compounds salts and other foreign matter by brushing with stiff fiber or wire brushes by scraping by cleaning with solutions of biodegradable cleaners provided such cleaners are followed by a fresh water rinse or by a combination of these methods .
satisfactorily remove detrimental deposits from new weld areas .
num .
weld spatter sharp edges flamecut steel and holes .
remove slag flux deposits and weld spatter from newly installed steel .
grind any resulting burrs smooth including burrs around holes .
num .
pack rust and rust scale .
remove heavy corrosion rust scale and loose pack rust e.g .
as found in crevice areas by hand and power tool cleaning before abrasive blast cleaning .
exercise extreme care to avoid nicking or gouging the steel during removal .
if nicks or gouges occur the representative may suspend activities until appropriate adjustments are made to prevent a recurrence .
caulk areas as directed .
num .
test areas .
before proceeding with the production blast cleaning operation prepare test sections on each structure of at least num square feet in locations considered by the inspector to be representative of existing surface conditions and structural characteristics .
blast clean test section areas using the same equipment materials and procedures that will be used for the production blast cleaning .
provide safe access for close visual inspection and testing .
do not proceed with the numc numd num num change no .
num production blast cleaning operation until the inspector agrees that the surface of each test section is acceptable .
num .
blast cleaning and abrasives .
blast clean all steel to a nearwhite condition as defined in sspcspnum except that a slight residue of paint or rust in seams between plates and around rivet heads is acceptable .
determine the nearwhite blast condition by use of sspcvis num .
in the event of a conflict between the pictorial standard and the written sspc definition follow the written definition .
utilize clean dry compressed air for abrasive blast cleaning .
conduct blotter tests according to astm dnum a minimum of one time each shift for each compressor system in use to verify that the air supply is free of moisture and oil contamination .
conduct the tests in the presence of the inspector .
select abrasive size and type based on the type grade and surface condition of the steel to be cleaned and based on the finished surface condition to be attained for the paint that is to be applied .
select abrasives that are sized to create a surface profile from num num mils to num num mils deep in a dense uniform pattern of depressions and ridges .
determine the surface profile depth by the keanetator surface profile comparator gs or sh disc as appropriate or testex replica tape according to astm dnum .
if the profile is outside of the specified range obtain different abrasives and reclean the steel .
use abrasives that are clean and dry .
use recyclable abrasives to create the least amount of waste that is practicable .
acceptable recyclable abrasives are aluminum oxide silicon carbide zirconium aluminum oxide steel grit and steel shot .
use nonrecyclable abrasives only if allowed .
when the use of nonrecyclable abrasives is allowed use low dust abrasives such as coal slag e.g .
black beauty or staurolite e.g .
star blast and use the abrasive only once .
do not use silica sand .
select the nonrecyclable abrasives according to sspcabnum .
use a reclamation system to clean the recyclable abrasive and return it for reuse .
confirm the cleanliness of the recycled abrasive during use according to sspcabnum .
equip the reclamation system with dust collectors to ensure that the discharge meets air quality requirements .
grind laminations raised by the blasting operation to a flush surface and reclean the ground area to obtain the specified anchor pattern .
upon approval restore the profile in limited areas according to sspcspnum .
num .
chlorideferrous soluble salt removal .
in the presence of the inspector remove chloride and other water soluble salts to level scnum of sspcspnum .
these thresholds are chloride numgcmnum ferrous ion numgcmnum sulfate numgcmnum conduct tests across the structure with special attention to pitted areas .
use the cell method of sspctunum to collect the samples .
conduct this testing after abrasive blasting .
provide the proposed method of chloride removal e.g .
fine abrasive mix of gritshot low or highpressure water cleaning according to sspcspnum in the qc plan specified in section numbnum .
include the process that will be used for recleaning the steel .
if the chlorideferrous salts are removed using wet methods after blast cleaning is performed remove the resulting flash rust before applying the coating .
num .
cleanliness before painting .
before painting remove abrasive residue and dust from the surface .
pay specific attention to pockets and corners .
unless directed otherwise e.g .
in the case of leadcontaining paint conduct the cleaning using clean bristle fiber or hair brushes vacuuming blowing with clean dry compressed air or a combination thereof .
apply primer within num hours after the metal is cleaned .
if the metal is blastcleaned and remains unpainted for longer than num hours or if cleaned steel exhibits evidence of rust back analyze for chloride contamination as specified in section numcnum .
if chloride is present remediate as specified in numcnum .
if chloride is not present blast clean it again before priming .
apply primer only after the inspector has accepted the prepared surface .
num .
cleaning concrete .
after completing the superstructure work provide a concrete rust removal method .
this can be by abrasive blasting to obtain a condition conforming to sspcspnum .
brush blast or use an acceptable concrete rust remover in the manner recommended by the manufacturer of the rust remover to remove rust stains from the substructure concrete .
flush with water after application of rust remover .
provide for the representatives review and acceptance the name of the product proposed for use and the procedures that will be followed to apply remove contain and dispose of the waste .
d painting .
num .
storage and mixing of paints .
store all paints under cover out of direct sunlight and between numf and numf .
if the storage requirements of the manufacturer are more restrictive comply with the more restrictive requirements .
mix the coatings as follows numd numd num num change no .
num num.a prime coat .
mix primer according to the requirements of the coating manufacturer .
unless prohibited by the manufacturer mix the coating with a high shear mixer e.g .
a jiffy mixer .
when the manufacturer prohibits the use of a highspeed mixture e.g .
in the case of moisturecured urethanes comply with the manufacturers instructions .
mix the coating to achieve a smooth lumpfree consistency .
mix in the original containers .
continue mixing until all of the metallic powder or pigment is in suspension .
ensure that all of the coating solids that might have settled to the bottom of the container are thoroughly dispersed .
num.b intermediate and finish coats .
mix each coat according to the manufacturers instructions to achieve and maintain a homogeneous mixture .
num.c thinning paint .
thin paint using thinners provided by the manufacturer and in proportions as recommended by the manufacturer .
do not exceed local voc regulations for any coat at the time of application .
num.d straining .
strain the mixture through a num mesh to num mesh screen to remove large particles .
num .
weather conditions for painting .
apply coating to clean and dry surfaces during periods of favorable weather .
do not apply coating if any of the conditions specified in sections numdnum.ae are present .
if the requirements of the coating manufacturer are more stringent comply with those requirements .
num.a .
calendar .
do not apply coating in the field between october num and april num unless otherwise allowed in writing by the district executive .
num.b temperature .
do not apply coatings if the temperature of the air paint or metal is below numf or greater than numf or is forecasted to drop below numf before the coating dries according to the times specified in the manufacturers technical data sheet .
num.c dew point .
do not apply coatings if the temperature of the surface is less than numf greater than the dew point .
num.d relative humidity .
do not apply coatings if the relative humidity is below or above the thresholds established in the manufacturers written product data sheets .
num.e dampness .
do not apply coatings if the air is misty the surfaces are damp or frosted or if weather conditions are otherwise unsatisfactory .
in damp or cold weather keep the coating work protected until thoroughly dry according to the manufacturers instructions before exposing the steel to the elements .
num .
methods of application .
apply all coats using equipment that is acceptable to the manufacturer that is consistent with environmental constraints and that provides a finish that is acceptable to the department .
use brushes rollers spray equipment or any combination of equipment that gives satisfactory results .
num.a spray painting .
if air spray is used provide suitable traps or separators to exclude oil and water from the air .
conduct blotter tests according to astm dnum a minimum of one time each shift for each compressor system in use to verify that the air supply is clean and dry .
conduct tests in the presence of the inspector .
unless prohibited by the manufacturer equip paint containers with a mechanical agitator so the mixture is in motion throughout the application period .
num.b roller painting .
use rollers that do not leave a stippled texture in the paint film .
use rollers only on flat even surfaces to produce a paint film of even thickness with no skips runs sags or thin areas .
do not use rollers if prohibited by the manufacturer .
num.c brush painting .
manipulate the paint under the brush to produce a uniform even coat .
work the paint into corners and crevices .
move the brush in a series of small circles to thoroughly fill irregularities in the surface .
then brush out and smooth by a series of parallel strokes until the paint film has an even thickness .
do not use brushes if prohibited by the manufacturer .
num.d painting inaccessible areas .
use sheepskin daubers spray or other means to thoroughly paint surfaces inaccessible to normal painting methods .
do not use daubers if prohibited by the manufacturer .
num .
application and recoating requirements .
num.a removal of contaminants .
if concrete salts grease oil diesel smoke or other surface contamination are present on prime intermediate or finish coats clean the surface as specified in sections numcnum num and num and the manufacturers recommendations .
clean the bare steel prime and intermediate coats before the application of numd numd num num change no .
num subsequent coats .
clean the finish coat as directed .
num.b stripe coats before application of the prime coat apply a wet stripe coat to all edges bolts welds rivets corners crevices and other irregularities .
apply the wet stripe coat by brush andor spray .
the purpose of the stripe coat is to increase the build of the film on projecting surfaces such as edges and to ensure that the coating is thoroughly worked into and covers all irregular surfaces such as crevices .
extend the stripe coat approximately num inch from edges corners rivets and other irregularities that are stripe coated .
allow a minimum of num minutes for inspection of each stripe coat before applying each full coat .
do not apply the full coat until the inspector accepts the respective stripe coat .
before the application of the intermediate coat apply a wet stripe coat of the intermediate coating using the same procedure as for the prime coat .
do not apply the intermediate stripe coat until the prime coat has dried according to the manufacturers instructions .
a stripe coat is not required for the finish coat but pay particular attention to providing complete coverage of all surfaces including edges bolts welds rivets corners crevices and other irregularities .
num.c galvanized bolts and nuts .
remove grease oil dirt dust and similar interference material from the surfaces of galvanized bolts and nuts according to sspcspnum and sspcspnum .
provide spnum to an overall wirebrushed condition .
use bolts and nuts that are primecoated before delivery .
apply only intermediate and finish coats to the bolts and nuts .
num .
coating thickness and continuity .
apply the threecoat system to the dry film thicknesses specified in sections numdnuma to c. achieve a surface that is free of shadowthrough runs sags overspray dryspray pinholes skips misses and other film discontinuities .
determine the cumulative dry film thickness of each coat using a magnetic dry film thickness gage according to sspcpanum except measure each numsquare foot increment of the surface .
determine the thickness of each coat by subtracting the thickness of the underlying coats from the cumulative readings .
if questions are raised regarding the thickness of an individual coat use the tooke gage or equal .
repair damage created by the tooke gage .
if the thickness of any coat is less than specified unless otherwise allowed apply additional coating according to the manufacturers instructions and as specified before applying the next coat .
provide inspection access so that the work can be corrected and inspected before the expiration of recoat times if the thickness of any coat exceeds the specified maximum or the surface exhibits runs sags dry spray overspray or other discontinuities remove the excessive thickness or discontinuity by power tool cleaning or abrasive blast cleaning .
if the thickness is reduced to below the specified minimum recoat the area .
if the excessive thickness or discontinuity being removed is in the finish coat apply a thin coat of finish material to seal the surface and to smooth out any surface irregularities resulting from the removal process .
num.a prime coat .
apply the primer coating to a total dry film thickness above the surface profile in a single application employing multiple spray passes of num mils to num mils above the anchor pattern .
the inspector will determine thickness with a magnetic dry film thickness gage and measure thickness according to sspcpanumt .
obtain a dense and uniform appearance of the cured coating .
the inspector will assess cure by coin rub or methyl ketone mek wipe testing .
for areas deficient in coating thickness and areas exhibiting mudcracking repair according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num.b intermediate coat .
apply intermediate coating to a dry film thickness above the primer of num mils to num mils or a manufacturers specified dry film thickness if greater than num mils to num mils .
use an intermediate coat color that contrasts with the colors of the prime and finish coats .
num.c finish coat .
apply the finish coat above the intermediate to a dry film thickness of num mils to num mils or a manufacturers specified dry film thickness if greater than num mils to num mils .
num .
removalrepair of defective paint .
a paint coat is defective if it is damaged it lifts blisters or wrinkles it has excessive runs or sags it shows evidence of application under unfavorable conditions it does not meet the coating thickness and continuity requirements specified in section numdnum rusting occurs the workmanship is poor or impure or unauthorized paint has been used .
remove defective paint and repair and recoat damaged or defective areas .
when the defective paint or damage extends to bare steel or bare steel is exposed clean the surface by sspcspnum or sspcspnum as approved .
when the damage or defective paint does not expose the underlying steel clean the surface according to spnum to remove the defective material and loose coating and reapply the affected coats .
if in the opinion of the representative the damage is too extensive for localized power tool cleaning clean the surface according to sspc spnum to remove all loose and defective material and reapply the effected coats .
for all repairs roughen the coating in overcoat areas to ensure good adhesion of the repair material to the underlying coating .
feather the surrounding coating to expose a minimum of num inch of each coat and to provide a smooth transition into intact adherent material for all coats .
numd num num num change no .
num num .
stenciling of final product .
after the final coat of paint has dried stencil the following information on the inside face of the fascia member at the near and far abutment ends unless directed otherwise the bridge identification number the month and year of completion the specification identification of the cleaning method and identification of the paint system bulletin num peq .
stencil using suitable black paint to provide uniform block lettering num inches to num inches high .
num .
contractor inspection and qc program .
perform inspections and tests as described in the qc plan specified in section numbnum .
document inspections and provide a copy to the representative .
before beginning surface preparation work perform inspections as a record of initial conditions .
during work perform the qc inspections necessary to ensure that work is performed in strict compliance with the specifications and the manufacturers instructions .
at a minimum inspect the following ambient conditionscompressed air cleanliness suitability of protective coverings surface cleanliness and profile chloride removal coating storage mixing and application dry film thickness and continuity of each coat dry time curing and cleanliness of each coat and touch up and repair of damaged or defective coats .
num .
access for representative inspection .
provide safe access and allow time for department inspections as requested by the representative for all phases of the work including surface preparation the application of each coat including stripe coats and inspection of the completed system .
num measurement and paymentlump sum .
the price includes abrasive blastingpaint removal waste disposal soluble saltchloride remediation and application of the threecoat paint system .
the price also includes removal of coatings from surfaces not designated to be painted repair of any damage resulting from the painting operation removal of coating that does not meet specifications and recoating of the surfaces and controls necessary to comply with the requirements of regulatory agencies .
the price does not include caulking .
num numc num num initial edition section numspotzone maintenance painting of existing structural steel num descriptionthis work is the painting of existing bridges using an approved surface tolerant coating system .
num material a coating system .
an approved proprietory coating system selected from the list approved surface tolerant coating systems in bulletin num .
do not mix components from different systems .
b technical representation .
section numanum c technical data .
submit copies of the manufacturers current technical data safety data and recommended repair procedures for the coating system .
also include the manufacturers color designation for the color of finish coat to be used .
identify this information for each bridge for each coating system used .
work will not be permitted to proceed until this information is received .
in the event of a conflict between the manufacturers technical data and these specifications the specifications will govern .
num construction a general .
section numa b surfaces to be painted .
unless otherwise specified paint all surfaces previously painted and all surfaces of new metal .
do not paint aluminum and galvanized metal surfaces unless otherwise directed .
do not apply mastic to areas that will be in contact with concrete .
paint areas in contact with concrete with an approved inorganic zinc rich prime coat .
c surface preparation .
sections numbnum num and num and as follows num .
blast cleaning .
blast clean all steel to a commercial blast condition as defined in sspcspnum using acceptable abrasives propelled through nozzles .
resultant anchor pattern to be num num mils to num num mils as measured by a keanetator surface profile comparator or testex replica tape .
before proceeding with the production blast cleaning operation prepare test sections on each structure of at least num square feet in locations considered by the inspector to be representative of existing surface conditions and structural characteristics .
blast clean test section areas using the same equipment materials and procedures that will be used for the production blast cleaning .
provide safe access for close visual inspection and testing .
do not proceed with the production blast cleaning operation until the inspector agrees that the surface of each test section has been prepared to conform with specified requirements .
determine the commercial blast condition by use of sspcvis num .
remove all mill scale from steel to be painted .
if the surface is pitted slight residues of primer may remain in the bottom of pits .
slight residue of paint or rust in seams between plates and around rivet heads is acceptable and need not be completely removed .
clean dryblasted surface with clean bristle fiber or hair brushes with compressed air or with vacuum .
remove traces of blast residue from the surface and from pockets and corners .
equip compressors with separators or traps to remove water and oil .
if water is used in the cleaning procedure assure that surfaces pockets and corners are dry and clean before applying paint .
allow a minimum of num hours of ambient air drying then remove rust bloom by dry blasting and clean to remove blast residue from surfaces pockets and corners .
do not use rust inhibitors .
numc numd num num initial edition num .
acceptable abrasives .
section numcnum d painting .
num .
mixing paint .
mix paint as recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
thinning paint .
thin paint only as recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
conditions for painting .
section numcnum num .
application .
before paint is applied clean dust and dirt and other contamination from the surfaces to be painted .
apply coatings that are free of runs sags embedded foreign matter and any other imperfections indicative of improper application .
apply paint according to the manufacturers recommendations consistent with environmental and physical constraints .
use acceptable brushes rollers spray equipment or any combination of equipment that gives satisfactory results .
do not apply field coats between october num and april num unless otherwise permitted in writing by the district executive .
num.a spray painting .
section numcnum.a num.b roller painting .
section numcnum.b num.c brush painting .
section numcnum.c num.d surfaces inaccessible to normal painting methods .
section numcnum.d num.e primer .
apply immediately after cleaning inspection and acceptance of the surface .
apply primer the same day the metal is cleaned .
if the blast cleaned metal remains unpainted overnight blast clean it again before priming .
num.f intermediate and finish coats .
for application of the intermediate and finish coats wet stripe all edges bolts welds rivets corners crevices and other irregularities either by brush or by a separate and distinct spray operation before application of the full coat .
provide safe access for inspection as requested by the representative before application of the full coat over the striped areas .
do not apply the full coat until approval of the striping is provided .
num.g stencilling .
section numcnum.e num .
repair .
reclean and if directed repaint areas damaged by concreting or other operations .
num .
thickness of coats .
num.a primer .
apply in a manner recommended by the manufacturer in a single application to a minimum dry film thickness of num mils to num mils above the anchor pattern so that a dense and uniform appearance is obtained after the coating is cured .
use a color that contrasts with the color of the cleaned based metal .
num.b intermediate coat .
apply in a manner recommended by the manufacturer in a single application to a minimum dry film thickness of num mils to num mils so that a dense and uniform appearance is obtained after the coating is cured .
use a color that contrasts with the primer and finish coats .
repair areas deficient in thickness as recommended by the manufacturer .
numd num num num initial edition num.c finish coat .
apply in a manner recommended by the manufacturer in a single application to a minimum dry film thickness of num mils to num mils .
provide a finish that is uniform in color and appearance .
the cumulative dry film thickness will be determined by use of a magnetic dry film thickness gage or the thickness of each coat will be determined by the use of a tooke gage or equal .
increase the thickness of coating if directed by the inspectorincharge to ensure a finish that is uniform in color and appearance .
correct coatings deficient in thickness as directed and according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
removal of unsatisfactory paint .
section numcnum num measurement and paymentlump sum num numb num num change no .
num section numprestressed concrete bridge superstructure num descriptionthis work is the construction of a prestressed concrete bridge superstructure .
num material a deck and barriers .
cement concrete structuressection num preformed neoprene compression joint seal for bridgessection num pedestrian railingsection num aluminum bridge hand railingsection num steel bridge hand railingsection num protective barriersection num protective fencesection num protective coating for reinforced concrete surfacessection numa armored preformed neoprene compression damsection num tooth expansion dam with drain troughsection num reinforcement barssection num neoprene strip seal damsection num b beams and bearings .
prestressed concrete bridge beamssection num plain steel barssection numanum closed cell neoprene spongesections numpnum and numenum neoprene bearing padssections num and numg bedding material for bridge shoessection numh steel bearingssection numj post tensioning when requiredsection num nonshrink epoxy grout for shear keyssection numg nonshrink grout for studs dowels and anchor boltssection nume epoxy resin protective coatingsection numb numb nume num num change no .
num high load multirotational bearingssection num c nonshrink grout .
use either a premixed nonshrink grout from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and certified as specified in section numbnum or mix as follows one part nonshrink grout admixturebulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
two parts cement type ip is or iisection num three parts fine aggregate type asection num watersection num required minimum compressive strength num pounds per square inch at num hours num pounds per square inch at num days combine dry materials in the mixer then agitate to mix .
add water slowly and mix for num minutes or less or according to the manufacturers instructions .
mix as closely as possible to the site of the work and use each batch within num minutes .
do not retemper .
mold daily test cylinders according to ptm no .
num .
test cylinders according to ptm no .
num. d fabricated structural steel .
section num .
at least num weeks before the start of fabrication furnish to the inspectorincharge a complete list of the names and addresses of firms that are to fabricate or supply incidental fabricated structural steel items to be used in conjunction with or as a part of the prestressed concrete members .
e modified mortar for beam seat leveling .
use mortar from a manufacturer listed in the miscellaneous section polymer modified and special cements mortars and concrete in bulletin num conforming to the following specifications polymer modified nonshrink nonsag consistency application thickness range num inch to num inch properties initial set time aashto t num num hour minimum compressive strength aashto t num num pounds per square inchnum hours num pounds per square inchnum days num pounds per square inchnum days slant shear bond test astm cnum modified num pounds per square inchnum days freezethaw resistance ptm no .
num nummaximum loss by weight certify as specified in section numbnum .
numf numc num num change no .
num f posttensioning strand .
section numg g nonshrink epoxy grout for shear keys in adjacent prestressed concrete box beam bridges .
use nonshrink epoxy grout as specified below required minimum compressive strength num pounds per square inch at num hours num pounds per square inch at num days num construction a general .
the superstructure consists of all indicated portions of the bridge above the bridge seat and includes bearings bearings and anchors set in the substructure abutment backwalls cheekwalls shear blocks bridge drainage down to but not including the drain box and portions of wings and appurtenances above the horizontal construction joint nearest the bridge seat .
b superstructure .
construct the superstructure as indicated as shown on the standard drawings and as follows fabricated structural steelsection num cement concrete structuressection num preformed neoprene compression joint seal for bridgessection num pedestrian railingsection num aluminum bridge hand railingsection num steel bridge hand railingsection num protective barriersection num protective fencesection num tooth expansion dam with drain troughsection num reinforcement barssection num neoprene strip seal damsection num armored preformed neoprene compression damsection num high load multirotational bearingssection numcnum.h c erection .
num .
general .
erect prestressed concrete beams as shown on submitted erection drawings and accepted shop drawings .
have a professional engineer registered in the state sign and seal the erection drawings .
at the bridge site beams will be inspected for possible damage cracking and twisting during shipment and for camber tolerances and dimensions .
replace beams damaged by improper storing handling transporting erecting or any other reason .
num .
bearings .
when elastomeric bearings are used under beams determine if there is full contact between the bearing pad and bearing surfaces just after the beams are set in place .
temporarily remove or relocate waterproofing numc numc num num change no .
num and other material as required to expose all sides of the pad .
if a gap between the pad and bearing surfaces is present proceed as follows unless the contract plans indicate that a liftoff condition is expected when the beam is initially set on the pad gap thickness num inch .
if a gap along any edge of the pad exceeds num inch grind the bearing surface of the substructure to eliminate the gap except gaps along the front edge of the pad edge toward the midspan of the beam will be allowed as specified in steps num and num below .
provide a rough textured bearing surface after grinding .
verify that the minimum required vertical clearance to the bottom of beams as indicated is maintained after grinding .
gap thickness num inch .
if gaps along any edge of the pad are less than or equal to num inch proceed as follows gap along rear edge of pad only .
if a gap occurs anywhere along the rear edge of the pad edge toward the end of the beam eliminate the gap by placing a leveling bed of polymermodified mortar beneath the pad as specified in section numcnum.a .
gap along side edges of pad .
if a gap occurs along the side edges of the pad and there is full contact at the front and rear edges eliminate the gap by placing a leveling bed of polymermodified mortar beneath the pad as specified in section numcnum.a .
gap along front edge of pad .
if a gap occurs along the front edge edge toward the midspan of the beam of the bearing pad proceed as follows step num determine the area of noncontact between the pad and beam .
if the amount of non contact is less than num of the pad area proceed to step num otherwise eliminate gap by grinding of bearing surface .
a leveling bed of polymermodified mortar beneath the pad as specified in section numcnum.a may be used instead if approved by the structural control engineer .
step num measure the maximum gap thickness along the front edge and proceed as follows spans num feet gap thickness num inch leave gap in place .
num inch gap thickness num inch eliminate the gap by placing a leveling bed of polymermodified mortar beneath the pad as specified in section numcnum.a .
spans num feet gap thickness num inch leave gap in place .
num inch gap thickness num inch eliminate the gap by placing a leveling bed of polymermodified mortar beneath the pad as specified in section numcnum.a .
num.a leveling bed of polymermodified mortar placement procedure .
num .
immediately before lifting beam prepare mortar according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not extend mortar by adding coarse aggregate .
num .
lift beam as necessary .
num .
remove pad .
num .
apply a bed of mortar to the beam seat covering an area approximately num inches beyond the perimeter of the bearing pad .
apply the mortar in a thickness approximately num inch greater than the maximum actual gap thickness .
num .
place the pad on the mortar .
num .
reset the beam on the pad while the mortar remains plastic .
num .
cure the mortar as applicable according to the manufacturers recommendation .
numc num num num change no .
num num .
replace all previously removed preformed cellular polystyrene and closed cell neoprene sponge material around bearing area .
place mortar according to temperature restrictions recommended by the manufacturer .
do not place a leveling bed of mortar before the initial setting of beams .
d shear key joints between adjacent box beams .
num .
general .
check shear keys for widths .
maximum allowable gap between beams will be the tolerance for horizontal alignment plus num inch as specified in section numenum.b .
num .
preparation of the joints .
before shipping sandblast the entire shear key area providing a rough texture and completely remove all oil grease dirt or material that would prevent bonding .
just before erection clean the blasted surface with compressed air clean stiffbristle fiber brushes or vacuum .
caulk joints below the keys with suitable backer rod and soak joints with water num hour before grouting .
num .
filling joints .
fill the longitudinal joints between adjacent beams with nonshrink epoxy grout .
place grout quickly and continuously into the joints .
spade but do not vibrate .
overfill the joints let stand for num hour then strike off flush with the top of the beams .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for filling in hot or cold weather .
do not allow construction activity or other loadings on the bridge for at least num hours after the grout has been placed .
for vehicular loading section numdnum applies .
num .
curing .
start curing immediately after the grout has been placed .
use a double thickness of watersaturated burlap .
keep the burlap wet during the curing period for at least num hours .
during cold weather prevent freezing of the grout .
provide curing temperatures of numf or above .
num .
opening to traffic .
for noncomposite adjacent box beam construction after grouting shear keys do not allow any traffic on a span until num days have elapsed and grout compressive strength is num pounds per square inch minimum .
e protective coating for prestressed concrete beams .
where indicated apply an epoxyresin protective coating as specified in section numb to the beam tops and to grouted shear keys before the construction of a bituminous surface course .
apply coating as specified in section numb .
cure the coating according to the manufacturers recommendations .
f waterproofing at abutments .
as indicated place closed cell neoprene sponge on top of abutments then erect the beams .
use a wire brush and clean vertical end notches in beams of adjacent box beam bridges then seal by caulking with a suitable backer rod .
wet the backer rod num hour before grouting .
fill the notches with nonshrink grout .
cure with wet burlap for at least num hours .
g resetting expansion bearings .
where indicated reset expansion bearings as specified in section numcnum.c.num .
h posttensioning adjacent box beams .
posttension adjacent box beams as indicated and as specified in section num .
num measurement and paymentlump sum .
the price includes the following component items .
prestressed concrete bridge beams .
linear foot preformed neoprene compression joint seal for bridges .
section num pedestrian railing .
section num aluminum bridge hand railing .
section num num num num num change no .
num steel bridge hand railing .
section num protective barrier .
section num protective fence .
section num protective coating for reinforced concrete surfaces .
section num tooth expansion dam with drain trough .
section num armored preformed neoprene compression dam .
section num reinforcement bars .
section num neoprene strip seal dam .
section num cement concrete structures .
section num fabricated structural steel .
section num high load multirotational bearings .
section num reset expansion bearings prestressed concrete superstructure .
each num numm num num change no .
num section numprecast reinforced concrete box culvert num descriptionthis work is the manufacture storage delivery installation and assembly of precast reinforced concrete box culvert segments into one continuous unit .
num material a class a cement concrete .
section num b deformed welded wire fabric .
section num c galvanized specialized assembly and tightening hardware sleeves lug plates bolts nuts and washers .
section numd d nonshrink grout .
section numc e precast reinforced concrete box culvert segments .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
furnish test and place cement concrete as specified in section num except with a minimum numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch or as shown on the approved shop drawings .
aashto m numm numm or m numm numm except modify section num permissible variations as follows num internal dimensionsdo not allow the internal dimensions to vary from design by more than num with a maximum variation of num inch .
do not allow the internal diagonal dimensions to vary by more than num inch .
do not allow the haunch dimensions to vary more than num inch from design dimensions .
num slab and wall thicknessdo not allow slab and wall thickness to vary from design dimensions by more than minus num inch .
num length of opposite surfacedo not allow laying length of two opposite surfaces of the box section to vary more than num inchfoot of the internal span with a maximum of num inch .
num position of reinforcementdo not allow the position of the reinforcement to vary from the approved shop drawings by more than num inch in any direction .
place reinforcement so the indicated cover clearance does not deviate more than num inch .
provide num num inch minimum cover at the mating surface as measured to the end of the joint .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
f reinforcement bars .
section num g waterproofing .
section num h selected borrow excavation structure backfill .
as shown on the standard drawings .
i concrete bonding compound .
section num j rock protection class rnum .
section numa k joint sealing compound .
section nume m neoprene joint material .
identify neoprene material according to the type class and grade .
print stencil or otherwise affix this code to each pad at intervals of not more than num inches and in letters and numerals of not less than numinch height .
additional information such as lot or batch numbers date plant and place of manufacture trademark or name of manufacturer may also be added .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
numm numf num num change no .
num num .
closedcell neoprene sponge .
pads may be manufactured as sponge neoprene or expanded neoprene and may be composed of laminations .
use material conforming to the following astm dnum type num class c grade num including the requirements of suffixes bnum and fnum astm dnum quality retention rating of num after num weeks exposure n post tensioning strands .
section numg num constructionconstruct as indicated and according to article num of the aashto lrfd specifications .
a design .
design according to aashto specifications as supplemented by penndot design manual part num. b shop drawings .
obtain approval of shop drawings before fabricating precast box culverts .
show segment length on drawing .
provide segments of maximum length compatible with hauling equipment in order to minimize the number of joints .
provide shop drawings as specified in section numd .
provide shop drawings clearly showing all items incorporated into the box culvert including all reinforcing .
list items such as chairs and inserts by source type and supplier .
c inspection .
the department will inspect precast segments during the entire fabrication process .
the necessary facilities for inspection include a plant office as specified in section numa .
d qc num .
general .
establish a level of qc based on uniform production practices .
submit the plants qc plan and mix designs to the structural materials engineer lts for review and approval .
include with the qc plan a company organizational chart indicating a separate chain of command from the qc manager to the ownerplant manager independent of the production manager .
resubmit the qc plan mix design and organizational chart if processes materials or personnel change .
num .
qc manager .
provide a qc manager who has overall responsibility for the adequacy of production facilities qc sampling and testing and fabrication of the product and who will ensure that items are fabricated as designed and as specified .
num .
qc personnel .
assign sufficient qualified personnel with precast concrete experience to be responsible for qc and sampling and testing during the complete fabrication process storage and shipment .
technicians responsible for concrete sampling and testing are required to provide written evidence that they successfully completed the certification requirements for an aci grade i field technician or have approval from the structural materials engineer as a technicianintraining .
do not proceed with production until qualified personnel are present and approved by the department .
after initially obtaining the aci certification technicians are not required to obtain recertificationunless there has been more than a num month interval where actual plastic concrete testing has not been performed by the technician .
num .
plant acceptance .
section num except register and certify the plant under either the national precast concrete association npca american concrete pipe association acpa box culvert or prestressed concrete institute pci box culvert plant certification program .
submit an annual endorsed copy to the structural materials engineer for continued qualification .
e handling and storage .
handle and store precast reinforced concrete box culvert segments so that damage will not occur to the concrete or reinforcing steel .
provide suitable lifting devices for handling and installing precast reinforced concrete box culvert segments .
galvanize metal devices as specified in section nums .
f delivery .
replace precast reinforced concrete box culvert segments damaged by improper storing handling transporting or erection .
numf numo num num change no .
num the representative will inspect the segments at the site for possible damage and cracking during shipment and for tolerances and other dimensions required for acceptance .
do not ship segments until the numday minimum compressive strength is attained .
provide numhour advance notice of loading and shipping schedule .
have the department representative verify form csnum and properly tag segments before shipping .
do not ship unapproved items .
g installation requirements .
num .
foundation material .
construct foundation as specified in section num excluding section numanum.f .
if unsuitable foundation material or rock is encountered remove all unsuitable material or rock at least num inches below bottom of box culvert and backfill with no .
numa or aashto no .
num coarse aggregate as shown on the standard drawings graded in close conformity with the stream bed grade to provide proper bedding conditions .
accurately shape bedding material with a template to provide uniform contact num of bearing .
num .
grouting .
grout hand holes pockets bolt sleeves tie rod holes and lifting lugs after joints are sealed and hardware is installed .
num .
placement .
place box culverts as indicated .
do not disturb the bedding or damage the box culvert .
num .
backfill .
backfill reinforced concrete box culverts to limits shown on standard drawing rcnumm .
backfill trench as specified in section numf .
num .
compaction of cover .
if cover or fill is indicated do not traverse top of box culverts with construction equipment until after cover or fill has been placed unless cover exceeds num feet .
do not use vibratory rollers to compact cover or fill over or directly adjacent to box culverts .
num .
waterproofing .
apply waterproofing as specified in section num and as shown on the standard drawings .
h guide rails .
if indicated install guide rail over box culverts as follows for fill heights greater than num inches at post locations provide guide rail as shown on standard drawing rcnumm type num strong post guide rail .
for fill heights num inches or less at post locations provide structure mounted guide rail as shown on standard drawing bdnumm r.c .
box culvert precast and furnish a class a cement concrete headwall .
i cutoff walls .
if indicated provide castinplace or precast cutoff walls of numinch thick by numinch deep class a cement concrete or less if directed and install upstream and downstream .
j wingwalls .
if indicated provide castinplace class a cement concrete wing walls .
k aprons .
if indicated provide aprons of numinch thick class a cement concrete reinforced as shown on the standard drawings .
l concrete bonding compound .
if cutoff walls or wing walls are indicated bond to box culvert by coating the contact surfaces with concrete bonding compound .
m protective coating .
if indicated apply two spray coats of coal tar epoxy conforming to the requirements of sspcps num to the top of the box and exposed end faces and to the entire height of the outside walls .
n curing .
section num except maintain box culvert segments after stripping and during secondary curing in a minimum numf environment until they have reached a compressive strength of num of the required numday minimum concrete design strength shown on the approved shop drawings .
o posttensioning .
install precast culvert segments as shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as specified in section num and as described below num .
grouting strand ducts .
if grouting is not going to be performed during the same day the tendons are stressed then within num hours after stressing protect the tendons and grout ducts against corrosion and debris by temporarily numo numd num num change no .
num sealing all openings and vents cleaning rust and other debris from all metal surfaces to be covered by the grout cap and placing the grout cap including a seal over the anchor plate until the tendon is grouted .
grout ducts within num calendar days after tensioning .
failure to grout the ducts within num calendar days after tensioning will require the contractor to demonstrate the ducts are unobstructed to achieve complete grouting .
if obstructions are present clean ducts to remove obstructions and reinspect prior to grouting .
num measurement and payment a precast reinforced concrete box culvert .
lump sum the price includes the following component items class a cement concrete .
section numa deformed welded wire fabric .
pound annealed iron wire chairs and ties are incidental to the deformed wire fabric .
precast reinforced concrete box culvert segments .
linear foot the unit price includes posttensioning if indicated .
reinforcement bars .
section num membrane waterproofing .
section num selected borrow excavation structure backfill .
section numg rock protection .
section numa protective coating coal tar epoxy .
square yard work to divert running water according to the accepted erosion and sedimentation control plan is incidental to box culvert construction .
b guide rail .
section num c excavation for unsuitable material or rock .
section num d backfill for unsuitable material or rock excavation .
cubic yard the department will pay as specified in section num .
num numb num num initial edition section num sound barriers num description this work is the construction of either structure mounted ground mounted or offset sound barrier walls .
num material a wall posts .
num .
structural steel posts .
structural steel shapes and plates section numanum structural steel tubing astm anumanumm grade b type e anchor bolts nuts and washers section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
oversize washers section numanum galvanized and painted after fabrication as specified in section nums and section numb .
welded studs section nume welding material section numt galvanizing section nums paint section numb num .
precast reinforced concrete posts .
section num class aa cement concrete modified provide cement concrete as specified in section num except with a minimum numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
structural steel base plates section numanum galvanized after fabrication as specified in section nums .
anchor bolts nuts and washers section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
oversize washers section numanum galvanized after fabrication as specified in section nums .
deformed reinforcement bars section num deformed welded wire fabric section num b wall panels .
num .
precast reinforced concrete panels and offset wall panels .
section num class aa cement concrete modified provide cement concrete as specified in section num except with a minimum numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
provide light weight concrete in the structure mounted sound barrier panels when specified to achieve a maximum oven dry density of num pounds per cubic foot .
verify the oven dry density of concrete in accordance with astm cnum during qualification of the mix design .
following mix design approval perform oven dry unit weight testing in accordance with astm cnum for each lot .
proportion mix design in accordance with aci num for structural lightweight concrete .
deformed reinforcement bars section num numb numh num num initial edition steel welded wire fabric section num c finish .
provide texture architectural surface treatments and color of panels as specified in the proposal .
color and texture to be uniform from panel to panel and post to post .
d penetrating stain where indicated .
see special provisions in the proposal .
e foundations .
num .
drilled caissons .
section num num .
spread footings .
class a cement concrete section num deformed reinforcement bars section num f steel cables in precast concrete panels and accessories for structure mounted or ground mounted sound barrier walls .
bolts section numcnum nuts section numcnum.a washers section numcnum.b galvanize and paint all bolts nuts washers and other hardware as specified in section nums and section numb .
galvanized steel flexible wire rope num inch num x num with a minimum breaking strength of num num kips .
thimbles galvanized heavyduty for num inch wire rope meeting the requirements of federal specification fftnumb type ii .
galvanized wire rope clips num inch .
steel pipe astm anumanumm grade b type e galvanized as specified in section nums .
g steel cables and accessories for offset sound barrier walls .
stainless steel type num or num flexible wire rope aircraft cable num inch num x num in accordance with milwnum with a minimum breaking strength of num kips .
stainless steel type num or num internally threaded terminals num inch outside diameter swedged to cable in accordance with miltnum .
provide compression fittings with a minimum breaking strength equal to or greater than the cable .
stainless steel type num hex head cap screws num inch num unc .
stainless steel type num washers .
pvc pipe schedule num section numbnum .
h end panel connection for offset sound barrier walls .
structural steel angles section numanum galvanized after fabrication as specified in section nums .
anchor bolts nuts and washers section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
thru bolts section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
nuts section numcnum.a galvanized as specified in section nums .
washers section numcnum.b galvanized as specified in section nums .
pvc pipe schedule num section numbnum numh numb num num initial edition i access door in precast concrete panels where indicated .
door and frame as manufactured by windsor republic doors steelcraft pioneer industries or and approved equal .
refer to standard drawings for additional information .
j other material .
adhesive as required and as specified by the manufacturer .
joint sealing material section numa caulking compound section numb joint backing material backer rod section num epoxy bonding compound section num nonshrink grout section numc closed cell neoprene sponge section numm unreinforced plain neoprene bearing pads section numa .
sample the completed pads according to ptm no .
num except reduce the sampling rate to three pads per structure .
integral color pigmentation where indicated see special provisions in the proposal .
lifting inserts galvanized and as specified by fabricator .
paint color where indicated see special provisions in the proposal .
k certification .
section numbnum num construction before fabrication obtain acceptance of shop drawings .
construct as indicated on the contract drawings standard drawings as shown on the accepted shop drawings and as follows a design .
num .
general .
provide fire hydrant openings and other highway access doors as indicated .
provide adequate reinforcement around panel openings to prevent cracking .
show reinforcement details in accordance with the standard drawing on the shop drawings .
submit design calculations for acceptance for the precast concrete panels in accordance with the requirements of the standard drawings .
submit design calculations for acceptance for the panel and post lifting inserts for actual strength of concrete at time of stripping transportation and erection in accordance with the requirements of the standard drawings .
num .
ground mounted and offset sound barrier walls .
refer to the contract drawings for the finished ground and acoustical profile elevations .
protect final ground elevations established in the field for the duration of the project and do not adjust without prior acceptance .
num .
structure mounted sound barrier walls .
refer to the contract drawings for the top of barrierwall and acoustical profile elevations .
b shop drawings .
before beginning fabrication submit for acceptance shop drawings showing fabrication details and handling and transportation procedures for all wall elements including connections .
submit shop drawings for the posts and panels concurrently .
numb nume num num initial edition c erection and construction procedure .
submit erection and construction procedures for acceptance with the shop drawings .
d catalog cuts .
prepare and submit the following catalog cuts for acceptance with the shop drawings if applicable num .
architectural surface treatments when indicated indicating the following minimum information name of manufacturer pattern name and number minimum maximum and average relief joint widths liner material type schematic drawing of form liner layout for each panel type num .
lifting inserts indicating the following minimum information name of manufacturer specification product name number and lifting capacity minimum concrete strength for lifting insert design information and calculations num .
integral color pigmentation when indicated indicating the following minimum information name of manufacturer product number and color number specification num .
caulking compoundjoint sealing material indicating the following minimum information name of manufacturer product number and color number specification num .
provide any other catalog cuts required for other products used in the construction of the sound barrier wall .
e installation requirements .
num .
foundations .
num.a .
drilled caissons .
construct drilled caisson foundations as specified in section num and as follows construct embankments andor cut existing grade to the top of caisson elevations before construction of the caissons .
provide vertical and tie reinforcement for the full height of the shaft .
if the bottom of the caisson elevation is lower than required then either provide additional vertical and tie reinforcement at no additional cost to the department or suspend the reinforcement cage such that the reinforcement is in the proper position relative to the top of caisson elevation .
provide test holes and probe holes only as indicated .
nume nume num num initial edition when permanent casing is used drill drive or vibrate casing so soil is in full contact with the outside of the casing .
alternatively place casing in an oversized hole and grout the annular space between the permanent casing and the surrounding soil to establish lateral support .
grout after the concrete has obtained its initial set but no later that num hours after placement of the concrete .
where excavation is stable and not subject to rapid degradation the num hour period may be extended to num hours as allowed .
use a pressurized grouting method capable of completely filling the open area .
provide grout as specified in section numfnum except testing is not required .
when temporary casing is used remove casing as specified in section numi .
if unexpected construction conditions require the casing to remain in place perform grouting as specified for permanent casing to fill cavities surrounding the casing .
place caisson concrete within num hours of the completion of excavation and within num hours of final inspection of the drilled shaft .
where excavation is stable and not subject to rapid degradation the num hour period may be extended to num hours as allowed .
num.b .
spread footings .
construct concrete spread footings as indicated as specified in section num and as follows construct embankments andor cut existing grade to the top of footing elevations .
excavate and backfill foundation areas as specified in section num and compact using a mechanical tamper .
if unsuitable foundation material is encountered remove all unsuitable material at least num inches or as specified or directed below the bottom of spread footing elevation and backfill with compacted no .
numa coarse aggregate or class c cement concrete as specified or directed .
num .
fabrication .
num.a .
precast concrete posts and panels .
fabricate precast concrete posts and panels as specified in section num as indicated on the accepted shop drawings and as follows use only preapproved fabricators listed in bulletin num .
obtain acceptance of the concrete mix design before fabrication .
obtain initial acceptance of any architectural surface treatments before production of test posts and panels .
fill all holes in the precast concrete posts and panels resulting from fabrication with an accepted nonshrink grout color to match panelpost .
ensure that precast concrete posts and panels are cast in one continuous lift to eliminate cold joints .
fabricate panels in a manner that will produce a secure and vibration free installation .
provide a smooth finish on the portions of panels being placed in post flanges or in contact with adjacent panels as shown in the standard drawing .
furnish full height panels or stacked panel sections with tongue and groove or interlocking joints that provide light tight conditions at the joints and prevent direct transmission of sound .
furnish top panels with a smooth finish on the top side .
furnish bottom panels with a smooth finish on the bottom side .
repair defects in accordance with publication num .
replace cracked or damaged posts and panels which can not be repaired to the satisfaction of the representative .
num.b .
steel cables in precast concrete panels and accessories .
assemble three sample connections and submit for testing and acceptance before panel fabrication .
samples must be assembled by the same process that is used for production panels .
nume nume num num initial edition galvanized wire rope clips tighten nuts evenly in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
confirm tension via torque verification .
num.c .
threaded reinforcement bars in precast concrete posts with base plate connections .
provide either epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcement bars .
thread end of bar or provide upset threads as specified .
fabricate in accordance with the following procedure cut threads on one end of bar .
clean any cutting lubricant from threads and bar and apply two coats of zinc oxide paint meeting the requirements of astm anum to the threaded portion of the bar .
assemble reinforcement and base plate assembly .
overtap nuts if required to accommodate the additional material on the bolt threads .
num.d .
structural steel posts .
fabricate steel posts as specified in section num as indicated on the accepted shop drawings and as follows use only preapproved fabricators listed in bulletin num .
furnish posts which are galvanized and painted as specified in section nums and section numb .
furnish paint color as indicated or directed .
num.e .
steel cables and accessories for offset sound barrier walls .
assemble three sample connections and submit for testing and acceptance before panel fabrication .
samples must be assembled by the same process that is used for production panels .
num.f .
test posts and panels .
fabricate test posts and panels samples for acceptance before normal fabrication and after acceptance of the shop drawings and catalog cuts for the panels and posts .
ground mounted sound barrier walls and structure mounted sound barrier walls fabricate and erect a sample wall consisting of a minimum of three posts and two panel sections .
provide post heights that meet or exceed the average post height for the sound barriers on the project .
provide sufficient number of panels in order to match the height of the posts .
offset sound barrier walls fabricate and erect a sample wall consisting of a minimum of three panel sections lengths .
provide sections that meet or exceed the average wall height for the sound barriers on the project .
fabricate samples using the same process and materials that will be used for production .
erect sample walls at the place of manufacture and store outdoors to allow proper lighting for comparisons during manufacturing and inspection .
apply penetrating stain where specified to one half of wall per side to show the final finish after the sample wall is constructed .
use test sections to determine the acceptability of the various surface treatments uniform color free of surface blemishes quality of construction and overall appearance of both the roadway and residential sides of the sound barrier wall .
provide integrally colored posts and panels that are uniform in color consistency and free from discoloration and blemishes .
galvanize and paint structural steel posts as specified .
view architectural treatments for the sample wall and subsequent production for acceptance at a distance of num feet unless otherwise specified .
notify the department at least num days before the construction of the test panels and posts so the appropriate department representatives may be present to determine acceptability .
department representatives may include the environmental manager project manager design staff construction staff and any other project team member designated by the department .
department representatives will determine whether the color and various surface treatments of the posts and panels are acceptable .
produce additional samples until an acceptable product nume numf num num initial edition is produced if initial test sections are found to be unacceptable .
acceptable samples fabricated according to the accepted shop drawings are allowed to be incorporated into the project in the final stage of construction after all production has been completed and accepted .
production panels and posts not conforming to the accepted test sections will be rejected .
num .
erection .
install sound barrier wall as indicated as shown on the accepted shop drawings and according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide cranes that are sized to handle the posts and panels safely at the required height and reach .
erect posts truly vertical .
erect panels truly vertical in a manner that will provide a secure and vibration free system installation .
pack or place nonshrink grout in locations as shown .
do not pour or inject grout .
provide joints and connections with no visible openings or gaps to decrease sound attenuation .
fill all lifting inserts in all concrete panels and posts with an accepted nonshrink grout color to match panelpost .
seal all open joints and holes with joint sealing material or caulking compound .
apply penetrating stain when indicated .
stain to extend a minimum of num inch below finished ground line .
construct finished ground as indicated or directed .
use only handoperated compaction equipment within num feet of the sound barrier when backfilling .
contractor is responsible for overall fit of wall .
num .
removal of falsework and bracing .
keep falsework and bracing that supports posts in place for at least num hours after placing the final portion of the foundation .
f tolerances .
num .
fabrication tolerances .
num. a. reinforced precast concrete posts and panels .
section num and as indicated in publication num .
num. b .
structural steel posts astm anum num. c. all others .
english panels inch post inch height num length num length num width num thickness num depth num out of flatness slot depth num lengths to num feet num slot width num lengths over num feet num out of flatness numf numf num num initial edition lengths to num feet num lengths over num feet num num.d .
steel base plate flatness .
machine surfaces to within num inch of flatness .
determine flatness as specified in section numc .
num.e .
galvanized lifting inserts .
set inserts within num inch of the indicated location .
num.f .
steel pipe in precast concrete panels .
set steel pipe for thru bolt in precast concrete panels within num inch of the indicated location .
num.g .
pvc pipe in offset sound barrier panels .
set pvc pipe for cable connection in precast concrete panels num inch of the indicated location .
num .
architectural surface treatment tolerances .
num.a .
general .
provide architectural surface treatment patterns that are continuous and uninterrupted across horizontal joints in stacked panels .
num.b .
vertical alignment for stacked panels toptobottom .
provide a tolerance of num inch for the vertical alignment of the architectural surface treatment pattern between stacked panels .
num.c .
horizontal alignment between adjacent panels sidebyside panels .
provide a tolerance of num inch for the horizontal alignment of the architectural surface treatment pattern at adjacent panels .
num.d .
seam lines between form liners .
assemble noncontinuous form liner sections such that seams lines or match lines are not apparent when viewing the completed panels .
num .
erection tolerances .
num.a .
vertical alignment .
height of wall vertical alignment of walls and posts num feet num inch num feet num inch num feet num inch num.b .
horizontal alignment .
horizontal alignment for walls and posts to be within num inch of the indicated location .
num.c .
posts .
set posts within num inch of the indicated location .
num.d .
post rotation .
set orientation of post within num degrees of the indicated location .
num.e .
anchor bolts .
set anchor bolts within num inch of the indicated location .
numf numb num num initial edition num.f .
top of barrier wall caisson footings pedestals and raised panel seat elevations .
set elevations within num inch of the indicated location .
num.g .
grout depth under base plate .
set grout depth within num inch of the indicated thickness .
g reject individual posts and panels for any of the following production panels and posts not conforming to the accepted test sections .
fractures and cracks passing through the panel or post .
defects that indicate proportioning mixing and molding not in compliance with the specifications or as indicated .
honeycombed open texture .
damaged ends where such damage would prevent making a satisfactory joint .
twentyeight day cylinder strength is less than design concrete strength .
defective welding .
dimensions not conforming to the allowable tolerances specified .
panels and posts may be rejected either at the fabrication shop or at the construction site even after installation but before acceptance of project .
mark the rejected post or panel rejected for the departments use with waterproof paint .
num measurement and payment a wall posts .
each the price includes excavation foundation post base plate bearing pads and all associated hardware .
b wall panels .
square foot measured to equal the total area of the panel including areas concealed by posts or finished ground .
the unit price includes all joint sealing materials and all associated hardware .
c offset sound barrier wall .
square meter square foot measured to equal the total area along the sound barrier control line disregarding the offset .
the barrier height will be measured from the top of wall to the bottom of wall top of footing .
the barrier length will be measured from begin to end of wall .
the price includes excavation foundation bearing pads joint sealing material and all associated hardware .
d sound barrier access door .
each the price includes installation of door in wall panel and all associated hardware .
e excavation for unsuitable material .
section num class num excavation required for the over excavation of unsuitable material below the bottom of spread footing elevation as indicated or directed .
f backfill for unsuitable material .
section num backfill over excavated area with compacted no .
numa coarse aggregate or class c cement concrete as indicated or directed .
num numa num num initial edition section numpa ht bridge barrier num description this work is the construction of a pa ht bridge barrier .
num material unless otherwise specified galvanize steel materials as specified in section nums .
before fabrication submit shop drawings as specified in section numd for review and acceptance .
a railing .
num .
steel rails .
num.a .
astm a numa numm type e or s grade b or a.p.i .
numlxnum pslnum subsequently extruded or cold pressed into desired elliptical shape .
num.b .
pipe rail produced continuously off a pipe mill in an elliptical shape in accordance with the chemical mechanical and testing requirements of api numl grade xnum psl num seamless or electric resistance welded except as modified below the inside flash for elliptical pipe used in a sleeve application is not required to be removed .
eddy current testing of the weld line in accordance with astm enum calibrated to num inch drilled hole is acceptable .
standard operating procedure is as follows drill reference holes in the weldline area on the mill for calibration .
pass this area through the inspection system at production speeds .
adjust signal levels to provide a suitable signaltonoise ratio for the material being inspected .
adjust signal level to produce a minimum of num deflection on the strip chart recorder .
adjust the phase setting so signals are in between gate settings .
adjust marking system to spray any signal exceeding referenced hole calibration height of num .
maintain documentation of standard operating procedure to include daily verification checks .
flattening test of the elliptical shape cut a sample from the leading and trailing end of each coil with the weld line located between the num oclock and num oclock position is acceptable .
conduct flattening test to num of the original outside diameter without the weld opening .
hydrostatic testing is not required for the elliptical pipe .
square cut pipe ends .
num .
steel rail sleeve member .
num.a .
astm a numa numm type e or s grade b astm a numa numm or astm a num grade b or a.p.i numlxnum pslnum subsequently extruded or cold pressed into desired shape .
num. b .
acceptable alternate section numanum.b .
num .
sidewalk rail tubes .
section numa .
num .
toggle bolts for sidewalk rail tube .
section numb .
num .
sidewalk rail rod .
astm a numa numm .
num .
sidewalk rail rod splice .
astm a num as welded tubing grade num or a num hot rolled tubing grade num .
numa num num num initial edition num .
railing posts and base plates .
section numanum .
num .
test requirements for post welds .
visually inspect all welds on all posts .
in addition inspect at least num of the posts in a lot as defined in aws dnumdnummnum section numc as follows perform magnetic particle testing over full length of the welds on all posts inspected .
if unacceptable discontinuities are found in any of the welds tested inspect an additional num of the posts in the same lot .
if unacceptable discontinuities are found in any of the welds tested in the second group of posts inspect all of the remaining posts in the lot .
num .
miscellaneous .
section numanum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numc galvanized as specified in section nums .
c caulking compound .
section num .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings the contract drawings and as follows before erection use caulking compound and thoroughly coat surfaces of posts in contact with concrete .
after erection and alignment use caulking compound and seal openings between metal surfaces and concrete .
remove blemishes and scratches from exposed surfaces .
for areas that have been damaged exposing base metal repair galvanizing in accordance with astm anum .
place joints as indicated .
do not open bridge to traffic until bridge railing is placed .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from end to end of barrier .
num num num num change no .
num section numpa type numm bridge barrier num descriptionthis work is the construction of a pa type numm bridge barrier .
num materialunless otherwise specified galvanize steel materials as specified in section nums .
before fabrication submit shop drawings as specified in section numd for review and acceptance .
a railing .
steel cold formed tubes .
astm anum grade b sidewalk rail tubes .
section numa toggle bolts for sidewalk rail tube .
section num a railing posts and base plates .
section numanum.b test requirements for post welds .
at least num of the posts in a lot as defined in aws dnumdnumm num section numc will be inspected .
a visual inspection and magnetic particle testing will be performed over the full length of the welds on all posts inspected .
ultrasonic testing of the complete joint penetration welds will also be performed .
if unacceptable discontinuities are found in more than num of the welds tested an additional num of the posts in the same lot will be inspected .
if unacceptable discontinuities are found in more than num of the welds tested in the second group of posts all of the remaining posts in the lot will be inspected .
miscellaneous .
section numanum certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numc galvanized as specified in section nums .
c barrier mount delineation devices .
section numb d caulking compound .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings the contract drawings and as follows before erection use caulking compound and thoroughly coat surfaces of posts in contact with concrete .
after erection and alignment use caulking compound and seal openings between metal surfaces and concrete .
remove blemishes and scratches from exposed surfaces .
for areas that have been damaged exposing base metal paint with two coats according to astm anum .
place joints as indicated .
at bend area do not vary the diameter of rail tubes by more than num of the outside dimension when rail tubes are bent to the radii indicated .
do not open bridge to traffic until bridge railing is placed .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measured from end to end of barrier .
num num num num initial edition section numpa bridge barrier num description this work is the construction of a pa bridge barrier .
num material unless otherwise specified galvanize steel materials as specified in section nums .
before fabrication submit shop drawings as specified in section numd for review and acceptance .
a railing .
steel cold formed tubes .
astm a num grade b threaded welded anchor studs for barrier rail tube .
astm a num no thread welded anchor studs for barrier rail splice .
astm a num sidewalk rail tubes .
section numa threaded welded anchor studs for sidewalk rail tube .
astm a num sidewalk rail rod .
section numanum sidewalk rail rod splice .
astm anum or anum railing posts and base plates .
section numanum.d type num num or num only .
test requirements for post welds .
all welds on all posts will be visually inspected .
in addition at least num of the posts in a lot as defined in aws dnumdnummnum section numc will be inspected as follows magnetic particle testing will be performed over the full length of the welds on all posts inspected .
ultrasonic testing of the complete joint penetration welds will also be performed .
if unacceptable discontinuities are found in more than num of the welds tested an additional num of the posts in the same lot will be inspected .
if unacceptable discontinuities are found in more than num of the welds tested in the second group of posts all of the remaining posts in the lot will be inspected .
miscellaneous .
section numanum certify as specified in section numbnum .
b anchor bolts nuts and washers .
section numcnum galvanized as specified in section nums .
c ushaped washer .
section numa galvanized as specified in section nums .
d barrier mount delineation devices .
section numb e caulking compound .
section num num constructionas shown on the standard drawings the contract drawings and as follows before erection use caulking compound and thoroughly coat surfaces of posts in contact with concrete .
after num num num num initial edition erection and alignment use caulking compound and seal openings between metal surfaces and concrete .
remove blemishes and scratches from exposed surfaces .
for areas that have been damaged exposing base metal repair galvanizing in accordance with astm a num .
place joints as indicated .
at bend area do not vary the diameter of rail tubes by more than num of the outside dimension when rail tubes are bent to the radii indicated .
do not open bridge to traffic until bridge railing is placed .
num measurement and paymentlinear foot measure from end to end of barrier .
num numb num num initial edition section numepoxy injection crack seal num descriptionthis work is the preparation and sealing of cracks with epoxy resin mixture excluding overhead sealing .
num material a epoxy resin system .
provide a system conforming to the strength requirements of astm c num type i grade num section num for epoxy injection and from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. b surface seal .
provide a surface seal as recommended by the manufacturer and of adequate strength to hold injection fittings firmly in place and to resist injection pressures adequately to prevent leakage during injection .
c injection fittings .
as recommended by the manufacturer .
d certification .
section numbnum num constructionconstruct as directed and as follows a preliminary work .
the representative will mark areas to be sealed .
b preparation for sealing .
thoroughly clean the surfaces of rust scale grease loose and disintegrated particles and material .
remove unsound concrete and mortar as directed .
glue injection ports in place at spacings as recommended by the manufacturer .
bevel cracks as directed to facilitate installation of injection ports .
seal the surface and areas surrounding the entry ports with surface seal .
apply seal so that the epoxy injection resin is sealed until initially cured .
c mixing epoxy resin system .
mix the epoxy resin system according to the manufacturers instructions with a minimum num second mixing time using a low speed num rpm to num rpm electric drill with an approved mixing paddle .
the mixing may also be accomplished by an injection machine capable of metering and mixing the specific proportions of components within a tolerance of num. d injection procedure .
do not inject the cracked area until after the surface sealer has hardened .
inject the epoxy with a hand held gun pressure pot or injection machine or as recommended by the manufacturer .
start injection at the lowest point on the crack .
when the material begins to flow from the next higher entry port remove the nozzle plug the port and insert the nozzle in the next higher entry port .
continue the operation until the crack is completely filled .
after the epoxy material has achieved an initial cure remove the entry ports and if necessary patch the areas with the same material used to seal the rest of the crack surface .
e application limitations .
do not apply or inject epoxy materials if the ambient or concrete temperature is below numf .
num measurement and payment a linear foot or b dollar the proposal will include an item and a predetermined amount of money for epoxy injection crack seal .
the contract item will have a unit of measure of dollar a unit price of num and a quantity equal to the predetermined amount .
numb numb num num initial edition due to the contingent or unpredictable nature of the work being performed the provisions of section numd are not applicable to this item .
measured and paid for under the epoxy injection crack seal item as follows num .
negotiated price .
at an agreed upon price .
this price will be agreed upon with the department before performing the work .
when applicable agreement is also required with the fhwa .
num .
force account basis .
section numd num numa num num change no .
num section numepoxy protection for structural steel num descriptionthis work is the coating of surfaces of structural steel with an electrostatically applied fusionbonded epoxy .
num material a coating system .
use powdered epoxy coating material from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
provide fusionbonded epoxy coating that is a onepart heatcurable thermosetting powdered coating conforming to astm anum modified as follows wherever the terms deformed steel reinforcing bars plain steel reinforcing bars reinforcing steel bars or reinforcing bars appear substitute the terms structural steel members structural steel or members as applicable .
unless otherwise indicated coating color to match federal standard no .
num color no .
num foliage green .
section numreinforcing steel .
revise the title of the section and the section to read num .
structural steel .
num furnish structural steel to be coated conforming to the requirements of applicable aashto standard specifications as indicated or specified and free of contaminants such as oil grease paint and silvers .
structural steel exhibiting any silverlike defects after the heating and coating process will be rejected unless satisfactorily repaired .
a single recorded coated steel member thickness measurement is defined as the average of three individual readings obtained from three immediately adjacent areas on the body of the member .
obtain a minimum of five recorded measurements approximately evenly spaced along each side of the test specimen i.e .
a minimum of ten recorded measurements per specimen .
the film thickness limits do not apply to patched areas .
section numadhesion .
delete this section .
section numtest methods .
revise this section as follows revise the first sentence in subsection num to read measure the thickness of the coating on the body of the member as specified in section num .
subsection numadhesion of coating .
delete this section .
section numrepairs due to handling .
revise subsection num to read satisfactorily repair damage to the epoxy coating that occurs during fabrication shipping or installation either according to section num or by mechanical wire brush cleaning and painting with an approved epoxy paint using the paint manufacturers approved procedure .
repair any member with visible signs of rust according to section num .
do not cover more than num of the total surface area with patching material .
section numfabrication of steel reinforcing bars after coating .
delete this section .
numa numd num num change no .
num section anumspecimens for test .
revise this section as follows revise subsection anum to read submit the following type and number of test specimens for test num two steel plates num inches by num inches by num inch cleaned and uncoated .
num four steel plates num inches by num inches by num inch and coated with a film thickness of num mils .
num three films of epoxy of the minimum thickness proposed for use during production coating of structural steel for the chloride permeability test .
revise the last sentence in the first paragraph in subsection anum to read measure the thickness of the film on the body of the member .
section anumflexibility of coating .
delete this section .
section anumbond strength to concrete .
delete this section .
section anumimpact test .
revise the third sentence to read have impact occur on those areas that will be subject to impact when member is used for its intended purpose if this can be determined .
otherwise have impact occur on any areas .
section anumhardness test .
revise the last sentence to read meet or exceed a knoop hardness number of num when averaging four individual hardness measurements made on at least two specimens .
num construction a general .
apply coating in an environmentally controlled plant that is fully enclosed .
provide a fully automatic coating system with the capability of preheating and postbaking .
use a fully automatic gritblast cleaning machine enclosed in an environmentally controlled plant .
b surface preparation .
free all surfaces of oil or any mill coating .
gritblast the steel to white metal as defined in sspcspnum using a mixture of steel shot and grit .
protect clean surfaces from conditions of high humidity rainfall or surface moisture .
do not allow the steel to flash rust before coating .
provide a uniform angular anchor blast profile from num mils to num mils deep .
determine anchor pattern depth by the keanetator surface profile comparator or testex replica tape .
c application of coating .
apply the coating material according to the manufacturers recommendation as to application procedure and curing schedule .
in no case allow the over temperature or temperature of the steel during any part of the curing process to exceed numf .
provide a cured coating of uniform color gloss and thickness and free of blisters pinholes fish eyes sags runs and other irregularities .
provide a finished coating thickness of num mils num mils tested according to astm gnum .
d inspection .
the coater is responsible for all qc checks including visual inspection thickness measurements numd num num num change no .
num and holiday testing and for keeping records on the results of all such inspections in an approved form .
provide access to each part of the process to the inspector .
allow the inspector to witness any qc tests and perform such tests himself or herself on a random sampling basis if requested by the inspector .
after cure check the coating for continuity using a num v wet sponge detector to check for holidays pinholes and voids .
allow no more than an average of num holidays per meter .
satisfactorily repair all defects .
e touchup system .
provide a compatible twopart epoxy touchup system designed and colormatched for patching the epoxy coating used on the structural steel .
satisfactorily patch all defects in the epoxy coating areas damaged during erection and all visible uncoated areas .
do not cover more than num of the total surface area with patching material .
num .
surface preparation .
apply coating directly to the metal for maximum performance .
ensure that metal is clean dry and free of rust and scale .
blast clean to nace near white where possible .
remove grease oil and other substances with suitable solvents .
coat cleaned surface before oxidation occurs .
num .
mixing .
mix part a and part b of the twopart system in the proportions recommended by the manufacturer .
mix the two parts thoroughly until a uniform color is obtained .
if required thin each part separately with thinner recommended by the system manufacturer to minimize loss of pot life .
furnish material having a pot life of at least num hours .
discard material that is not used within the pot life specified by the manufacturer .
num .
application .
apply material with ordinary brush or roller according to the manufacturers instructions and as directed .
achieve a track free surface in num hours to num hours at numf .
achieve full cure in num days to num days at numf .
exercise care in handling pieces before they are fully cured .
num measurement and paymentepoxy protection for structural steel is incidental to the items of work protected .
num num num num change no .
num section num manufactured material section numhighway lighting num general requirementsdesign manufacture and test lighting material and equipment according to the latest applicable standards of ieee astm nema ansi and the currently adopted aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals aashto specifications .
fabricate highway lighting structural materials according to aws the aashto specifications and section num steel members only except applying water to the base metal is permitted for the air plasma arc cutting process .
bulletin num listing shop inspection and aws certified welding inspectors cwi are required for welded aluminum pole manufacturers and for welded steel pole manufacturers .
bulletin num shop inspection and section num do not apply to cast aluminum poles cast steel poles cast iron poles painting of aluminum poles or poles without welds on any areas subject to tensile stress .
design calculations are required for all poles .
submit design calculations and fatigue analysis within num days of contract award or as directed .
if the bureau of design has previously approved identical lighting material and equipment submission of design calculations and fatigue analysis may not be required .
provide calculations signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in pennsylvania .
provide steel poles that are fabricated from material conforming to the current aashto specifications .
the charpy vnotch toughness test is required for load carrying tension members num inch and greater in thickness including base plates and arm connection plates as required for zone num in table snum of the applicable aashto specifications .
the charpy vnotch toughness test is not required for high mast handhole frames .
bend testing is required for material less than num inch in thickness .
provide steel poles that are either round or multisided with a minimum of eight sides .
use radiographic test methods when inspecting complete penetration welds on steel poles with material less than num inch in thickness and use radiographic or ultrasonic test methods when inspecting complete penetration welds on steel poles with material num inch in thickness and greater .
perform and evaluate all nondestructive testing according to cyclically loaded nontubular tension criteria .
use radiographic ultrasonic or magnetic particle test methods when inspecting other welds on steel poles .
provide aluminum poles that are round .
provide aluminum welds and aluminum welding material conforming to ansiaws dnum structural welding code for aluminum .
use radiographic test methods when inspecting complete penetration welds on aluminum poles .
use radiographic or dye penetrant test methods when inspecting other welds on aluminum poles .
provide testing and test methods according to ansiaws dnum steel dnum aluminum and as determined by the lts .
contact the lts to arrange for proper pole manufacturing inspection .
inspection will include num of the length of each complete penetration weld and a minimum of num of the length of each other weld .
the portion of the other welds to be tested will be selected by the departments agency inspector .
certify lighting poles nuts bolts and associated hardware as specified in section numbnum including charpy vnotch test results bend test results and weld inspection reports .
provide catalog cuts or shop drawings for approval instead of certification for all other highway lighting items .
the department may select test samples at the source of supply before shipping or at the project site after delivery .
submit for approval before purchase and at no expense to the department catalog cuts drawings and manufacturers specifications for all lighting material including lighting poles luminaires junction boxes conduits cables and power supply components proposed for the project .
refer to the project office manual for material information requirements .
do not alter or modify any material unless authorized in writing by the manufacturer .
inform the department of any alterations or modifications made outside of the manufacturers facilities and furnish proof of authorization from the manufacturer .
provide poles which are less than num feet in height in two sections or less .
provide poles which are between num feet and num feet in height in three sections or less .
provide poles which are over num feet in height in four sections or less .
furnish minimum pole section lengths of num feet for highmast poles and num feet for conventional poles .
obtain approval to furnish shorter section lengths .
num numa num num change no .
num provide all units of any one item such as luminaires lamps cable and poles that are of similar type and from the same manufacturer unless approved as a substitute .
num poles and bases conventional lightingfurnish type a poles with nonbreakaway bases or type s poles with breakaway bases as indicated conforming to the details as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a general .
num .
poles .
manufacture shafts of steel or aluminum with the shaft uniformly tapered approximately num inch per foot .
fabricate multipiece shafts to allow field assembly by overlapping sections .
design for a recommended life of num years and use the alternate method for wind pressures contained in appendix c of the aashto specifications .
fatigue is not a required design element .
provide a handhole finished without rough edges and with a reinforcing frame and cover designed to maintain the required pole strength .
weld a num numinch to numinch o.d .
vertical tenon fabricated from the same grade metal as the shaft at the top of poles with post top luminaire mounting and on the same axis as the pole .
compute the ice load on cobra head luminaires using a surface area equal to six times the effective projected area epa .
refer to section numb for cobra head luminaire epa and weight .
design decorative light poles with no significant arms for a recommended life of num years .
use the alternate method for wind pressures contained in appendix c of the aashto specifications .
for square cross section poles only include a fatigue design which considers vortex shedding and natural wind gusts per table num for fatigue category iii as found in the aashto specifications .
furnish poles capable of sustaining loadings as follows horizontal load of num pounds applied num inches from the shaft top in any direction with no failure of any component part .
deflection of the shaft from vertical is limited to num of the shaft length .
horizontal load of num pounds applied at the luminaire attachment point and normal to the pole bracket member plane with a vertical load of num pounds on the luminaire supporting arm .
rotation of individual sections of twosection poles is not allowed .
the horizontal deflection is limited to num of the luminaire supporting arms horizontal length .
vertical load of num pounds applied at the luminaire attachment point .
the vertical deflection is limited to num of the pole arms horizontal length .
vertical load of num pounds applied at the luminaire attachment point .
collapse or rupture of any portion of the structure is not allowed .
pole arm and luminaire dead load .
the deflection from vertical at the top of the pole is limited to num of the total shaft length .
the pole deflection from vertical is defined as the horizontal distance between the pole top centerline when the pole alone is installed plumb and the pole top centerline after the arm and luminaire combination are installed on the previously plumb pole measured without additional shaft adjustment .
num .
anchor bases .
numa numb num num change no .
num finish clean smooth and of the dimensions required for adequate pole mounting and structural support .
provide holes for anchor bolts .
telescope the base over the shaft and secure in place by electric arc welding at the pole bottom and at the top of the base plate .
num .
anchor bolt covers .
furnish a cover for each anchor bolt and use numinch stainless steel phillipshead or hexhead screws .
num .
frangible or breakaway bases .
provider transformer bases .
furnish bases that meet the aashto specifications .
perform nondestructive testing of all welds at the pole fabricator location .
submit a copy of the fhwa acceptance letter with the catalog cut or shop drawing information for approval .
other base types are not allowed unless specifically approved for the application .
num .
labels .
provide pole identification date and lighting management system lms key tags with numinch high reflective aluminum characters and slide in aluminum holders width as required to accommodate the characters .
provide numinch diameter holes for attachment with stainless steel rivets or screws .
provide black characters on white or gray background or white characters on black background .
do not use id tags with decorative poles .
b steel poles .
num .
shaft .
fabricate from material conforming to astm anum or astm anum and not less than no .
num gage or from hotrolled low carbon highstrength steel conforming to the following requirements minimum yield strengthnum kips per square inch minimum ultimate tensile strengthnum kips per square inch carbon contentnum min .
num max .
maximum phosphorus contentnum maximum sulfur contentnum maximum silicon contentnum do not use equivalent steel types unless approved .
form into a continuously tapered shaft with one automatic electric arc welded longitudinal joint per piece .
do not use transverse intermediate welds .
it is permitted after forming and welding to use longitudinal cold rolling with sufficient pressure to tighten the weld form a round shaft and to increase the metals minimum yield strength to num kips per square inch .
grind or bevel longitudinal weld beads and mating edges of twopiece shafts to avoid binding during section assembly .
provide completepenetration longitudinal welds in the slipjoint area num times the inside diameter of the exposed end of the female section plus num inches beyond for the female section only .
provide a grounding nut for a numinch x num unc threaded bolt or stud when applicable on the inside of the shaft accessible from the handhole .
numb numb num num change no .
num poles octagonal in shape with flat or fluted faces may be substituted for round steel poles .
furnish octagonal poles at least equal to round poles in thickness of metal and strength of pole and meeting the requirements for round poles .
provide tapped holes for attaching anchor bolt covers .
num .
anchor bases .
fabricate onepiece bases of cast steel conforming to astm anum grade num or steel plate conforming to aashto m num astm anum grade num .
num .
finish .
hotdip galvanize the inside and outside surfaces of poles and bases as specified in section nums astm anum after fabrication and before shipment .
clean the welds on poles by sandblasting or by an alternate approved method before galvanizing .
c aluminum poles .
num .
shaft .
spin shafts to provide alloy numtnum according to the aashto specifications .
provide a satin finish .
weld an aluminum grounding nut or lug for an numinch x num unc threaded bolt or stud when applicable on the shaft inside opposite the handhole .
furnish stainless steel hardware unless otherwise directed .
provide poles with a jhook at the top of the shaft .
num .
anchor bases .
fabricate onepiece bases of cast aluminum alloy sgnumatnum numtnum astm bnum or astm bnum .
provide tapped holes for attaching anchor bolt covers .
num pole arms conventional lightingfurnish steel bracket arms and connections conforming to the details shown on the standard drawings and furnish clamp connections for aluminum truss arms and poles and as follows a general .
manufacture arms of steel or aluminum .
install the arm with a weatherresistant connection to the shaft with a smooth raceway for wiring .
furnish arms of the same material as the pole .
provide astm anum connecting bolts as specified in section numd for steel poles .
b bracket type .
furnish arm assemblies consisting of an upper member and a lower member rigidly secured by vertical struts truss or consisting of a cantilevertype arm single member .
provide a fitting on the pole end of each type arm to allow the bracketarm assembly to be secured to the pole .
numb numa num num change no .
num do not use gusset plates for truss arm connections to the clamp plate for arms less than or equal to num feet .
num .
truss arms .
num.a steel .
fabricate arms to have a minimum nominal diameter of num inches .
finish as specified in section numbnum .
num.b aluminum .
fabricate upper and lower members using numinch or larger nominal diameter aluminum pipe or using a combination of pipe and elliptical sections .
provide alloy numtnum according to the aashto specifications .
num .
singlemember arms .
num.a steel .
fabricate arms to have the same taper and a minimum nominal diameter of num inches .
finish as specified in section numbnum .
num.b aluminum .
fabricate using numinch or larger nominal diameter tapered aluminum tube or using tapered aluminum section oval in shape at the pole end and tapering to the luminaire end .
provide alloy numtnum according to aashto specifications .
num anchor bolts nuts and washers conventional and high mast lighting provide a preassembled high mast anchor bolt arrangement .
mark the anchor bolt assembly for matching with the corresponding high mast pole base plate .
use an identification mark that will be visible after embedment in concrete .
furnish structural steel anchor bolts hexhead bolts nuts and washers for conventional and high mast lighting conforming to section numcnum the following requirements and as shown on the standard drawings a hex head bolts .
provide hotdipped galvanized bolts conforming to astm anum for anchor bolts with yield strength of num kips per square inch and astm anum grade bc for anchor bolts with yield strength of num kips per square inch .
b galvanizing .
as specified in section nums and as follows galvanize the top num inches minimum of anchor bolts and all associated hardware according to astm anum or another acceptable method which conforms to the thickness and adherence requirements of astm anum .
brushing of the threaded area to remove excess zinc is allowed as specified in the american hotdip galvanizers associations recommended procedures for galvanizing of threaded parts .
num poles high mast lightingfurnish poles conforming to the details shown on the standard drawings as specified in section num and the following a general .
comply with the aashto specifications .
design for a recommended life of num years .
use the alternate method for wind pressure contained in appendix c of the aashto specifications .
consider vortex shedding and natural wind gusts per table num for fatigue category i .
design poles to provide a maximum deflection equal to num of the shaft length .
design based on ten luminaires per pole with each luminaire exerting a downward force equal to num pounds and having an epa of num square feet .
include epa and downward force for the head frame assembly being used .
compute the ice load on the luminaire using a surface area equal to six times the apa .
fabricate pole shafts and base plates from highstrength lowalloy structural steel conforming to aashto m num astm anum grade num .
do not use equivalent steel types unless approved .
numa numb num num change no .
num galvanize poles and base plates as specified in section numbnum .
grind or bevel mating edges of multisection poles to avoid binding during section assembly .
do not use transverse welds .
provide base plates with a minimum thickness of numinch unless otherwise approved .
provide bottom shaft sections with an num inch minimum thickness .
provide a complete joint penetration weld for the connection of the shaft to the base plate as specified in the aashto specifications in table num .
detail num .
provide completepenetration longitudinal welds in the slipjoint area num times the inside diameter of the exposed end of the female section plus num inches beyond for the female section only .
provide numinch complete penetration longitudinal welds at the base plate connection .
join each pole section by telescoping the individual sections .
overlap a minimum length of num times the inside diameter of the exposed end of the female section .
do not field weld .
mark corresponding pole sections for field mating and assembly .
mark the inner telescoping section to show the minimum required telescoping length .
clearly mark and identify each pole base plate for matching to the corresponding anchor bolt assembly to ensure proper fit in the erection of each pole .
permanently inscribe each pole with manufacturing identification and reordering information or show on a nameplate attached to the pole .
provide fourconductor copper no .
num awg minimum num v electrical cable of the type and length required with a watertight electrical plug and receptacle suitable for use .
provide a matching watertight power receptacle having sufficient cord length to be brought outside for energizing the lowered luminaire mounting ring and the electrical power drive .
provide a low resistance grounding lug at the top of the pole for grounding the lightning rod to the pole shaft .
provide stainless steel hardware such as nuts bolts screws and washers .
b head frame assembly .
provide a head frame assembly with each highmast pole to support the luminaire ring with its required number of luminaires and as follows mount pulleys and mechanisms on the headframe assembly cover with a protective noncorrosive housing .
make necessary cable openings as small as practical to prevent the entry of birds .
provide a housing that can be easily removed from the headframe assembly for servicing of pulleys and other mechanisms .
provide a numinch nickeltip copper lightning rod on each pole extending not less than num inches above the headframe cover and located on or near the pole centerline .
ground the lightning rod to a grounding lug at the pole top using no .
num awg braided copper wire numb nume num num change no .
num adapters and cable connectors .
provide a grounding lug furnished by the lightning rod manufacturer .
mount the lightning rod with brass or bronze hardware .
provide pulleys large enough to contain the various required cables without exceeding the recommended bending radii .
fabricate pulleys of either cast steel with a nylon bushing or aluminum with a bronze bushing both with a stainlesssteel shaft type num and both equipped with guards to prevent the cable from jumping off the pulley .
furnish a head frame that provides threepoint suspension and positive centering and engagement between the mating parts of the head frame and the luminaire ring assembly .
hotdip galvanize the head frame after fabrication as specified in section nums astm anum or completely zincelectroplate with an additional nummil minimum thickness of approved zincrich paint or an epoxy powder coating .
c latching .
furnish each high mast pole assembly with either a latching device or two safety cables to secure the luminaire ring in the fully raised position after tension is removed from the winch hoist cable .
if a latching device is furnished the mechanism is required to release either automatically or by manual pull of a cable after the luminaire ring has been raised from the latching pins or fingers .
provide a mechanically operated indicator for each of the three luminaire ring latches to indicate positive latching at each point on the luminaire ring .
if two safety cables are furnished anchor the cables to the winchmounting frame or to eyebolts embedded in the foundation .
attach the safety cables to the cable terminator securing the luminaire ring in the fully raised position removing tension from the winch hoist cable .
provide a mechanically operated indicator for each of the three cables to indicate a fully seated ring .
d luminaire ring assembly .
equally space numinch luminaire tenons around the ring for the indicated number of luminaires .
hotdip galvanize the entire luminaire ring assembly after fabrication as specified in section nums astm anum .
provide a weatherproof male plug wired to the terminal box for energizing the luminaires in the servicing position .
provide a num a fourwire type watertight plug to mate with the power receptacle .
provide a ringmounted enclosure as specified in section numc to house a terminal block fuse block and lightning arrester .
provide guide rollers or pads to cushion excess swing during raising and lowering operations .
e winch assembly .
provide a selflocking permanently lubricated worm gear winch assembly enclosed within the pole mast capable of raising and lowering the entire luminaire ring at a rate of approximately num feet per minute when driven by a portable winch drive .
provide a drive unit of a size and speed determined by the lifting and lowering force required and the required raising and lowering speed without exceeding num of the capacity of the worm gear assembly or the drive unit .
provide a winch that remains locked in any position to prevent the luminaire ring assembly from falling under its own gravitational force if the operator interrupts the raising or lowering operations .
provide a winch designed to ensure proper spooling of the cable upon the drum at all times .
numf numa num num change no .
num f electrical winch drive .
furnish for each project one portable heavyduty industrialrated reversible electrical winch drive as follows provide the drive with a torque limiter that causes drive slipping at a predetermined torque to prevent damage to the system .
provide sufficient length of cable and mating plug to directly utilize the power supply .
equip the drive to attach to the winch drive shaft and the pole so the drive is completely selfsupporting .
furnish a drive that operates from a remote switch with sufficient cable length so the operator can stand a safe distance outside the radius of the luminaire ring assembly .
a num v drill motor and transformer may be provided instead of a num v drill motor .
the maximum transformer weight allowed is num pounds .
provide a transformer enclosure carrying handle and connectors .
g hoist cables .
furnish hoist cables made from stainlesssteel aircraft cable conforming to military specification milwnumj .
attach the support cables to a selfleveling yoke to which is attached the winch cable from the winch drum .
provide guide cables or other acceptable means to prevent cable entanglements in the pole shaft .
h miscellaneous hardware .
furnish miscellaneous hardware of stainless steel astm anum type num .
num luminaires conventional lightingfurnish luminaires complete including lamps ballasts decals associated hardware and necessary wiring .
a general .
furnish materials incorporating the latest available ratings and design improvements .
provide nema num or num pin photocell receptacle and shorting cap .
omit shorting cap if individual photocell control is indicated .
provide individual nema num or num pin remote monitoring and control module as specified in section numb when indicated .
furnish warranty and luminaire certification of ul approval as applicable .
furnish a sample luminaire for review and acceptance if directed when data is submitted for a product that has not previously been accepted by the department .
furnish luminaire photometric data and ballast or driver data with catalog cut information .
install glare shields where indicated .
furnish clear high pressure sodium lamps for hps luminaires .
provide lamps with a date marking code on the base .
the nominal lamp voltage for less than num w is num v and for num w and greater is num v. provide hps luminaires with internal prewired ballasts regulator or autoregulator capable of operating within num of the specified supply voltage .
furnish ballasts that provide dependable starting of the lamp numa numc num num change no .
num at a temperature of numf with a power factor of not less than num and in compliance with the latest ansi specifications .
for led luminaires provide documentation that demonstrates that the proposed model of led luminaire has been tested for electromagnetic compliance following the measurement protocols specified in ansi standard cnum and required by num cfr num. b arm mount luminaires hps cobra head .
num .
housings .
provide a precision cast or formed housing of aluminum with a refractor holder and an integral num inch slipfitter capable of adapting to the mounting tenons .
provide a gasketed thermal shockresistant glass prismatic refractor accurately molded to give the specified light distribution pattern held in position in the lower housing with retaining clips .
provide a detachable reflector of processed aluminum with a sealed anodic coating over an electrolytically or chemically brightened surface .
install the reflector with a gasket between it and the refractor designed for easy removal from the housing .
silicone rubber gaskets are acceptable for luminaires up to and including num w and ethylene propylene ept or epdm gaskets are acceptable for luminaires up to and including num w. for cobra head and other luminaires where the housing provides a dripproof protection refractor gaskets of high density filtering type nonwicking dacron polyester not less than num inch thick are also permitted .
die cut gaskets and overlay at joints .
include an adjustable mogul lamp socket .
furnish a luminaire capable of accommodating the appropriate lamps properly positioned relative to the optical system .
provide a slipfitter designed to prevent linear creep or rotation of the luminaire on the tenon .
provide a frame size for conventional highpressure sodium luminaires as follows or equal watts american electric cooper lighting general electric hubbell less than num num ovz mnum rm num num num num num ovf mnumr rl num provide luminaires with a maximum epa of num square feet and a maximum weight of num pounds .
c arm mount luminaires led cobra head .
num .
housings .
provide a precision cast or formed housing of minimum num copperfree aluminum minimum shell thickness of numinch with stainless steel or zinc plated steel fastening hardware and an integral numinch slipfitter capable of adapting to the mounting tenons and adjustable for numinch or numinch mounting pipe .
provide integral die cast mounting pipe stop feature and integral levelling means .
housing to be iec ipnum rated .
provide ansinema cnum vibration test level numg .
provide factory installed led array thermally sealed to heat sink .
chip on board leds will not be accepted .
numc numd num num change no .
num driver to be accessible and removable without the use of tools .
enclosure to be sealed to prevent entry of animals and insects .
provide luminaire assembled in the usa and conforming to us steel certifications as specified in section numa .
provide luminaires with an epa between num square feet and num square feet and a weight between num pounds and num pounds .
num .
optical .
provide factory sealed flat glass lens .
provide uv stabilized refractor for each individual diode .
provide ipnum optical chamber .
provide minimum num cri verified according to lmnum .
provide nominal correlated color temperature cct between num k and num k verified according to lmnum .
num .
electrical .
provide maximum drive current to led of num ma .
provide luminaire with a minimum lnum of num hours tested in accordance with tmnum .
testing data must indicate minimum testing period of num hours .
provide num v dimmable electronic driver with minimum rated life of num hours at numf .
num .
warranty .
luminaire to be free from defects and operate as indicated for a period of num years from the date of delivery d post top mount luminaires hps offset .
furnish as specified in the applicable requirements of section numb and as follows furnish a precision cast aluminum housing with a refractor holder .
provide a gasketed thermal shockresistant glass prismatic refractor accurately molded to give the specified light distribution pattern held in position in the lower housing with retaining clips .
join the upper and lower housings by stainless steel hinges and provide with twin trigger latches for access to internal components .
install gaskets at critical points to prevent entry of moisture and contaminants .
provide a detachable reflector of processed aluminum with a sealed anodic coating over an electrolytically or chemically brightened surface .
permanently attach the lamp socket to the reflector to ensure correct lamp positioning .
provide the socket with a quick disconnect for easy removal of the reflectorsocket assembly .
numd numa num num change no .
num provide the luminaire with a slipfitter designed to accept a num numinch to numinch o.d .
vertical tenon for lateral orientation .
provide external adjustments for horizontal luminaire leveling .
provide infinite angular fixture adjustment in the vertical plane for proper luminaire aiming .
e wall mount luminaires underpass .
furnish as specified in the applicable requirements of sections numb and c and as follows .
furnish luminaires that provide total available downward street side lumens between one mounting height and three mounting heights transverse distance of not less than num of the bare lamp lumen output .
f overhead mount luminaires underpass .
furnish as specified in the applicable requirement of sections numb and c. num luminaires highmast lightingfurnish opentype cutoff luminaires complete with lamps ballasts associated hardware and necessary wiring as specified in the applicable parts of sections numa b and c and as follows a luminaires hps highmast lighting .
provide with adjustable slipfitters designed for a numinch tenon to allow a positioning adjustment of num degrees about the tenon axis .
provide with a heavyduty porcelainenclosed lamp socket with the brass shell impregnated to prevent thermal freezing with the lamp base .
provide a lampstabilizing clamp that is non asbestoslined heatresistant and stainless steel .
equip luminaires with ballasts as specified in section numa .
furnish num w highpressure sodium lamps with a minimum initial output rating of num lumen and a minimum rated life of num hours based on num hours of operation per start .
furnish lamps that burn in a vertical baseup position .
provide luminaires with a maximum luminous intensity angle nominally num to num degrees from nadir .
furnish luminaires having a projected area not exceeding num square feet an epa not exceeding num square feet and exerting a gravitational force not more than num pounds .
provide glare shields when indicated .
furnish luminaires that provide the following nominal initial luminous intensity at the angles shown numa numb num num change no .
num vertical angle degrees luminous intensity candelas num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num these are minimum values at the respective angles .
other candelas are nominal values .
furnish vertical luminous intensity trace data to ascertain compliance with luminous intensity distribution requirements .
b luminaires led highmast lighting .
num .
housings .
provide a precision cast or formed housing of minimum num copperfree aluminum minimum shell thickness of numinch with stainless steel or zinc plated steel fastening hardware and an integral numinch slipfitter capable of adapting to the mounting tenons and adjustable for numinch or numinch mounting pipe .
provide integral die cast mounting pipe stop feature and integral levelling means .
housing to be iec ipnum rated .
provide ansinema cnum vibration test level numg .
provide factory installed led array thermally sealed to heat sink .
chip on board cob will not be accepted .
driver to be accessible and removable without the use of tools .
enclosure to be sealed to prevent entry of animals and insects .
provide luminaire that is assembled in the usa and conforming to us steel certifications as specified in section numa .
furnish luminaires having a projected area not exceeding num square feet an epa not exceeding num square feet and exerting a gravitational force not more than num pounds .
num .
optical .
provide factory sealed flat glass lens over emitters for ease of cleaning .
provide uv stabilized refractor for each individual diode .
provide ipnum optical chamber .
provide minimum num cri verified according to lmnum .
provide nominal cct between numk and numk verified according to lmnum .
numb numa num num change no .
num provide luminaires with a maximum luminous intensity angle nominally num to num degrees from nadir .
provide glare shields when indicated .
furnish luminaires that provide the following nominal initial luminous intensity at the angles shown vertical angle degrees luminous intensity candelas num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num these are minimum values at the respective angles .
other candelas are nominal values .
furnish vertical luminous intensity trace data to ascertain compliance with luminous intensity distribution requirements .
num .
electrical .
provide maximum drive current to led of num ma .
provide luminaire with a minimum lnum of num hours tested in accordance with tmnum .
testing data must indicate minimum testing period of num hours .
provide numv dimmable electronic driver with minimum rated life of num hours at numf .
num .
warranty .
luminaire to be free from defects and operate as expected for a period of num years from the date of delivery num cablefurnish cable as follows a general .
provide num v conductors with insulation and jacket as applicable conforming to icea snumnema wcnum .
provide insulated equipment grounding conductors .
provide bare grounding electrode conductors .
provide colorcoded cables .
color code by surface markings pigmented insulation or tape .
if surface markings are used place marks at intervals not exceeding num inches located so as not to conflict with the required nec markings .
provide cable with surface markings except as specified in section num .
if taping is provided overlap the tape for a minimum of num inches on the cable at all access locations and for each conductor .
numa numd num num change no .
num conductors for all types of cables including ground wire as follows copper conductor soft drawn astm bnum stranding astm bnum num to num mmnum num num strand num to num mmnum num num strand b underground cable .
furnish with insulation and jacket as required conforming to the following rubberneoprene xlp insulation sbr rubber ethylene propylene ep rubber thickness in .
num num or num num num or num num num or num crosslinked thickness in .
num num or num num num or num num num or num jacket neoprene astm dnum thickness in .
num num or num num num or num none max .
normal operating temperature numf numf wet numf dry numf code rhw rhw rhh use rhw rhh use c aboveground cable .
the cables specified for underground applications may be used for above ground applications .
furnish with pvc insulation without nylon jacket or thinner xlpinsulated as applicable and as follows pvc without jacket xlp insulation thickness in .
num num or num num num or num num num or num crosslinked polyethylene thickness in .
num num num num num num jacket none none max .
normal operating temperature wet numf dry numf wet numf dry numf code thw xhhw d cable duct .
when indicated furnish cable preinstalled in a polyethylene schedule num plastic conduit numd numc num num change no .
num conforming to nema tcnum .
provide cable conductors and stranding as specified for underground cable with cable insulation rhwrhhuse and with insulation thickness as specified above .
e application testing and shipping .
utilize acceptable cable as follows with luminaires numf other uses numf show the name of the manufacturer conductor size in awg or mcm and cable voltage rating on the outer cable covering with the code clearly printed or molded on the sheath .
manufacture inspect and test cable according to the latest issues of icea publications .
submit certification of these tests identifying each cable reel with the test data supplied .
ship cable on reels plainly and indelibly marked with the name of the manufacturer gross net and tare masses size type voltage rating and length of cable per reel .
ship on a reel having a minimum drum diameter not less than num times the nominal cable diameter .
seal cable ends against entrance of moisture .
provide a covering of heavy cardboard burlap or lagging to protect the cable during handling or shipping .
num conduitfurnish conduit and protective coating for conduit .
a general .
furnish pvc and fiberglass conduit conduit fittings and conduit elbows and expansion fittings from the same manufacturer .
provide expansiondeflection fittings required for structures as shown on standard drawing bcnumm .
use cement labeled by or recommended by the conduit manufacturer .
if metal conduit bodies and fittings are specified and hot dipped galvanized parts are not available apply two coats of zinc paint as specified in section numr .
provide manufactured sweep bends or as specified in section numg .
b direct burial .
num .
polyvinyl chloride pvc conduit .
provide schedule num numf ullisted conduit conforming to nema standard tcnum epcnumpvc with fittings conforming to nema standard tcnum epcnumpvc .
num .
fiberglass reinforced epoxy conduit .
provide ulrated conduit conforming to nema standard tcnum part b and as follows filament wound minimum glass content of num minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch containing carbon black for ultraviolet protection .
c concrete encased or exposed .
provide one of the following num .
rigid steel conduit .
hotdipped galvanized inside and outside and conforming to ansi cnum ul standard num and ul standard num .
provide hotdipped galvanized conduit bodies and fittings .
numc numb num num change no .
num num .
polyvinyl chloride pvc conduit .
as specified in section numb for direct burial conduit .
num .
fiberglass reinforced epoxy conduit .
as specified in section numb for direct burial conduit .
d conduit sleeve jacked augered or bored conduit .
rigid steel conduit as specified for concrete encased or exposed conduit .
num junction boxes and buried cable and conduit markers a junction boxes .
furnish as shown on the standard drawings for the type indicated and as follows concrete junction boxes .
provide castinplace boxes made from class a cement concrete as specified in section num or provide precast boxes as specified in section num .
provide frames as specified in section num .
refer to standard drawings rcnumm and rcnumm for details of junction boxes jbnum num num and num .
cast iron or welded steel plate junction boxes .
provide boxes as specified in section num .
provide boxes hotdipped galvanized as specified in section nums astm anum after fabrication .
provide a cover with a closed cell neoprene gasket with screws to secure cover .
provide a factory installed grounding stud and hex nut in rear of the box as applicable .
refer to standard drawing bcnumm for junction box jbnum details .
b buried cable and conduit markers .
furnish castinplace or precast class a cement concrete markers as shown on the standard drawings .
form letters and arrows by making depressions in the plastic concrete .
refer to standard drawing rcnumm for marker details .
num power supplyfurnish the power supply consisting of a service poles .
conforming to ansi specifications .
of western red cedar southern yellow pine or equal .
minimum size as listed under class num .
minimum length of num feet .
impregnate with nonleaching waterborne preservative chromated copper arsenate cca type c conforming to awpapnum preservative applied in closed cylinder by pressure process according to awpacnum .
provide retention of cca dry salts of num pounds per cubic foot oxide basis .
approved trade names chromarcu osmose knumc wolman cca and wolmanac cca .
include treatment certification with each shipment .
b photoelectric control device .
photo cell of the cadmiumsulphide type with failsafe in the on position .
weatherproof pheonolic cycolac or acrylic plastic housing not susceptible to distortion discoloration cracking or crazing .
adaptable for poletop or crossarm mounting in a plugin lockingtype receptacle conforming to ul specification num .
numb nume num num change no .
num provide solid brass plug blades .
relay rated num va and num amps for all hid lamps .
control unit with a builtin surge protective device for protection from induced high voltage and followthrough currents and having a turnoff time delay to prevent false turnoff due to lightning stray lighting or flashing lights .
designed to operate at the required voltage and to operate satisfactorily at numf ambient temperature with performance characteristics equal to or exceeding eei and nema standards .
load switching capability of num operations minimum at rated load .
a separate photoelectric cell conforming to the above requirements may be installed as an integral part of each luminaire assembly as a substitute for the above when indicated .
c control cabinet enclosure .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows num .
cabinet construction .
conforming to one of the following code gage stainless steel astm anumanummnuma type num .
code gage aluminum sheet alloy no .
numhnum having mechanical properties of not less than astm bnum .
num .
other requirements .
nema numr or num .
having closed cell neoprene gasket welded seams continuous hinge with stainless steel pin and stainless steel external hardware .
having a backboard for mounting apparatus .
having two weep holes in the bottom .
equipped for padlocking .
provide acceptable outdoor tumblertype padlocks keyed as directed .
furnish two keys with each lock .
having manufacturers nameplate .
d main disconnect .
provide a main disconnect in a separate nema numr or a num enclosure that is labeled suitable for use as service equipment .
provide with a lockable cover and no external handle .
the disconnect may be provided integral to the control cabinet if the cabinet is dead front .
provide a numpole num a.i.c .
minimum moldedcase circuit breaker with line and load lugs and capacity to accommodate the specified conductors and current and conforming to federal specification wcnumb .
if greater interrupting capacity is required by the local utility the main disconnect may be a fused device .
e lightning arrester .
conforming to ieee cnum category b. ul num numrd edition listing .
minimum mcov num vac service rating numv .
num vac service rating numv .
nume numm num num change no .
num minimum short circuit current rating sccr numa .
with bracket for mounting on the control cabinet backboard .
f lighting contactor .
magnetic num v twopole lighting contactor with coil and contacts rated as specified .
g selector switch for the photoelectric control contactor .
provide a num v three position automaticoffmanual maintainedcontact control station .
h distribution circuit breakers .
minimum rating of num a.i.c line and load lugs .. no fuse quickmake quickbreak type having tumbler mechanism full contact and positive pressure until opening whether operated automatically or manually .
stationary contacts as an integral breaker part and nonwelding contacts when operating .
trip free from handle so the contacts can not be held closed against short circuit or abnormal overload .
mounted individually on din rail or similar .
handle position indicating the breaker contact position .
size and capacity as indicated i circuit breaker panels .
enclosure mounted panel with solid neutral and with bus bars and solderless lugs of large enough rating and size to accommodate the required voltage current and conductors .
j ground rod .
copperclad steel ul listed .
provide with bronze clamp or exothermic weld for connection to the grounding electrode conductor .
k transformers less than or equal to num kva .
secondary windings for threewire unbalanced circuits .
stepup or stepdown as indicated .
copper or aluminum windings .
totally enclosed nonventilated outdoor type .
enclosure degreased primed and finished with a coat of outdoor enamel .
core and coil assembly encapsulated with an epoxy compound for transformers rated num kva and less .
insulation of class f material that does not exceed numf raise above a numf ambient when tested according to ansi and nema standards .
terminal compartment located in the transformer bottom with provisions for side or bottom conduit entrance .
certified copy of results required for transformer temperature performance and sound tests conforming to ansi and nema standards .
m guy anchor assembly .
single down guy consisting of numm numb num num change no .
num a conetype anchor having a diameter of not less than num inches .
a numinch thimbleeye anchor rod .
a numinch sevenstrand galvanized steel guy wire .
three bolt heavyduty guy clamps .
a strain insulator .
strain and load plates on the pole .
an angle thimbleeye through bolt of the required length .
curved washer and nuts .
hardware galvanized as specified in section nums astm anum or other acceptable method conforming to the thickness adherence and quality requirements of astm anum .
num remote monitoring and control systemfurnish a complete outdoor lighting network for remotely monitoring and controlling highway lighting luminaires consisting of a central management system cms .
provide graphical user interface for operation of the remote monitoring and control system to be compatible with the individual control nodes as specified in section numb and segment controller as specified in section numc .
capable of multiple user access with assignable restrictions to user functionality .
capable of exporting records to .xls or .csv spreadsheets with a predetermined format .
capable of running custom reports for feedback of system status and operation .
capable of selecting on or a group of fixtures in a graphical site map format and modifying onoff status or dimming level .
b individual luminaire control nodes .
provide one control node per arm mounted luminaire .
capable of normal operation over an ambient temperature range of numf to numf .
operation from num v nominal num universal ac input rms volts .
mechanical and electrically connected to luminaire using nema cnum standard num or num terminal polarized twistlock receptacle for both electrical and dimming control signal connectivity .
capable of o actuating the onoff status of a luminaire .
o actuating a luminaire off state that results in a zero watt power requirement for the luminaire .
it is understood that the controller will require power to remain online .
numb num num num change no .
num o actuating a luminaire dimmed state by creating a num v control signal .
o measuring and monitoring over time for the luminaire rms input voltage volts .
rms input current amps .
apparent power va .
true input power watts .
power factor .
o measuring energy consumption with an accuracy and precision of num over the ambient temperature range and a load range of num to num relative power and in accordance with ansi cnum .
o integrally sensing gps location .
c segment controller .
provide one or more segment controllers as necessary to ensure communication with all luminaire controllers .
separate segment controllers are not required if the conditions in this section are met by the luminaire controller .
provide a segment controller capable of logging cumulative hours in the luminaire on state for each luminaire controller .
during online operation provide a segment controller capable of reporting the following online luminaire controller parameters o controller status online time offline time warning or error codes o luminaire statusonline time offline time warning or error codes o average rms input voltage volts in the on state o average rms input current amps in the on state o average true input power watts in the on state o average input power factor in the on state o cumulative on state time hours o cumulative energy consumption kwh o led driver status warning or error codes during online operation provide a segment controller capable of reporting all control point parameters for all luminaire controllers at a maximum reporting frequency of once every num minutes .
num miscellaneous materialfurnish as follows numa numf num num change no .
num a hardware stainlesssteel or hotdipped galvanized as directed .
b shims .
stainless steel nonmagnetic num series or acceptable aluminum .
c pulling lubricant .
as recommended by the cable manufacturer .
d cable tags .
acceptable nonconducting .
e plastic marking tape .
provide one of the following or approved equal allen marking tape allen systems inc. brady identoline tape w.h .
brady co. terra tape reef industries inc. f ground rod .
as specified in section numj .
num numc num num change no .
num section numsign lighting num general requirementssection num num luminaires a light fixture .
furnish a light fixture from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and conforming to the following requirements aluminum mounting bracket when specified .
positive door closure by use of stainless steel latches and hinges .
cast aluminum housing and door assembly .
refractor and door assembly with nonpermanentset gasket material .
thermal and shock resistant borosilicate glass refractor .
weep holes in the lowest area of the luminaire housing bottom when mounted .
polished aluminum reflector .
conduit entries in the luminaire assembly .
constantwattage ballast either integral or remote mounted .
aluminum cast aluminum or stainless steel enclosures for remote ballasts .
b lamps .
furnish lamps as follows num watt coated ceramic metal halide .
num hours minimum rated life .
universal operating position .
rated num initial lumens minimum .
c ballasts .
furnish electronic ballasts as follows fully enclosed aluminum housing .
power factor greater than num lamp starting down to numf ambient temperature and an operating case temperature up to num f. thermally protected .
endoflife and output shortcircuit protection .
output frequency less than num hz .
numc numd num num change no .
num lamp wattage regulation less than num for a num change in rated line voltage .
d fittings .
furnish washers to level and adjust the luminaires on the supports and made of the same material as the supports .
fittings at the entry into the luminaires made of a standard factorymade watertight design .
num circuit breakers panels and enclosuresfurnish the following a circuit breakers .
section numh b circuit breaker panels .
section numi c enclosures .
section numc d and as follows provide enclosures with dimensions that provide code clearance and wiring space for the specified control apparatus .
num controlsfurnish the following controls a photoelectric control device .
section numb b control contactor .
magnetic control contactor num v twopole num a with a num v or num v operating coil .
c selector switch .
section numg num lightning arrestersection nume num junction boxessection num num cablesection num and as follows provide type tc tray cable with xhhw insulation and a pvc jacket for cable from the sign enclosure to the luminaire .
num conduitsection num num miscellaneous materialsection num and as follows a service poles .
section numa b ground rod .
section numj c guy anchor assembly .
section numm d fittings .
provide standard factorymade watertight fittings at enclosures junction boxes conduits and service heads .
num numa num num change no .
num section numtraffic signing and marking num general requirementscertify material as specified in section numbnum .
num extruded aluminum channel signs for post mounted signs types a and e and structure mounted a extruded aluminum channels .
as shown on the standard drawings .
use channels conforming to astm bnumbnumm alloy numtnum from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
use continuouschannel sections equal to the sign width .
the channel section is nominal .
the contractor may use an alternate extruded channel section of equal or greater section moduli with dimensions suitable to utilize the mounting hardware with written permission .
b coating treatment .
use a chemical conversion coating such as alodine no .
num alodine no .
nums or bonderite no .
num .
apply the coating to the channel surfaces to ensure a good bond between the reflective sheeting material and the surface .
coat according to military specification milcnume chemical conversion coatings on aluminum and aluminum alloys .
do not handle with bare hands between the chemical conversion coating process and the application of the reflective sheeting .
handle by special devices or by hand wearing clean pvc gloves .
c reflective sheeting .
use precolored type iii or type iv sheeting conforming to the departments specification for retroreflective sheeting materials and process inks for traffic control from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
apply the sheeting to the face and a numinch width along both edges of the channel sections using a procedure specified by the sheeting material manufacturer .
apply free of bubbles or wrinkles greater than num inches in length and with total sheeting shrinkage of not more than num inch .
a maximum of one splice may be made in the sheeting for any channel section .
make the splice perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline of the channel with the edges of adjacent pieces butted together throughout the entire seam length without any overlap or separation .
if covered sections are stacked before sign fabrication then use microfoam between sign faces and store sections in a vertical position .
d legend and border .
use directapplied cutout type viii or type ix reflective sheeting material for letters numerals accessories borders and symbols .
e sign fabrication .
apply the reflective sheeting then firmly bolt channels together with the webs in the same plane to form a smooth and uniform surface .
adjust channel ends for correct position so the edges are free from projections .
securely fasten assembled sign panels to a rigid framework before application of legend and before shipment .
lay out the legend and border on the sign face as indicated on the sign fabrication drawings .
apply cutout type viii or type ix legend and border to sign face according to manufacturers instructions .
fabricate signs in a single unit .
if necessary ship large signs sectionalized in panels .
when shipping sectionalized signs slit any legend and border which overlaps the panels .
f sign identification .
fabricate the plaques of aluminum plastic or fiberglass of sufficient thickness to provide the necessary stiffness and to resist vandalism or stencil directly on the sign panel with weatherresistant paint .
indicate sign number and the month and year of erection in numinch high characters of a contrasting color to the background and affix to the rear of the sign in the lower righthand corner when viewed from the back .
if rivets are used to attach plaques use numinch aluminum rivets inserted from the sign face .
num flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffeners for post mounted signs types a d and e and structure mounted signs a flat sheet aluminum .
use aluminum as specified in section numa with a minimum thickness of num inch .
numa numg num num change no .
num fabricate panels from a single aluminum sheet or from a number of pieces making every effort to minimize the total length of joints .
locate joints so the legend does not straddle two or more aluminum sheets whenever possible .
use sheets with a minimum width of num inches wherever possible .
use continuous sheets for the full width of signs less than num feet wide or for the full height of signs less than num feet high .
use sheets free of buckles warps or dents .
remove burrs .
b coating treatment and reflective sheeting .
sections numb and c except as follows apply the sheeting only to the face of the sign .
a maximum of one splice in the reflective sheeting will be allowed on an aluminum sheet .
c legend and border .
section numd d extruded aluminum stiffeners and splice bars .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows manufacture channels from aluminum conforming to astm bnumbnumm alloy numtnum .
use large stiffener sections in numfoot lengths and medium stiffener sections in numfoot lengths .
an alternate cross section of equal or greater section modulus than that indicated may be used with written permission .
e sign fabrication .
stiffener sections may end at a maximum of num inches from each sign edge .
if the sign is more than num inches wider than the length of a fulllength stiffener section then splice two sections together using numinch rivets as shown on the standard drawings to form a longer composite section .
position the splice so it is not on or within num inches of a sign post or within the center half of the span between sign posts .
stagger splices on adjacent sign stiffeners as much as possible .
the aluminum sheeting may extend above the top stiffener or below the bottom stiffener for a maximum distance equal to onethird of the spacing between the stiffeners .
if using an exit panel use a stiffener on both the primary sign top and on the exit panel bottom .
use numinch aluminum rivets at a maximum spacing of num inches and end rivets within num inch of the end of the stiffener .
hold the aluminum sheet firmly against the stiffener section while holes are drilled and rivets are expanded .
if the aluminum sheets are placed with the long dimension vertical or if a single large section stiffener or a single flanged medium section stiffener is used to join two panels together then it may be necessary to have the flat sheet aluminum clamped to the stiffener section while the holes are drilled .
then disassemble the sign for shipping .
if disassembled then remove burrs around the drilled holes to facilitate handling and to ensure a tight connection .
if exit panels can not be supported by two sign posts brace the panel with one or more auxiliary supports .
bolt the supports to a minimum of three stiffeners on the primary sign by use of clips .
if a single stiffener section is not used to join two adjacent panels together use butting plates as shown on the standard drawings .
place butting plates at the left and right edges of the sign and at intervals not greater than num inches throughout the length of horizontal joints between the posts .
use either twistin bolts or standardconnection bolts and plastic inserts to fasten the butting plates .
for joints between aluminum sheets without a stiffener on the joint fasten lightweight aluminum sheets with num inch aluminum rivets to the sign back .
use twistin toggle and buckle straps or post clips on stiffener sections at each post .
lay out the legend and border on the sign face according to the sign fabrication drawings .
apply cutout type viii or type ix legend and border to sign face according to manufacturers instructions .
fabricate signs in a single unit .
if necessary ship large signs sectionalized in panels .
slit any legend and border which overlaps the panel when shipping sectionalized signs .
f sign identification .
section numf g internally illuminated signs .
provide from a bulletin num manufacturer as shown on the approved plans and as follows mount to traffic signal support using a minimum of two bracket connections .
secure each bracket to the mast arm using double stainless steel banding .
connect wiring from internally illuminated sign to a circuit breaker in the electrical service disconnect box .
provide maintenance demonstration to municipal official responsible for maintaining the sign .
construct sign using a weatherproof housing with drain holes in the bottom of the sign and corrosion resistant stainless steel for all fasteners and hardware .
sign must be ul listed and approved .
use bulletin num approved transparent reflective sheeting capable of being internally illuminated and retroreflective when not energized .
use clearview wnum font or as specified on the plan .
display the designated message clearly and numg numc num num change no .
num legibly during both daylight and during hours of darkness .
internally illuminate with light emitting diodes leds .
for street name signs show approved street name on both faces doublesided unless otherwise approved by the representative in writing .
supply a weathertight wire entrance junction box with the sign assembly .
mount the box on the exterior or interior of the sign .
use an appropriately sized numconductor minimum num awg cable between the sign and the controller assembly .
for street name signs provide brackets that allow the sign to swing freely .
use a twopoint support assembly to mount the internally illuminated street name sign to a mast arm that is perpendicular to the street or use a single point support assembly if the internally illuminated sign is attached to a mast arm that is diagonal to the street .
mount a photocell on the top of each sign .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
h school zone speed limit flashing warning sign .
provide a school zone speed limit sign assembly in accordance with section num as shown on the approved plans and as follows utilize approved yellow light emitting diode led indications as indicated in section num .
for type ii and type iii sign use ledilluminated num speed limit message .
include all hardware to provide a functional assembly .
assembly includes specified structural support with foundation mounting hardware an approved solid state flasher dual circuit controller assembly an approved solid state time clock and wiring for the indications .
provide and label an onoff switch in the controller assembly to operate the flashing yellow led lenses and the steady red num speed limit message while retaining power to the time clock .
provide sign assembly capable of obtaining power from solar or electric source .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
i flashing warning sign .
provide a flashing warning sign in accordance with section num as shown on the approved plans and as follows utilize approved yellow light emitting diodes led indications as indicated in section num .
include all hardware to provide a functional assembly .
assembly includes specified structural support with foundation mounting hardware an approved solid state flasher dual circuit controller assembly an approved solid state time clock and wiring for the indications .
provide and label an onoff switch in the controller assembly to operate the flashing yellow led lenses while retaining power to the time clock .
provide sign assembly capable of obtaining power from solar or electric source .
j light emitting diode led blankout signs .
provide led blankout sign from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num in accordance with section num conforming to all regulations and as shown on the approved plans provide verification from independent laboratory test results .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
num flat sheet signs for post mounted signs types b c and f and distance markers a blanks .
use aluminum blanks .
for signs furnished under section num use plywood aluminum acryonitrite butadiene styrene abs aluminumplastic laminate corrugated polypropylene or polyethylene blanks .
physical and chemical properties of plywood and aluminum blanks are to conform to publication numm .
b coating treatment .
prepare sign faces with appropriate coating conforming to publication numm .
c reflective sheeting .
use sheeting from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
num .
general .
apply the sheeting to the sign face using a procedure according to the sheeting manufacturer free of bubbles or wrinkles greater than num inches in length and with total sheeting shrinkage of not more than num inch .
on signs larger than num inches on the shorter side sheeting may be spliced with the edges of adjacent pieces butted together throughout the entire seam length without any overlap or separation .
use type iii or type iv sheeting for all signs .
numd numc num num change no .
num d ink .
as recommended by the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting .
e electronic cuttable ec film .
use film from a sheeting manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
apply the sheeting to the sign face using a procedure according to the sheeting manufacturer free of bubbles or wrinkles greater than num inch in length .
f legend and border .
apply legend and border of the color size and dimensions shown in publication num publication num and the mutcd or as indicated .
use silk screens with a mesh of numxx or finer for reverse screening .
use stencils with sharp clearcut edges uniform curvature and straight lines .
silk screen in a manner resulting in uniform color and tone with sharplydefined edges and without blemishes on the sign background .
air dry or bake signs after silk screening to achieve a smooth hard finish .
blisters appearing during the drying process will be cause for rejection .
if directapplied legend is indicated for any directional or destination sign use type iii or type iv reflective sheeting .
slipsheet and pack signs to ensure delivery in an undamaged condition .
num delineation devicesnot used .
num steel s or w beam posts and breakaway system for post mounted signs type a a steel s or w beam posts .
as shown on the standard drawings .
b breakaway system .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows num .
couplings .
alloy steel ams numd with minimum tensile yield stress of num psi .
ultimate tensile strength of num psi .
minimum rockwell c hardness of num .
capable of withstanding a tensile breaking load of num pounds .
num .
hinge plates .
alloy steel aisi num num or an equivalent material with a minimum tensile yield stress of num pounds per square inch an ultimate tensile stress range of num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch and a tensile breaking load in pounds as follows model sbhbnumb num min .
num min .
model sbhbnumb num min .
num min .
num .
brackets .
aluminum alloy astm bnumbnumm alloy numtnum or equal with a loadconcentrating boss of stainless steel astm anumanumm type num or equal .
num .
bolts nuts and washers .
num.a hinge plates .
aisi num steel .
galvanized as specified in section nums astm anum .
num.b brackets .
astm bnum alloy numtnum .
num .
anchor .
type num stainless steel ferrule with num steel rod and coil .
num .
coupling bolts .
ams numd galvanized as specified in section nums astm anumanumm .
c fabrication .
cut drill or punch holes in parts or members before galvanizing .
furnish a statement before the beginning of galvanizing showing the carbon content of the steel to be galvanized .
hotdip galvanize posts and numc numb num num change no .
num hardware after fabrication as specified in section nums .
bolts nuts and washers to be galvanized according to astm bnum and bnum and conforming to the coating thickness adherence and quality requirements of astm anumanumm aashto m num .
num breakaway steel posts for post mounted signs type b and distance markers a steel channel bar posts .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows roll posts from standard carbon steel rails astm anum with a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch and a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch or new billet steel equivalent with a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch and a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch .
cast heat analysis of new billet as follows element composition carbon num to num manganese num to num phosphorus max .
num sulphur max .
num silicon num to num roll bars to the required shape dimensions and weight .
drill or punch holes for mounting .
additional holes on numinch centers available for punching are allowed .
after fabrication paint green according to astm gnum using federal color no .
num electrostatically coat with a green polyester coating as specified in section numc or hotdip galvanize as specified in section nums astm anumanumm .
b steel square posts .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows num .
material .
roll formed and conforming to one of the following cold rolled steel in num gage numinch or num gage numinch with a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch and a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch conforming to the chemical and mechanical requirements of astm anumanumm and astm anumanumm grade num grade a .
hot rolled carbon sheet steel in num gage num inch or num gage numinch with a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch and a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch conforming to the chemical requirements of astm anumanumm grade num .
cold rolled steel in num gage numinch with a minimum yield strength of num pounds per square inch and a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch conforming to the chemical requirements of astm anumanumm .
num .
fabrication .
corner weld and scarf as necessary to allow sections to telescope within each other .
space numinch diameter cut holes or knockout holes on numinch centers on the centerline of all four sides in true alignment and opposite to each other .
num .
protective coating .
apply after fabrication using one of the following methods num.a method num .
galvanize or coat the inside and outside as specified in section nums aashto m num .
either of two alternate coating systems may be used as follows numb numc num num change no .
num outside .
apply a hotdipped coating of zinc according to astm bnum at a minimum rate of num ounce per square foot num ounce per square foot of actual surface area a chromate conversion coating at a rate num micrograms per square inch num micrograms per square inch of actual surface area and a thermoplastic electrostatically applied acrylic or polymer coating num mil num mil in thickness and inside .
apply a zinc based coating num num mil in thickness at a rate of num ounce per square foot num ounce per square foot with a minimum of num zinc powder by weight .
num.b method num .
apply a triple coating of zinc conforming to astm bnum having a weight of num ounce per square foot num ounce per square foot to the outside of posts after fabrication .
apply a chromate conversion coating of num micrograms per square inch num micrograms per square inch and a clear organic exterior coating of num mil num mil following the zinc application .
provide a double inline application of a full zincbased organic coating of num mils num mils for the inside surface tested according to astm bnum .
num.c method num .
galvanize inside and outside according to astm anumanumm and astm anumanumm coating designation znum gnum by hotdip method before fabrication .
provide zinccoating to corner welds after scarifying operations .
c polyester post coating .
num .
powder composition .
as follows or of sufficiently similar composition to meet the specified testing requirements polyester resin molecular weight equivalent num num blockedisocyanate curing agent molecular weight equivalent num num flow control agent acryloterpolymers num exteriordurable grade pigment and extender num organic volatile content num max .
num .
pretreatment .
blast clean steel posts to near white with blast profile not greater than num mils .
apply coating immediately after cleaning as an electrostatically charged dry powder sprayed onto the grounded post using an electrostatic spray gun .
num .
color .
green unless otherwise specified .
num .
physical tests .
test coating as follows impact test .
according to astm dnum showing no cracks or breaks when an impact of num inch pounds is applied .
salt spray .
no rust blisters or undercutting of uncoated or scribed areas apparent when tested for num hours according to astm bnum .
film thickness .
thickness measured on a flat surface of the post according to astm dnum num inch minimum .
weatherometer .
no more than num gloss loss when tested for num hours in a carbon arc weatherometer according to astm gnum type eh .
humidity .
no blistering of the coating nor gloss loss greater than num when tested according to astm numc numd num num change no .
num dnum .
num treated wood and composite posts for post mounted signs types c and e a treated wood posts for post mounted signs types c and e. num .
posts .
snums no .
num dense or no .
num dense sr southern yellow pine or no .
num douglas firlarch seasoned to a maximum of num moisture .
grade and grade mark each post before treatment with an official grade stamp or inspection agency mark certified by the board of review american lumber standards committee .
cut and drill before preservative treatment .
num .
treatment .
treat with ammoniacal copper arsenite aca or chromated copper arsenate cca type a b or c meeting awpa standard pnum .
use a minimum preservative retention of num pound per cubic foot by assay oxide basis .
treat and quality mark according to awpa cnum .
inspect according to awpa standards mnum and mnum .
include a treatment certificate with each shipment .
b composite posts for post mounted signs type e. num .
posts .
unsaturated polyester resin reinforced with eglass and lightweight aggregate concrete not greater than num pounds per cubic foot to form a rigid structural support member .
tensile modulus of tube to be not less than num kips per square inch .
posts to be equal to or greater in strength to schedule num steel of the same diameter astm anumanumm .
num .
weathering .
post shall have less than num loss of strength after num hours of accelerated weathering exposure to moisture and lamps required in astm gnum gnum and gnum .
num .
color .
specified post color will be permanent throughout the frp tube with not less than num mil dry film thickness .
after num hours exposure according to astm gnum gnum and gnum posts will exhibit num adhesion astm dnum and a maximum color change of num delta e. num delineator postsnot used .
num miscellaneous materials a hex head bolts nuts and washers for extruded panel sign postclips .
galvanized steel as specified in section nums num .
hex head bolts .
astm anum grade a or b .
num .
nut .
astm anum dh or astm anum grade num or num .
num .
washer .
carbon steel helical coil or astm fnum or astm fnum note num note num if either astm fnum or astm fnum flat washers are used bolt must be fastened either using two nuts or a single nut with the threads galled adjacent to the nut to prevent loosening .
b postclips .
for extruded panel signs aluminum conforming to astm bnum alloy numtnum .
for flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffeners stainless steel type num num gage .
c auxiliary supports for exit panels .
aluminum conforming to astm bnumbnumm alloy numtnum .
num inches by num inches by numinch angle num num feet long or long enough to attach to three stiffeners on the main sign .
d lag screws .
numinch round head galvanized steel as specified in section nums astm anum .
nume numm num num change no .
num e rivets .
aluminum selfplugging or hollowcore as follows numinch for mounting reflective units and distance plaquesalloy num with num mandrels .
numinch for mounting flat aluminum sheets to stiffeners sections alloy num with carbon steel mandrels .
rivet size specified is the minimum shank diameter .
use rivets with sufficient grip range to attach to background sign material stiffeners or posts .
use a no .
num drill for numinch rivets for attachment of stiffeners and splice bars .
f bolts nuts and washers for flat sheet aluminum signs with stiffeners .
stainless steel type num bolts .
use numinch by num inch long for butting plates and numinch by num inches long for postclips .
use standard connection bolts or twistin bolts .
g twistin toggle and buckle straps .
stainless steel type num and num inch wide and num inch thick with rounded edges .
spot welded twistin type toggle on end of strap .
spot welded antirotational buckle on other end of strap .
toggles and buckles shall be stainless steel type num and num inch thick .
h butting plates .
fabricate from stainless steel type num. i anchors .
section numcnum .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num. j antitheft sign hardware .
num .
system a. bolts .
section numcnum and as follows provide num inch by num numinch steel carriage bolts with minimum numinch diameter round head square neck and threads to within num inch of head .
furnish bolts having a mechanically deposited cadmium coating b num or zinc type i coating as specified in section nums .
nuts .
square pyramidalshaped nuts with all four sides sloping at an angle of num degrees num unc threads cnum coldrolled steel case hardened to rockwell hardness of num to num .
furnish nuts having a num inch to num inch thick mechanically deposited zinc type ii yellow chromate coating as specified in section nums astm bnum tested according to astm bnum .
num .
system b. bolts .
section numm and as follows provide numinch by num numinch and numinch by numinch bolts with minimum numinch diameter oneway heads and threads to within num inch of head .
nuts .
section numn and as follows provide nuts alloy numtnum doublechamfered hexagon with selflocking conical shape num inch numinch by numinch unit under the nut with num unc threads .
hexagon portion should break away from selflocking unit with num unc to num inchpounds to num inchpounds of torque .
washers .
nylon num inch thick by numinch minimum outside diameter with num inchpounds maximum allowable applied torque .
k banding .
stainless steel type num num inch wide by num inch thick with rounded edges for handling ease and safety .
buckles and other necessary hardware shall be of stainless steel type num. m aluminum bolts .
astm bnumbnumm .
alloy numtnum thread fit ansi class numg and threads shall be within numm numa num num change no .
num two threads of the head or a minimum of num num inches .
n aluminum nuts .
astm bnumbnumm .
alloy numtnum thread fit ansi class numh ansi class numb num unc threads .
num sign and distance marker supports a general .
hotdip galvanize steel except stainless steel after fabrication as specified in section nums .
drill or punch holes and cut before galvanizing .
b brackets for post mounted signs types c d and f. astm anum .
c bars for post mounted signs types c d and e. aashto m numm numm astm anuma numm grade num grade num. d shims for post mounted sign types c and e. aashto m numm numm astm anumanumm grade num grade num. e steel pipe supports for post mounted signs types d and e. astm anumanumm .
f shapes and plates for post mounted signs type d. aashto m numm numm astm anumanumm grade num grade num. g angles aluminum for post mounted signs type e and structure mounted signs .
astm bnumbnumm alloy numtnum .
h shim bars and plates for post mounted signs type e. aashto m numm numm astm anumanumm grade num grade num. i brackets bars clamps strips and gussett plates for erecting distance markers on bridge railing .
stainless steel astm anum .
num delineator bracketsnot used .
num reflective glass beads a general .
furnish reflective glass beads conforming to aashto m num except as follows num .
gradation .
satisfies the following gradation for type indicated sieve size percent beads passing type a type b type c type d type e num mm num num num mm num num to num num num mm num num to num num to num num num mm num num num to num num to num num num mm num num to num num to num num to num num m num num to num num to num num to num num m num num to num num to num num m num num to num num to num num m num num to num num m num num to num num to num num to num num m num num to num num to num numa numa num num change no .
num num .
rounds .
provide glass beads with a minimum of num true spheres overall a minimum of num true spheres per sieve and not more than num angulars overall .
type e beads must meet a minimum of num true spheres for all sieve fractions when measured by aashto t num .
num .
coating .
supply type a b d and e glass beads with coatings to enhance moisture resistance embedment and adherence with the binder .
supply type c with coatings to enhance embedment and adherence .
evaluate coatings to referee methods in aashto t num .
num .
colorclarity .
provide glass beads that are colorlessclear and visually free of carbon residue andor inclusions containing no greater than num carbon by weight when measured by astm dnum combustion infrared .
num .
refractive index .
minimum num by oil immersion or equivalent method premeasured by aashto t num .
num .
air inclusions .
num by visual inspection .
num .
hardness .
beads above the no .
num sieve are to exhibit an average hardness of cnum when measured using the rockwell c scale method with a minimum sample of num glass beads .
num .
crushing strength .
beads above the no .
num sieve are to exhibit an average crushing strength of not less than num pounds per square inch when measured with ldnum method with a minimum sample of num glass beads .
num .
chemical resistance .
chemical resistance to hydrochloric acid water calcium and other chlorides and sodium sulfides tested as specified in sections num to num of ttb federal specification numd .
num .
performance properties .
the department will benchmark bead performance properties using methods referenced in nchrp num to ensure continued quality and retroreflectivity in markings .
num .
recycled postconsumer glass .
incorporate recycled postconsumer glass into glass used for beads at a minimum of num for direct melt processes up to a maximum of num by weight for nondirect melt production .
type e beads will contain a minimum of num of direct melt glass .
num numd num num change no .
num section numtraffic signals num general requirementscomply with the requirements of associations societies codes and regulations as applicable pertaining to the work of furnishing and installing operational traffic signals including traffic signal supports controller assemblies traffic signal systems and communications electrical distribution traffic signal indications and detectors .
words and phrases specific to traffic signals that are not defined in these specifications or in the regulations are to be defined as in nema ts num nema ts num type numatc or type numatc industry standards .
a traffic signals materials acceptance .
before the submission of a bid proposal verify that bulletin num approved products issued by the department for traffic signal equipment as provided in num pa code chapter num .
at least num weeks before their installation submit to the representative for review and acceptance a tabulation of all project traffic signal materials .
include the type of material manufacturers name model number and the departments certificate of approval number for each item to be supplied .
refer to publication num to obtain the listing of traffic signal items that require bulletin num approval .
provide catalog cuts for further clarification of the material when requested .
b structural material .
fabricate traffic signal structural material according to section num steel members only aws and the aashto specifications except applying water to the base metal during plasma arc cutting is permitted .
bulletin num listing and shop inspection is required .
fabricators provide an aws certified welding inspector cwi for welded steel or aluminum pole products as specified in section numgnum .
bulletin num shop inspection and section num do not apply to painting of aluminum poles and for the following nonwelded items cast aluminum poles cast steel poles and cast iron poles .
the charpy vnotch toughness test is required for load carrying tension members greater than numinch in thickness as required for zone num nonfracture critical criteria of the applicable aashto specifications .
provide steel poles that either round or multisided with a minimum of eight sides .
provide testing and test methods according to aws dnum steel or aws dnum aluminum and as determined by the lts .
provide nondestructive testing on num of full penetration groove welds and a random num of partial penetration groove welds of longitudinal seams on steel poles and arms .
when inspecting full penetration seam welds use radiographic test methods on material less than numinch in thickness and use radiographic or ultrasonic test methods on material numinch and greater in thickness .
use magnetic particle inspection on partial penetration seam welds .
provide nondestructive testing by ultrasonic test methods on random num of all pole to base plate and arm to arm plate full penetration groove welds .
for tube material less than numinch in thickness have the fabricator submit a detailed ultrasonic testing procedure including acceptance criteria to the lts for review and approval before testing .
for all other welds on steel traffic poles perform magnetic particle inspection on a minimum of num of the length of each weld .
provide inspection for the full length of the weld when less than num inches in length .
for aluminum traffic pole structures perform fabrication and nondestructive testing in accordance with section num .
where less than num of the weld is nondestructively tested and a rejectable defect is found test num of the length of the weld .
where applicable the departments plant inspector will select portions of welds to be tested .
perform and evaluate all nondestructive testing according to cyclically loaded nontubular tension criteria .
c certification .
as specified in section numbnum .
certify from the manufacturer that all signal supports satisfy the departments criteria and are adequate to support the loads indicated on the approved plans .
include on the certification the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in the state .
certify the structural adequacy of all sign and signal brackets as well as all other mounting hardware .
d traffic signal controllers .
provide switches controls and indicators that are operable without the use of tools .
clearly and permanently identify the switches controls and indicators .
furnish three copies of warranties guarantees instruction manuals wiring diagrams and parts lists with each different type material .
also provide in the controller assembly cabinet one instruction manual for each controller unit time clock and coordination unit .
upon completion of a controller assembly conduct a physical and functional shop test of the assemblys continuous satisfactory operation for not less than num calendar days in accordance with industry standards .
provide num w loads numd numg num num change no .
num for signal circuit and simulated inputs for detectors and interconnection .
certify that the equipment operates as indicated .
demonstrate and provide written documentation that the conflict monitor or malfunction management unit will cause transfer of the signals to flashing operation upon sensing all possible conflicting signal indications .
label the load switch sockets and cable connectors for detector amplifiers in the controller assembly according to function .
all equipment which requires a separate device to set adjust or read the timing intervals furnish plans or programs with one of these devices for each ten units or fraction thereof .
e wiring diagrams and timing plans .
provide three copies of the cabinet wiring diagram traffic signal equipment wiring diagram approved plans and manufacturers timing plan for each controller assembly in accordance with the approved signal construction drawings .
place a clear protective envelope in the controller assembly cabinet that contains one copy of the manufacturers instruction manual for each controller unit time clock coordination unit software programming manuals time setting charts wiring diagrams and parts list .
upon completion of the numday test if there were any changes that would affect a change to these documents then provide three new copies of each .
f shop testing .
submit results from shop tests to the representative as specified in section num and most recent publication for the applicable controller type as follows nema tsnum standard traffic control systems for existing traffic control equipment nema tsnum standard traffic controller assemblies with ntcip requirements type num industry standard type num industry standard g standard construction practices .
as shown in sections numa and num the standard drawings and as follows existing traffic signals are to remain in operation as is until the new traffic signal equipment and devices are in place and operable unless an approved plans indicates otherwise .
if it becomes necessary to turn off the existing system of signalization obtain the district traffic engineers approval municipal concurrence and provide flaggers or other approved means to direct traffic within the intersection during periods when the traffic signals are not operating .
place temporary poles to adequately support existing traffic signals as indicated or directed .
provide certification to the department that such poles have sufficient strength to support the traffic signals .
make revisions to the existing system of signalization as indicated or directed .
before any excavation for placement of traffic signal or sign support poles mark proposed locations in the field .
field review pole locations with the representative and adjust pole locations as necessary .
remove all existing traffic signal supports including those with traffic signals flashing warning devices and lane control signs and signal equipment unless otherwise indicated .
maintain existing controller assemblies as a unit .
store material on the project site .
provide a listing of the equipment for the municipal owner and make arrangements to deliver equipment to the municipal storage area .
do not damage items during removal and storage .
abandon underground conduit conductors and detectors not interfering with new construction .
remove foundations and junction boxes that are designated to be abandoned and are located in an off traveled roadway area to num foot below final grade and dispose of removed materials .
fill compact and landscape the resulting hole including topsoil if necessary by the particular planting .
repair damage to galvanized finishes .
restore areas damaged by construction .
if any vegetation is blocking the visibility of signs or traffic signals in the opinion of the representative generate and submit a list of items to the representative .
obtain approval to remove or relocate any of the items .
if not notified by the representative notify the representative as soon as it is recognized that a utility facility is causing or will cause an obstruction to visibility .
before the initial turnon verify for the representative that all traffic signals are working properly .
make the initial turnon to flashing mode and full operation in the presence of the representative between the hours of num am and num pm tuesday through thursday except holidays .
under special circumstances involving safety of motoring public the representative may grant exceptions to this rule .
give the representative a minimum num calendar day notice before the initial turnon .
for locations presently unsignalized flash signals for a period of num to num days .
num .
numday testing .
after the traffic signal installation becomes operational conduct a continuous num hour numg numa num num change no .
num operating test for not less than num consecutive calendar days .
correct failures during the test period by repairing or replacing malfunctioning parts or equipment or faulty work regardless of the cause in less than num hours as directed .
after correcting failures caused by defective equipment material or faulty work reconduct the numday test .
during the numday test period change adjust or reinstall controller andor master controller settings as directed at any time .
adjust or revise initial signal timing parameters as directed to optimize signal operation due to actual traffic flows and field conditions .
during this time period power and communication costs associated with maintaining the operation of the traffic signal will be the responsibility of municipality or other party that currently or will ultimately assume ownership or maintenance of the installation .
in addition to the provisions of sections num and num those department federal and municipal personnel and agencies as well as public and private interests that are involved with the signal installation have jurisdictional control over the installation or adjacent facilities or will ultimately assume ownership or maintenance of the installation will at the discretion of the department be allowed to observe signal turnon installation of initial timing parameters and any subsequent adjustment and inspection before completion of numday test .
num .
equipment guarantee .
guarantee the in service operation of mechanical and electrical equipment related components and the controller assembly for a period of num days from the date of completion of the specified num day field test .
during this period maintain equipment in the controller cabinet .
use additional locks as necessary to prevent entry by others .
repair faulty work repair or replace defective materials or equipment and correct malfunctions in the controller cabinet within num hours after starting repairs .
start repairs no later than the working day following notification of failures or malfunctions .
guarantee repairs or replacements for the balance of the numday guarantee period or num days whichever is the longer period .
repair or replacement work not performed within the guarantee period or any extension period will be considered latent defects as specified in section numb .
provide the representative with the name and telephone number of the person to be notified in the event of failures or malfunctions during the guarantee period .
issuance of an acceptance certificate or final settlement of the contract does not in any respect relieve the contractor of responsibility for the inservice guarantee period described in these specifications .
h warranties instruction manuals and guarantees .
furnish as specified in sections num num num and num .
num traffic signal supports a general .
num .
design and acceptance .
design in accordance with publication num .
submit shop drawings in accordance with publication num including calculations for all special structures for review and acceptance .
num .
supports .
fabricate shafts and arms in any of the following shapes and styles round tapered .
one longitudinal seam continuously welded and ground or rolled flush .
transverse butt welds are not acceptable .
uniform wall thickness .
uniform taper num inch maximum and num inch minimum per foot of length .
round stepped .
round pipe sections each with not more than one longitudinal seam continuously welded and ground numa numb num num change no .
num or rolled flush .
join sections by a hotswaged shrink fit continuously sealwelded to prevent entrance of water .
uniform wall thickness for each section .
maximum change in diameter between stepped sections not to exceed num num inches .
multisided tapered .
maximum of two longitudinal seams continuously welded and ground or rolled to a maximum bead height of num inch .
transverse butt welds are not acceptable .
uniform wall thickness .
uniform taper num inch maximum and num inch minimum per foot of length .
minimum of eight sides .
round untapered .
maximum of one longitudinal seam continuously welded and ground or rolled flush .
uniform wall thickness and diameter .
transverse butt welds are not acceptable num .
cable support .
weld a cable support to the inside top of the shaft .
num .
grounding .
weld a ullisted grounding lug capable of accommodating a no .
num awg stranded copper cable to the inside of the shaft adjacent to the handhole .
num .
handholes .
provide a handhole in the shaft of the poles as shown on the standard drawings .
reinforce the area to develop the minimum guaranteed yield strength of the shaft .
furnish a cover and keeper chain .
num .
wire inlets .
provide a wire inlet at each signal head or at each electrically operated sign location .
weatherproof each inlet with an insulated grommet .
provide a deburred hole num numinch minimum diameter in the flange plate and shaft which serves as a wire entrance into the arm from inside the shaft .
provide type lb access fittings from type ii mounted controller cabinet into pole shaft and in pole shafts for pedestrian pushbuttons .
num .
anchor bases .
fabricate the base clean smooth and of the dimensions necessary for adequate pole mounting and structural support .
provide holes for anchor bolts .
fabricate the base to telescope over the shaft and be secured in place by welding .
num .
galvanizing .
section nums and as follows galvanize steel shafts and arms including those manufactured of high strength and corrosion resistant steels according to astm anum aashto m num .
galvanize accessories and hardware according to astm anum aashto m num. b overhead supports .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows shaft and armsaashto m numastm anum grade num or grade num astm anum astm anum astm anum grade num astm anum and anum .
luminaire mounting armssection num anchor base plates flange arm and column connection plates and gusset platesaashto m num astm anum grade num .
astm anum astm anum grade num .
miscellaneous shapes plates and barsaashto m num astm anum grade num .
astm anum astm astm anum grade num and astm anum .
numb numa num num change no .
num flange plate assembly bolts nuts and washers astm anum astm num and astm fnum .
mechanically galvanize in accordance with astm bnum .
furnish bolts nuts and washers for testing purposes and test as specified in section numc num.b .
shaft and arm capsgalvanized steel ccoat cast iron or cast aluminum .
handhole ch and hole cover plates aashto m num astm anum grade num .
astm anum astm astm anum grade num and astm anum pipe caps aashto m num astm anum grade num .
astm anum astm astm anum astm anum or astm bnum arm dampening harmonic mitigation device as shown on the standard drawings .
c pedestal supports .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows num .
aluminum .
supportone length num numinch minimum outside diameter aluminum pipe schedule num astm bnum or bnum alloy numtnum .
basescast aluminum astm bnum or b num alloy numtnum aluminum plate astm bnum alloy numtnum .
pole topsaluminum num .
steel .
supportone length num numinch minimum outside diameter steel pipe schedule num astm anum type f. basesteel casting astm anum grade num gray iron casting astm anum class num steel plate aashto m num astm anum grade num. d pedestrian stub poles .
as specified in section numc except having a fixed length of num inches and a rounded top cap to minimize injuries .
e anchor bolts .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows anchor boltsastm anum or fnum .
hex nutsastm anumma num washersastm fnum galvanize the top num inches of bolts and all associated hardware as specified in section nums astm anum or by another acceptable method conforming to the coating thickness adherence and quality requirements of astm anum .
furnish template prints for setting anchor bolts with each support .
f wood support poles .
when used for temporary signal installations certify sawn material both rough and dressed by the mill as to grade and mark in accordance with the grading rules and basic provisions of the american lumber standards psnum by a lumber grading or inspection bureau or agency .
if dressed the grade mark shall be applied after dressing .
g span wire .
astm anum class a siemensmartin or astm bnum .
h tether wire .
astm anum class a siemensmartin or astm bnum .
i lashing .
as shown on the standard drawings for attaching cable to span wire .
num controller assembly a type of operation .
numa numb num num change no .
num num .
solidstate pretimed .
ts num section num environmental standards and test procedures .
linum type frnum circuit boards .
num.a operational requirements .
cyclesthree minimum or indicated otherwise on the approved plans .
splitsone per cycle minimum or indicated otherwise on the approved plans .
settable offsetsthree per cycle or indicated otherwise on the approved plans .
cycle durationnum seconds to num seconds in numsecond increments or indicated otherwise on the approved plans .
signal circuitsnum minimum wired for num including terminal blocks .
num.b interconnect .
offsetsnum num num or indicated otherwise on the approved plans .
cyclecall cycle num call cycle num .
flashingremote flashing .
voltagenum v to num v ac num hz to num hz .
inputpositive true .
fuseampacity per manufacturers recommendations .
isolationremote common from local ground .
num .
solidstate actuated .
ts num section num environmental standards and test procedures .
ts num section num interface standards .
ts num section num solidstate traffic signal controller units .
num .
solidstate actuated with volume density .
section numanum.a and with the following operational requirements variable initial timingmaximum variable initial timing programmable from num to num seconds .
gap reduction timingsas indicated .
time before reduction tbr as indicated .
num .
solidstate flasher .
flashersection numbnum.d circuit breakersection numcnum surge protectorsection numcnum cabinetsection numbnum.f b type of controller .
num .
nema controller unit .
num.a standards .
ts num section num environmental standards and test procedures ts num section num interface standards ts num section num solidstate traffic signal controller units lnum type frnum circuit boards pretimed operation tsnum section num environmental standards and test procedures numb numb num num change no .
num tsnum section num controller standards and coordination tsnum section num interface and electrical standards tsnum section num bus interface unit requirements num.b controller requirements .
all hardware and software must be in compliance with nema tsnum tsnum standards and as directed by the representative .
all products must be bulletin num approved products .
an approved plugin hand control with cord is required in all cabinets and a method to switch the signal controller from automatic to manual control .
include ability to accept a contact closure or open controller output to reset clock on controller at a predetermined hour each day typically num am .
provide fiber modem as specified per the system for the communication between local controller and master controller .
clean and connect fiberoptic cable to the new controller using procedures described in current department and industry guidelines fiber optic association inc. foa .
num.c conflict monitor .
ts num section num conflict monitor .
ts num section num malfunction management unit test .
ts num section num malfunction management unit .
a minimum of one input channel for each load switch socket as specified in section numbnume .
num.d flasher unit .
ts num section num solid state flasher .
ts num section num flasher tests .
ts num section num solidstate flasher .
num.e load switches .
ts num section num solidstate load switches .
ts num section num load switch tests .
ts num section num threecircuit solid state load switch operational features provide light emitting diode led indicators to display operation .
isolate signal load from load switch input using optic couplers .
furnish a minimum of one load switch for each of the following active controller unit functions vehicle phase .
overlapping vehicle phase .
pedestrian phase .
num.f cabinet .
furnish a weatherproof controller cabinet large enough to suitably house the traffic signal controller unit and auxiliary equipment and conforming to the following requirements num.f.num enclosure .
materialsheet or cast aluminum .
wall thicknessnum inch minimum reinforced where required .
minimum sizeas shown on the standard drawings and as follows position equipment in the cabinet to provide access to all terminal strips and equipment from the front without removing other equipment .
provide an unobstructed view of all equipment having visual indicators .
place all equipment in an upright position and not on top of other equipment .
provide department approved controller cabinet with adequate room for all necessary numb numb num num change no .
num equipment and cable .
provide removable numinch handle designed for the doors and a full height continuously welded piano hinge .
continuously weld all joints of the cabinet .
mount a fluorescent light suitable for freezing temperatures inside the front and back of the cabinet automatically turning on when the cabinet door is open .
provide a pullout shelf to double as a storage container for wiring diagrams plans and timing sheets .
provide a twist lock receptacle and transfer switch for power provided by an emergency generator during power outages .
access to the twist lock receptacle and the transfer switch thorough the use of a locked police door using a no .
num key or standard police key .
provide door with continuous stainless steel door hinge on right side door stop at num degrees and num degrees num degrees for all doors over num inches wide auxiliary door for access to police panel pocket for prints .
hardwarevandal and corrosion resistant .
finishnatural with external welds free of irregularities and a maximum bead height of num inch .
gasketsneoprene attached with an oil resistant adhesive .
mountingsas indicated pole or foundation .
locksbrass tumbler type for main door and standard police lock for auxiliary door two keys for each lock .
latching mechanismone pointthrough mechanism for doors less than num inches in width three pointthrough mechanism for doors num inches or wider .
interiorshelfmounted equipment unless rack or panelmounted .
test pushbutton panelone pushbutton to each input for simulated detector operation of vehicles and pedestrians with type and phase permanently labeled on panel .
mount panel on inside of door .
back panels wiring and terminals for maximum phase capability of solidstate controller unit load switch sockets as required and as follows controller unit load switch sockets minimum number maximum number pretimed num phase actuated num phase actuated num phase actuated num num num num as required as required num num provide a minimum of two unused sockets per unit .
num.f.num environmental controls .
ventilationweatherproof vents of minimum num square inches area in the lower part of the door or cabinet .
filtercover vents with full perimeter frame with a disposable filter securely held in place .
num.f.num solidstate equipment .
fancapacity num cubic feetminute minimum .
fan thermostatlinevoltage type adjustable from numf to numf with fan set to turn on at numb numb num num change no .
num numf .
num .
type num controller unit .
num.a standards .
the manufacturers of all component parts and hardware are to be from a bulletin num manufacturer .
comply with current type num controller industry standards .
num.b controller requirements .
provide controller chip as directed by the representative .
provide a num microcomputer having a vertical board design with separate input and output boards .
include ability to accept a contact closure or open controller output to reset clock on controller at a predetermined hour each day typically num am .
equip the controller with four serial communication ports each capable of communicating at speeds up to num bitssec .
the port assignments to be as follows port num internal modem port num pc laptop connection port num conflict monitor communication port num future use provide numc prom module .
data retention in the absence of controller voltage vcc .
data is automatically protected during power loss .
directly replaces numk x num volatile static ram or eeprom .
unlimited write cycles .
lowpower cmos .
over num years of data retention .
standard numpin jedec pinout .
num ns read access time .
read cycle time equals write cycle time .
lithium energy source is electrically disconnected to retain freshness until power is applied for the first time .
industrial temperature range of numf to numf .
furnish all controller assemblies so that the controller returns to normal operation from cabinet flash automatically .
an approved plugin hand control with cord is required in all cabinets and a method to switch the signal controller from automatic to manual control .
provide for automatic return to flashing operation when lost electrical service has been restored .
the flash sense stop time and cabinet door open functions to be optically isolated but capable of operating without a model num dc isolator .
provide prewired input file with a minimum of eight inputs and equipped with model num two channel dc isolators .
supply the required number of model num dc isolators plus one spare for each intersection .
also provide slots and internal wiring for two future model num four channel loop sensing units .
provide fiber modem as specified per the system for the communication between local controller and master controller .
clean and connect fiberoptic cable to the new controller using procedures described in current department and industry guidelines foa .
provide software as directed by special provision unless provided by the municipality .
num.c conflict monitor .
provide model num cardmounted conflict monitor capable of communicating with the num microcomputer .
the conflict monitor when polled by a system compatible num microcomputer will return information including but not limited to the status of all monitored inputs and events stored in non volatile memory .
it will also monitor the absence of a red indication along with normal conflicts and perform all the functions required by a model num conflict monitor including the following features numb numb num num change no .
num monitoring the absence of signal on any channel .
include three preemption inputs to disable red monitoring .
include red signal monitoring interface through front panel connector .
detect simultaneous display of green and yellow on a channel .
detect simultaneous display of green and red on a channel .
detect minimum yellow display following a green on a channel .
store of up to num events .
inform num controller of a resetting via a communication port .
monitor incoming line voltage .
a minimum of one input channel for each load switch socket as specified in section numbnum.e .
num.d flasher unit .
ts num section num solid state flasher .
ts num section num flasher tests .
ts num section num solidstate flasher .
num.e load switches .
ts num section num solidstate load switches .
ts num section num load switch tests .
ts num section num threecircuit solid state load switch .
provide type num load switch .
provide a minimum of twenty prewired load switch positions as shown on the approved plans .
provide a load switch of a repairable modular type construction .
provide a minimum of four flash transfer relays .
operational features provide led indicators to display operation .
isolate signal load from load switch input using optic couplers .
furnish a minimum of one load switch for each of the following active controller unit functions vehicle phase .
overlapping vehicle phase .
pedestrian phase .
num.f cabinet .
minimum size as shown on the approved plans and as follows position equipment in the cabinet to provide access to all terminal strips and equipment from the front without removing other equipment .
provide an unobstructed view of all equipment having visual indicators .
place all equipment in an upright position and not on top of other equipment .
provide department approved type num controller cabinet with adequate room for all necessary equipment and cable .
provide removable numinch handle designed for the doors and a full height continuously welded piano hinge .
continuously weld all joints of the cabinet .
mount a fluorescent light suitable for freezing temperatures inside the front and back of the cabinet automatically turning on when the cabinet door is open .
provide a pullout shelf to double as a storage container for wiring diagrams approved plans and timing sheets .
the latching mechanism will be a three point draw roller .
equip the large cabinet door with a spring lock which can be opened only by a key .
equip the smaller compartment door with a similar spring lock which can be opened only by a standard police box key .
an approved plugin hand control is required in all cabinets and a method to switch the signal controller from automatic to manual control .
provide a twist lock receptacle and transfer switch for power provided by an emergency generator during power outages .
access to the twist lock receptacle and the transfer switch thorough the use of a locked police door using a no .
num key or standard police key .
num .
type num controller unit .
num.a standards .
the manufacturers of all component parts and hardware are to be bulletin num approved .
comply with current type num controller industry standards .
numb numb num num change no .
num num.b controller requirements .
program module as approved by representative communications module as approved by representative processor module as approved by representative power supply module as approved by representative the num microcomputer is to have a vertical board design with separate input and output boards .
include ability to accept a contact closure or open controller output to reset clock on controller at a predetermined hour each day typically num am .
equip the controller with four serial communication ports and one ethernet port each capable of communicating at speeds up to num bitssec .
the port assignments are to be as follows port num internal modem port num pc laptop connection port num conflict monitor communication port num future use port num ethernet provide numc prom module .
data retention in the absence of controller voltage vcc .
data is automatically protected during power loss .
directly replaces numk x num volatile static ram or eeprom .
unlimited write cycles .
lowpower cmos .
over num years of data retention .
standard numpin jedec pin out .
num ns read access time .
read cycle time equals write cycle time .
lithium energy source is electrically disconnected to retain freshness until power is applied for the first time .
industrial temperature range of numf to numf .
furnish all controller assemblies so that the controller returns to normal operation from time clock flash automatically .
an approved plugin hand control with cord is required in all cabinets and a method to switch the signal controller from automatic to manual control .
provide for automatic return to flashing operation when lost electrical service has been restored .
the flash sense stop time and cabinet door open functions to be optically isolated but capable of operating without a model num dc isolator .
provide prewired input file with a minimum of eight inputs and equipped with model num two channel dc isolators .
supply the required number of model num dc isolators plus one spare for each intersection .
also provide slots and internal wiring for two future model num four channel loop sensing units .
provide fiber modem as specified per the system for the communication between local controller and master controller .
clean and connect fiberoptic cable to the new controller using procedures described in current department and industry guidelines foa .
provide software as directed by special provision unless provided by the municipality .
num.c conflict monitor .
provide model num malfunction management unit .
exception when mounted in a num cabinet provide conflict monitor using cabinet bus interface .
equip the conflict monitor with a programmable serial interface capable of communicating at a speed of up to num bitssec with the num microcomputer .
the conflict monitor when polled by a system compatible num microcomputer is to return information including but not limited to the status of all monitored inputs and events stored in nonvolatile memory .
also monitor the absence of a red indication along with normal conflicts and perform all the functions required by a model num conflict monitor including the following features monitoring the absence of signal on any channel .
numb numc num num change no .
num include three preemption inputs to disable red monitoring .
include red signal monitoring interface through front panel connector .
detect simultaneous display of green and yellow on a channel .
detect simultaneous display of green and red on a channel .
detect minimum yellow display following a green on a channel .
store of up to num events .
inform num controller of a resetting via a communication port .
monitor incoming line voltage .
a minimum of one input channel for each load switch socket as specified in section numbnum.e .
num.d flasher unit .
ts num section num solid state flasher .
ts num section num flasher tests .
ts num section num solidstate flasher .
num.e load switches .
ts num section num solidstate load switches .
ts num section num load switch tests .
ts num section num threecircuit solid state load switch provide type num switch packs provide a minimum of eight maximum of twenty prewired switch positions as shown on the approved plans .
provide a switch pack is to be of a repairable modular type construction .
provide a minimum of four flash transfer relays .
operational features provide led indicators to display operation .
isolate signal load from switch pack input using optic couplers .
furnish a minimum of one switch pack for each of the following active controller unit functions vehicle phase .
overlapping vehicle phase .
pedestrian phase .
num.f cabinet .
section numbnum.f c controller hardware .
num .
relays .
num.a light duty relay .
mounted in a clear plastic cover permanently marked to indicate coil voltage rating and as follows usagelogic preemption or interconnection .
voltagenum v ac or num v dc .
switch typetpdt or dpdt .
contact ratingnum a .
contact materialfine silver or silver alloy .
num.b heavy duty relay .
mounted in a clear plastic cover permanently marked to indicate coil voltage rating and as follows usagecontinuous dutytransfer of signal indications from normal operation to flashing and the reverse .
voltagenumv to num v ac numhz to num hz .
numc numc num num change no .
num switch typedpdt .
contact readingnum a .
contact materialfine silver or silver alloy .
standard socketnum pin jones type .
num.c dial transfer .
mounted in a clear plastic cover permanently marked to indicate coil voltage rating and as follows usagedial transfer .
voltagenum v ac num to num hz num w. switch typetpdt electric latching two external poles dpdt mechanical latching .
contact ratingnum a .
contact materialfine silver or silver alloy .
standard socketplug interchangeable with furnished base .
num .
cable terminalharness assembly .
for wiring the cabinet including connections to the electrical load center police panel switches signal load switches signal cable terminals controller unit conflict monitor detectors and relays and as follows wiringarrange and lace or enclose in a raceway or in plastic tubing .
terminal blocksbarriertype with marker strips and nickelplated brass screws numinch minimum for detector leads numinch minimum for signal leads rated for num a at num v rms .
num .
electrical load center .
num.a breakers and receptacles .
circuit breakersnum a minimum flashing circuit and duplex receptacle .
num a minimum traffic control equipment .
duplex receptaclenectype ground fault interruptor with test buttons .
num a minimum .
num.b radio frequency interference rfi .
ullisted rfi filter according to nema standard testing procedures tsnum chapter num and as follows line voltagenum v to num v ac .
line frequencynumkhz to nummhz with minimum attenuation of numdb .
line currentnum of the total connected load num a minimum .
operating temperature numf to numf .
insulation resistancenum megaohms .
line to ground ratingnum v ac one minute .
line to line ratingnum v dc one minute .
humidity rangenum to num relative .
overloadnum a for num minutes .
num.c surge protection .
provide surge protection that has multistrike capability ul listed and line to neutral clamping voltage to be no more than num v at num amps .
filtering surge protector is not to exceed num inches x num inches x num inches not including studs or mounting flange .
spark gap arrestors are not allowed .
all surge protection devices must be approved .
the cabinet and content must as an assembly pass all nema tsnum voltage spikes test for the ac line .
peak current num x num ms life test voltage clamp before and after num surges of num ka waveshape clamp voltage num amps num change num v type num ka numc numc num num change no .
num response time continuous service current num vac numhz operating temperature voltage never excess num v during surge num amps maximum numf to numf provide surge suppressor that is ul listed and has dual pair four wire module implementing three stage hybrid technology or equivalent type as approved by the representative for communications cable to num ka num a per line .
peak surge current num times o num x num ms num ka o num x num ms num a per line life expectancy o num x num ms num occurrences o num x num ms response time num nanosecond technology sad hybrid operating temperature numf to numf num.d grounding requirements .
provide each controller with its own grounding rod in addition to the other grounding requirements for signal supports .
grounding and grounding rods will be installed in accordance with the standard drawings and as follows place two grounding rods at the base of the controller .
test all grounding rods used for controllers mast arms and supports for their resistance to ground in accordance with the nec with resistance less than num ohms .
for grounding rods failing the abovementioned test relocate the grounding rod to a suitable location approved by the representative .
when suitable place a grounding grid utilizing shielded copper wire and grounding rods at each corner around the intersection .
documentation regarding grounding resistance and asbuilt plans of grounding grid must be verified by the representative .
num .
police panel .
furnish with the following switches autoflash lights onoff automanual provide hand control cable in panel .
num .
time clock .
num.a solidstate .
enclosed in an electricalshockproof housing conforming to the following requirements input voltagenum v to num v ac num hz to num hz .
output voltagenum v to num v ac numhz to num hz .
output currentnum a .
output circuitsas required .
output setting limitnum minutes .
skipfeaturenum day .
carryovernum hours minimum .
clock setting limitnum second .
time setsone onoffdaycircuit .
temperature numf to numf .
transient immunityvaristor .
humiditynum to num relative .
daylight savings timeautomatic transfer .
numc numa num num change no .
num num.b timeofday clock global positioning system gps .
a system consisting of a gps receiver and base unit for mounting in traffic controller enclosure .
this system must have a contact closure or open controller output to reset clock on controller at a predetermined hour each day typically num am .
they will require daylight savings time dst adjustment and zone adjustment entries as well as time setting .
once programmed the base unit will send signals or messages to the traffic light host controller over the contact closure .
the base is to be equipped with a led to indicate the units status during operation .
num systems and communications a timebased coordinator unit .
num .
type .
internal to controller unit or as required to interface with controller unit not having internal timebased coordination capability .
if being placed in an existing traffic signal system make compatible with the existing timebased coordinators in that system .
num .
nema standards .
ts num operating voltage frequency and power interrupt .
ts num voltage .
ts num frequency range .
ts num temperature and humidity .
ts num transients power service .
ts num vibration .
ts num shock .
ts num electrical limits of inputoutput .
num .
provisions for timing plans .
storage capability minimumnine settable timing programs one dedicated freeoperation program and three control programs .
settable program positions minimumone offset one cycle one split onoff output switchone per control program .
program assertionturnoff previous settable or free programs at the assertion of any of the settable or free operational programs .
num .
cycle .
numberthree minimum .
durationsettable range of at least num seconds to num seconds .
incrementsnum second maximum .
num .
clockcalendar .
resolutionnum second .
selectable programsday of weekhourminutesecond number of changesnum minimum per day .
daylight savings timeautomatic transfer .
accuracynum num ppm of clock calendar time with respect to real time .
num .
display .
a type providing the functionality of programming and obtaining the following day of week hour numa numc num num change no .
num minute second program in effect and setting stored or entered for storage .
num .
uninterruptible power supply ups .
sections numi and numm num .
inputs .
power requirementsnum v to num v ac num hz to num hz .
minimum number and typeeight greensignal inputs at num v dc negative true .
keyboardfront panel mount .
transfer functioninput program from other unit .
num .
outputs .
section numb num .
program transition .
pretimed controller units dwell in coordinated phase walk .
dwell not to exceed num of operating cycle .
dwell in calledcycle when cycle transfer occurs due to program change .
program transfer not to exceed four cycles .
b master controller assembly .
in accordance with section num and as follows num .
master controller unit solidstate pretimed .
capable of functioning as an intersection controller or as a master controller to supervise other intersection controllers and as follows output circuitsground true .
time switchfor functions .
manual pushbuttonfor sync function with master removed .
num .
conflict monitor .
section numc num .
flasher .
section numc num .
relays .
section numc num .
load switches .
section numc num .
cable terminalharness assembly .
section numc num .
electrical load center .
section numc num .
police panel .
section numc num .
nema cabinet .
section numc c coordination unit .
in accordance with section num and as follows num .
solidstate .
capable of coordination up to an eightphase dualring solidstate actuated controller unit and as follows num.a cycle .
lengthas indicated in numsecond increments .
forceoffensure the forceoff command is directed to correct phase .
cycle and split transferat num point in local cycle .
offset transferwith pedestrian control transfer in greenwalk interval .
with nonpedestrian numc numf num num change no .
num control transfer in green .
transfer to occur in a maximum of three cycles with no more than num change in any one cycle .
num.b interface .
nema ts num section num .
num.c system interconnection .
typestandard sevenwire positive subsystem .
function requirementsnum v to num v ac num hz to num hz with isolated ground .
num.d environment .
nema ts num section num d closed loop signal system .
num .
master controller .
as directed by the representative provide a master controller or fieldhardened cpu compatible with the closed loop signal system software .
num .
computer system .
provide a computer system to host a central system software and user interface .
num .
software .
furnish two versions of closed loop system software along with appropriate manuals .
provide software capable of operating in latest windows operating system or updated version .
e radio communications system .
radio communication system consisting of a transmitreceive radio unit coaxial cable coaxial cable surge protection antennas mounting hardware and antenna grounding kit .
use unlicensed frequency bands for radio units unless a licensed band has been preapproved by the representative .
provide all necessary antennas cables jumpers and lightning protection but not be limited to the following requirements provide omni antennas having a minimum gain of numdbi and directional antennas numdbi unless stated higher in the approved drawings .
provide antennas having num ohms impedance and voltage standing wave ratio vswr less than num .
provide coaxial cable having num ohms impedance .
provide a minimum num inch coaxial cable with n type connections .
smaller num inch flexible jumpers are allowed inside enclosures .
provide external antenna connectors that are weatherproofed with an approved rubber mastic tape .
provide serial radio units with a minimum data throughput of numkbps and for ethernet radio units nummbps .
use radio units having builtin setup and diagnostic capabilities .
have a minimum receiver sensitivity numdbm for serial radio units and numdbm for ethernet .
output impedance of num ohms on all radio units .
provide radio units meeting the following approval agencies fcc iec ansi and ul .
f cable .
num .
control cable .
furnish control cable for field devices not requiring shielded conductors conforming to imsa specification num or num for cable in conduit and imsa specification num for aerial cable .
provide stranded conductors num awg minimum .
num .
communication cable .
furnish communication cable for signal controller telecommunications conforming to imsa specification num or num for cable in conduit and imsa specification num for aerial cable .
provide as indicated stranded conductors num awg minimum .
num .
instrument cable .
provide imsa certified shielded cable for filed devices requiring immunity to frequency interference with three solid num awg conductors and one drain wire and as follows insulationmoisture and heat resistant numf polyethylene conforming to astm dnum type i class b category num grade enum num v rating applied concentrically about the conductor .
color codenum yellow num blue num orange .
shieldmylaraluminum tape shielding applied with a nominal overlap of num with the aluminum side in contact with the drain wire .
numf numc num num change no .
num jacketpolyvinyl chloride having an average wall thickness of num inch conforming to imsa specification numl and rated at numf .
electricaldc resistance of each conductor less characteristics than num ohms per num feet .
capacitance between each insulated wire and all other less than num pf per foot .
finished outside diameterless than num inch .
g data level protocols for serial or ethernet communications .
in accordance with tiaeianumb ansitiaeianum ansitiaeianum or compatible standardsbased protocol for but not limited to the following data capacity bandwidth .
required turnaround time .
allowable latency .
allowable bit error rates .
datalevel protocols .
testing including requirements and test plans .
num electrical distribution a conduit .
num .
rigid steel conduit .
section num except may be used for direct burial and ulnum listing for rigid metallic conduit galvanized inside and outside .
num .
rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit .
section num with ulnum listing for rigid nonmetallic conduit and ulnum listing for fittings .
num .
cable pulling lubricant .
section numc num .
conduit sealant .
an acceptable duct seal .
b wire and cable .
num .
signal cable .
num awg minimum stranded conductors conforming to imsa specification num or num .
num .
service wire .
num awg minimum wire type use conforming to ulnum listing and astm bnum and bnum for soft annealed copper .
num .
ground wire .
bare or insulated green copper wire num awg conforming to astm bnum .
num .
cable tags .
an acceptable type .
num .
cable ties .
an acceptable type .
num .
highdensity polyethylene hdpe conduit .
nema tcnum standards and schedule num .
num .
polyester pull tape .
rated num pounds num .
cable supports .
for span wire installations utilize insulated cable rings and saddles or other acceptable type support to secure cable to span wire .
c junction box .
furnish the type indicated and as follows precast junction boxsection num steel or castiron junction boxsteel or cast iron conforming to the requirements for castiron junction numc numh num num change no .
num box section num .
reinforced plastic mortar junction boxprovide heavy duty junction box with nonskid surface and a watertight connection to the housing .
provide a minimum design load num pounds with a test load of num pounds .
place a logo traffic signal on cover .
d electrical service .
num .
service pole .
section numa num .
service head .
ullisted weatherproof service head for applicable conduit type .
num .
meter socket .
as specified by the utility company .
num .
service disconnect .
num.a enclosure .
galvanized steel aluminum or stainless steel with a hinged door having provisions for a padlock and no external handles or switches conforming to the nema standard for type numr type nums or type num .
provide a brass padlock for outdoor use with two keys .
all padlocks shall be keyed alike .
num.b main disconnect .
provide a means for disconnecting the service conforming to nec .
num.c fuses .
ullisted type knum num a minimum .
num.d fuse block .
ullisted for knum fuses .
num.e power line surge protector .
ullisted rated for a maximum permissible line to ground voltage of num v rms .
clamping voltage not to exceed num volts .
provide model with led to indicate proper functioning of protection for each line .
e wire connectors .
num .
wire nuts .
insulated ullisted with spring insert for applicable wire size and rating of wire insulation .
num .
waterproof resin sealer .
insulated ullisted for wire nuts .
num .
terminal blocks .
ullisted with twelvesets minimum to two terminals each screwtype rated at a minimum of num v and suitable for the applicable wire size .
connect each set of terminals by means of a removable link .
separate each set of terminals by a molded barrier .
provide a marker strip for terminal identification .
num .
insulated locking spade terminals .
an acceptable type .
f grounding bushings and lugs .
num .
bushings .
ullisted for applicable conduit type and size .
num .
lugs .
ullisted for applicable materials .
g ground rods with clamp .
section numj h generator adaptor kit .
facilitate connection to an external power source a num v ac generator .
num .
disconnect enclosure .
section numdnum.a num .
transfer switch .
capable of disconnecting the permanent power source and connecting to the emergency power source .
num .
connector cable assembly .
sufficient length to allow the attachment of an external power source in numh numa num num change no .
num accordance with the latest nec .
num .
surge protection .
protect the signal controller assembly with line to neutral clamping voltage of no more than num v at num a. i uninterrupted power supply ups .
furnish a battery backup system bbs and fulltime double conversion power conditioner ups compatible with the controller assembly and the following provide a ullisted bbs for use with traffic signal equipment .
connect to the bbs a standard readily available rsnum cable .
provide batteries that are deepcycle scaled prismatic leadcalcium based agmvrla absorbed glass matvalve regulated lead acid .
provide a system with minimum numhour backup operation .
provide all warranty information to the representative at final acceptance .
j service receptacle .
provide one duplex ground fault circuit interrupter gfci receptacle that is only used by service technicians working on the signal controller system .
no other internal equipment is to be connected to the service receptacle .
minimum rating numa .
num signal heads a vehicular signal heads .
num .
housings .
bulletin num manufacturer .
plasticopaque polycarbonate resin molding conforming to astm dnum .
federal yellow in color except the inside of the visor will have a nonreflective black finish .
aluminumfinish exterior of aluminum housings as follows clean and coat surfaces of the signal housing door and visor with an infrared ovenbaked ironoxide backing primer conforming to federal specification ttpnumb and federal specification sspc paint num .
coat finished surfaces except the inside of the visor with infrared ovenbaked highway yellow exterior enamel conforming to according to federal standard no .
numb .
finish the inside of the visor with phathalic anhydride black synthetic baking enamel with zero gloss reflectance and conforming to the performance requirements of milenum enamel heating resisting glyceryl phathalate type num instrument black .
requests for black traffic signal housing require the bureau of maintenance and operations approval .
num .
reflectors .
polycarbonate or aluminum .
when the reflector is attached to the door provide a means by which opening the door disables the indication .
num .
backplates .
furnish backplates that conform to the following onepiece aluminum with a minimum thickness of numinch thickness does not include retroreflective border .
powder coated dull black federal standard num on both the front and back sides .
top bottom and sides that measure from num to num inches in width .
rounded outside corners .
include louvers with no louvers closer than num inch from the inner or num inches from the outer edge .
orient the louver so it is vertical on sides and horizontal on top and bottom .
provide a minimum of four corner mounting attachment points per section head and must not interfere numa numc num num change no .
num with the operation of the section head doors .
include passivated stainless steel type num or num screws washers and other installation hardware required to mount securely .
permanently mark the manufacturer name partmodel number and date of manufacture on the back side .
universal backplates that fit all applicable penndot approved products .
a minimum numinch fluorescent yellow type ix retroreflective border placed flush with the outer edge of the backplate and placed no closer than num inch from all louvers .
no sheeting is allowed over any louvered area .
num .
miscellaneous .
furnish cutaway visors unless otherwise indicated .
furnish louvers and backplates as indicated with a nonreflective black finish .
num .
warranty .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
b led vehicular signal head modules .
bulletin num manufacturer and conforming to the following ite standard for vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode led circular signal supplement ite vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode led vehicle arrow traffic signal supplement mutcd also conforming to the regulations and as follows num .
housings .
section numanum num .
miscellaneous .
section numanum num .
warranties .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
c optically programmed signal heads .
bulletin num manufacturer and conforming to the following num .
optical .
incorporate an optical system using led modules for the green yellow and red signal indications that limits the visibility zone internally and optically without the use of hoods or louvers .
the projected signal may be visible or selectively veiled anywhere within num degrees of the optical axis .
num .
sections .
provide an integral means for the incremental tilting of each section from num degrees to num degrees above and below the horizontal .
unless directed otherwise assemble verticallymounted signals with a numdegree tilt below the horizontal .
provide couplers serrated locking rings flanges gaskets and other hardware necessary to mate optically programmed signal sections together or to mate with nonoptically programmed sections all in a secure and weathertight manner .
shopjoin the sections .
use corrosion resistant internal hardware .
num .
painting .
section numanum num .
electrical .
use copper brass nickelplated brass or phosphorbronze electricalconducting hardware .
furnish lamps that provide luminous intensity of num beam candlepower conforming to the traffic signal manufacturers specification rated at a minimum of num hours .
color code the internal wiring .
provide a breaker that disables the indication when the lamp door is opened .
provide an integral means within each signal face for regulating its luminous intensity between limits in proportion to the individual background illumination but not less than num of uncontrolled intensity at num footcandles and reduce to num num of maximum intensity at less than num footcandle proportionally and instantaneously .
num .
miscellaneous .
furnish cutaway visors .
furnish optical programming material and instructions .
within each section affix a permanent conspicuous warning label advising of possible eye damage and fire hazard from the sun .
numc numf num num change no .
num num .
warranty .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
d pedestrian signal housing .
bulletin num manufacturer and conforming to the ite standard for adjustable face pedestrian signal heads the regulations and as follows num .
housings .
section numanum num .
reflectors .
section numanum num .
miscellaneous .
furnish cutaway visors unless otherwise indicated .
e pedestrian signal headsled pedestrian signal modules .
bulletin num manufacturer and conforming to ite standard for pedestrian traffic control signal indications part num light emitting diode led pedestrian traffic signal modules and the mutcd .
provide verification from independent laboratory test results .
also conforming to the regulations and as follows num .
housing .
section numanum num .
electrical .
section numcnum num .
luminous intensity .
meet or exceed the illumination values for the maintained minimum luminous intensity listed in the ite standard for pedestrian traffic control signal indications part num light emitting diode led pedestrian traffic signal modules section num photometric requirement subsection num .
num .
warranties .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
f pedestrian signal headsled countdown pedestrian signal modules .
bulletin num manufacturer and conforming to the ite standard for pedestrian traffic control signal indications part num light emitting diode led pedestrian traffic signal modules and the mutcd .
provide verification from independent laboratory test results .
also conforming to the regulations and as follows num .
housings .
section numanum num .
electrical .
section numcnum num .
design and operation .
furnish double overlay or sidebyside message capable of displaying the symbols of a filled upraised hand symbolizing dont walk and a filled walking person symbolizing walk and a countdown timer consisting of num numsegment digits constructed of leds .
provide numeric display either integral to or separate from the led countdown pedestrian signal .
if the numeric display is a separate component the message display unit and the led countdown numeric display unit must be approved as one system .
provide upraised hand and walking person symbols as solid figures .
num .
countdown timer module .
discontinue and make the led countdown pedestrian signal display go dark immediately if the pedestrian change interval is interrupted or shortened as part of a transition into a preemption sequence .
equip the led countdown pedestrian signal with a screen visor or other device to eliminate all phantom conditions .
furnish visors if the led countdown pedestrian signal display will be visible to motorists stopped at a red traffic signal indication facing perpendicular to the display of the led countdown pedestrian signal .
equip the led countdown pedestrian signal timer to monitor the pedestrian change intervals and automatically adjust for any changes made at the controller .
provide a led countdown timer module with an internal conflict monitor to prevent any possible conflicts between the upraised hand walking person signal indications and the time numf numa num num change no .
num display .
when the steady upraised hand is illuminated make it impossible to display any number other than zero num .
num .
warranties .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
g led laneuse traffic control signal heads .
bulletin num manufacturer and conforming to the following ite standard for laneuse traffic control signal heads mutcd ite standard for vehicle traffic control signal heads part num light emitting diode led vehicle traffic signal modules sections num num and num excluding sections num and num maintained minimum luminous intensity .
num .
housings .
section numanum num .
warranties .
provide all warranty documentation to the representative at final acceptance .
h mounting assembly and hardware .
furnish signal mounting assemblies and hardware of a type and design that adequately supports the loading indicated and as indicated on the standard drawings .
num detectors a general .
num .
sealant .
furnish a nonshrinking flexible sealant for the encapsulation of loop or magnetometer sensor and as follows number of componentsone or two application temperaturenumf to numf unless otherwise specified by manufacturer tack freenum hour maximum maximum curing timenum hours permanent flexibilityto numf chemically resistant to deicing chemicals gasoline calcium chloride num motor oils hydraulic brake fluid num .
detector lead in cable .
num awg minimum conforming to imsa specification num .
num .
card rack assembly .
num.a power supply .
furnish a switchingtype power supply and as follows input voltagenum v to num v ac numhz to num hz output voltagenum v num v dc minimum output voltagenum v dc efficiencynum minimum full load currentnum a minimum line regulationnum over entire input range load regulationnum from no load to full load ripple noisenum mv pp typical num mv pp at full load environmentalnema ts num part num numa numb num num change no .
num provide a front panel incorporating a pilot lamp test points for monitoring output voltage and a circuit breaker or fuse .
ground all exterior metal surfaces to the chassis safety ground .
num.b card rack .
a standard eia numinch rack for mounting the detector amplifier units as follows aluminum front rails drilled and tapped num with eia spacing .
aluminum chassis supporting angles num inches deep and num inches wide for mounting on the sides of the controller cabinet .
aluminum connector panels with connector mounting holes tapped num on numinch centers then mounted to form a cage num inches wide num num inches high and num num inches deep .
nonmetallic guides and cinchjones no .
numanumm rear connectors mounted at numinch spacings .
num .
reenterable splice kit .
reusable molded body internal and external hardware clear polyurethane compound .
provide an appropriate size to accommodate inline wye x butt and deadend splicing of cables rated at num v or less with outside diameters from num inch through num inches .
supply with the following components twopart transparent mold body of pvc construction with tongueandgroove seams and builtin spacer web .
two flexible end caps each with doublestepped cable entry ports to accommodate the many possible splicing configurations .
snapin caps to cap off the fill ports after compound pouring .
strain bars with insulator sleeves .
four shield connectors to provide shield continuity with strain bars for shielded cables .
stainless steel base clamps to secure splice body end caps and strain bars .
reenterable electrical insulation and sealing compound capable of continuous operation at numf with an emergency overload temperature rating at numf a viscosity of approximately num centipoise at numf a gel time of approximately num minutes at numf and zero growth fungus resistance according to astm gnum .
an instruction booklet showing proper installation and reentry techniques .
b vehicular detection .
num .
loop detector .
num.a loop sensor .
num awg minimum conforming to imsa specification num .
num.b loop amplifier shelfmounted .
selftuning loop amplifier shelfmounted enclosed in a shockproof housing with relay output and one or two channels as indicated conforming to nema ts num section num .
num.c loop amplifier with timers shelfmounted .
selftuning loop amplifier shelfmounted enclosed in a shockproof housing with relay output and one or two channels as indicated conforming to nema ts num section num .
num.d loop amplifier rackmounted .
selftuning loop amplifier mounted on an edgeconnected printed circuit board with an electrically isolated solidstate output and two or four channels as indicated conforming to nema ts num section num .
num.e loop amplifier with timers rackmounted .
selftuning loop amplifier mounted on an edgeconnected printed circuit board with an electrically isolated solidstate output and two or four channels as indicated conforming to nema ts num section num .
num .
video detection system .
provide model approved by the representative that is capable of being ip addressable .
as indicated on the approved plans and as follows provide catalog cuts to the representative for approval before ordering the system .
provide all equipment connections software mounting system etc .
to provide the video vehicular detection for all locations identified on the approved plans .
numb numb num num change no .
num provide a video detection system that meets the latest nema tsnum standards .
provide mounting system with all required camera mounting hardware clamps field wiring and all remaining hardware necessary to accomplish installations and operation of the video detection device .
as necessary provide multiple units per approach if multiple zones are required and a single unit can not provide adequate coverage .
include four channel cards unless otherwise directed along with expansion cards .
have adequate memory to allow for future software and firmware updates .
remove or disable all video recording capabilities .
have all units ethernet port and ip addressable .
include all incidental cables and power supplies .
provide sunshield for each camera .
replace or repair video detection system at no additional expense to the local municipality or the department if the system fails to function as intended due to faulty work or material defects .
adjust and realign detection zone settings and provide and install software updates for num year after acceptance by the department .
num.a video camera lens .
continuous focus zoom minimum numx zoom num.b housing and sunshield .
sealed waterproof dusttight nemanum housing .
num.c environmental .
capable of operating during all hours and under all weather conditions .
temperature num f to num f relative humidity num to num num.d detection zones .
minimum of four separate detection zones per camera capable of determining which direction of travel presence calling pulse calling delay extension sensitivity settings and channel output .
num.e cables and mounting hardware .
as per manufacturers recommendations .
num .
radar detector .
provide bulletin num approved equipment with mounting assembly to detect the presence or passage of vehicles in accordance with sections num and num .
as indicated on the approved plans and as follows provide mounting system with all required radar sensor mounting hardware clamps field wiring and all remaining hardware necessary to accomplish installation and operation of the radar device .
detector unit must be ethernet port and ip addressable compatible .
num.a detection zones .
capable of determining which direction of travel presence calling pulse calling delay extension sensitivity settings and channel output .
minimum detection pattern oval num feet by num feet typical at num feet .
hold time num to num seconds adjustable .
detection of stationary vehicles within the detection zones depicted on the approved plans shall remain valid until the vehicle resumes movement .
vehicle presence detection accuracy of num minimum .
travel speed detection accuracy of num minimum .
maximum permissible error of num in the detection of the direction and magnitude of radial speed numb numb num num change no .
num and num in the case of transverse speed .
num.b environmental .
capable of operating during all hours and under all weather conditions .
operate without degradation in performance under temperature range of numf to numf and relative humidity num to num noncondensing without auxiliary heating or cooling .
num.c housing .
sealed waterproof dusttight nemanum housing .
num.d cables and mounting hardware .
as per manufacturers recommendations .
num.e .
communication .
radar vehicle detector sensor must include a minimum of one serial or ethernet communications interface .
all wireless communication must be secure .
wireless devices must be fcc certified and fcc identification number must be displayed on an external label .
all detectors must operate within their fcc frequency allocation .
num.f electrical .
operating frequency num ghz num megahertz or another fcc approved spectral band .
must comply with limits of a class a digital device pursuant to part num of the fcc rules or the appropriate spectrum management authority and must not interfere with any adjacent equipment .
power num num vad numw .
radiated energy must not exceed num milliwatts .
relay contacts form c rated at num amps .
num .
radar detection system .
provide bulletin num approved equipment with mounting assembly to detect the presence of passage of vehicles in accordance with sections num and num .
as indicated on the approved plans and as follows provide catalog cuts to the representative for approval before ordering the system .
provide all equipment connections software mounting system ect .
to provide the radar vehicle detection for all locations identified on the approved plans .
provide a radar vehicle detection system that meets the latest nema tsnum standards .
provide mounting system with all required radar sensor mounting hardware clamps field wiring and all remaining hardware necessary to accomplish installation and operation of the radar device .
as necessary provide multiple units per approach if multiple zones are required and a single unit can not provide adequate coverage .
have all units ethernet port and ip addressable compatible .
include all incidental cables and power supplies .
adjust and realign detection zone settings and provide and install software updates for num year after acceptance by the department .
num.a detection zones .
section numbnum.a num.b environmental .
section numbnum.b num.c housing .
section numbnum.c num.d cables and mounting hardware .
section numbnum.d numb numb num num change no .
num num.e configuration and management .
provide software that allows local and remote configuration and monitoring .
provide a system that is easily configurable and expandable to meet traffic management applications for various intersection control strategies .
display detection zones and detection activations in graphical format .
enable the operator to edit previously defined configuration parameters including size placement and sensitivity of detection zones .
retain programming within an internal nonvolatile memory .
all communication addresses must be user programmable .
system software offers an open api and software development kit available to the department and no cost for integration with third party software and systems .
num.f communication .
radar vehicle detector sensor must include a minimum of on serial or ethernet communications interface .
seral interface and connector must conform to tia num standards .
serial ports must support data rates up to num bps .
radar detector system must transmit data in serial rsnum or rsnum format .
furnish terminal server to convert signals to ethernet format where required .
all wireless communication must be secure .
wireless devices must be fcc certified and fcc identification number is displayed on an external label .
all detection systems must operate within their fcc frequency allocation .
all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair network cables and connectors must comply with tianum .
num.g electrical .
section numbnum.f and as follows if any system device requires operation voltages other than num vac supply a voltage converter .
num .
magnetometer detector .
num.a magnetometer sensor .
as indicated and as follows physical sizecylindrical housing nonferrous moistureproof suitable for direct burial in roadway pavement with no damage due to subsurface stresses and with a leadin cable of proper length for hookup .
operationalno moving parts and compatible with the magnetometer detector amplifiers furnished .
num.b magnetometer amplifier shelfmounted .
enclosed in a shockproof housing and as follows operationsolidstate design with two independent detection channels in each unit designed so the sensing element of one channel has no effect on the other .
bimodalpulse modeprovides an output closure of num ms num ms duration for each vehicle entering the detection area .
bimodalpresence modecontinually indicates the presence of a vehicle until the vehicle leaves the area of detection at which time the indication is to cease within num ms. sensing elementsone to six magnetometer sensors per channel capability at a distance of up to num feet between sensor and amplifier .
numb numb num num change no .
num indicators and switchesprovide on front panel an led indicator sensitive to vehicle detection fused or circuit breaker overcurrent protection mode switch calibration controls and switch or switch position per channel for disabling the output of a channel and placing a call on a channel .
outputoptically isolated darlingtonan optoisolated npn open collector capable of sinking num ma at num v dc .
connectormsnumanump numpin connector with the following pin assignments channel num channel num white d t black e n probe sets red p j green r s common b k output detect g m neutral a ac power high c chassis ground h power requirementsmaximum num va at num v to num v ac num hz to num hz without originating nor being susceptible to electrical transients in excess of the nema ts num section num .
environmentnema ts num section num .
num.c magnetometer amplifier rackmounted .
mounted on an edge connected printed circuit board for rackmounting and as follows physicalprovide a hand pull to facilitate insertion and removal from the rack .
operationsection numbnum.b modessection numbnum.b sensing elementssection numbnum.b indicators and switchessection numbnum.b excluding overcurrent protection .
outputsection numbnum.b connectorcinch jones number numanumm numpin edge connector with the following pin assignments pin function a dc ground b num v dc c reset d sensing element num input e sensing element num input f control unit output num collector h control unit output num emitter j sensing element num excitation k sensing element num excitation l equipment ground m reserved n reserved p sensing element num r sensing element num s control unit output num collector numb numb num num change no .
num t control unit output num emitter u sensing element num excitation v sensing element num excitation w na x na y na z na connectorslotted for keying between pins bc and pins mn .
power requirementsmaximum current num ma from num v to num v dc .
environmentalnema ts num section num .
num .
magnetic detector .
num.a magnetic sensor .
physicalcylindrical case nonferrous moistureproof suitable for burial within rigid nonmetallic conduit and with a leadin of sufficient length .
operationno moving parts and compatible with the magneticdetector amplifier furnished .
num.b magnetic amplifier shelfmounted .
shelfmounted enclosed in a shockproof housing and as follows operationsolidstate design with one channel in each unit .
sensing elementsone or more magnetic sensor capability at a distance of up to num feet between the sensor and amplifier .
indicators and switchesprovide on front panel indicator for detection of a vehicle fused or circuit breaker overcurrent protection calibration controls and a switch or switch position for disabling the output and placing a call .
outputsection numcnum connectorrelay outputmsnumanums solidstate isolatedmsnumanumw .
power requirementsmaximum power consumption of num w at num v ac and num hz .
environmentalnema ts l section num .
num.c magnetic amplifier rackmounted .
mounted on an edgeconnected printed circuit board for rackmounting and as follows physicalwith a handpull to facilitate insertion and removal from the rack .
the fourchannel magneticdetector amplifier in the front panel space of two twochannel magneticdetector amplifiers .
operationsolidstate design with two or four independent detection channels in each unit as indicated designed that the sensing element of one channel has no effect on the other .
sensing elementone or more magnetic sensors per channel capable of sensing at a distance of up to num feet between the sensor and amplifier .
indicators and switchessection numbnum.b excluding overcurrent protection .
outputsection numbnum.b connectorcinchjones number numanumm numpin edge connector with the following pin assignments pin function a dc ground b num v dc c not connected d detector num element e detector num element numb numc num num change no .
num f detector num output c h detector num output e j detector num element k detector num element l chassis ground m reserved n reserved r detector num element s detector num output c t detector num output e u detector num element v detector num element w detector num output c x detector num output e y detector num output c z detector num output e connectorslotted for keying ccollector eemitter power requirementsmaximum of num ma per channel from a num v dc power supply .
environmentalnema ts num section num .
num.d rigid nonmetallic conduit .
section num c pedestrian detectors .
provide bulletin num approved products .
num .
pedestrian pushbutton .
capable of completing a momentary circuit closure as indicated on the approved plans and as follows generalfurnish a tamper and weatherproof assembly with pushbutton contacts entirely insulated from the housing and buttons .
use a pushbutton with numinch diameter adacompliant stainless steel nonmoving pushbutton and a maximum force of num pounds .
furnish sign and mounting assembly as indicated .
conform to the regulations for the sign legend and section num for the fabrication .
use stainless steel hardware to mount the pushbutton assembly .
housingdiecast aluminum alloy housing with a curved back or a flat back as required to conform to the mounting surface .
paint the assembly highway yellow as specified in section numanum .
provide a rear cable entry .
electricalprovide a switch mechanism consisting of a direct pushtype button with a single momentary contact switch contacts rated at num a minimum num v ac for operation at num v dc .
latching ledprovide light emitting diode led light with luminous intensity greater than num mcd in ultra bright red color and a viewing angle of num degrees that activities only during nonwalk phases upon pedestrian actuation and stays on until the beginning of the walk phase .
num .
accessible pedestrian signals aps .
mutcd and the following as included on the approved plans the type of walk indication as specified tone or speech the significance of the extended button press function the requirement for audible and tactile feedback of the pushbutton activation location of pedestrian buttons pedestrian heads and speakers orientation of tactile arrow walk indication tone volume minimum maximum and amount over ambient locator tone volume minimum maximum and amount over ambient any requirement for the street name in braille or raised print latching led as specified in section numcnum numc numd num num change no .
num furnish aps and hardware that satisfy industry standards .
ensure that there are no sharp edges that could injure a pedestrian .
supply weatherproof hardware .
d preemption systems .
provide bulletin num approved model in accordance with sections num num and num approved plans and as follows num .
optical preemption .
include preemption devices mounting and controller hardware software connectors and cables as specified by manufacturer to provide a functional system .
provide optical emitters responsive at a minimum distance of num feet .
arrange for demonstration as directed .
num .
acoustic preemption .
provide a sirenactivated emergency vehicle preemption system .
include all necessary controller unit connectors panel wiring and miscellaneous hardware needed with the control cabinet .
provide field confirmation of detection at a minimum distance of num feet .
certify that no false detection can occur .
arrange for demonstration as directed .
num .
global positioning satellite gps based preemption .
provide gps units with a minimum num feet radio range at intersections indicated on approved plans to gain preemption or priority .
provide all hardware and software necessary to provide a functional gpsbased preemption system with secure radio communications .
arrange for demonstration as directed .
num numa num num change no .
num section numfabricated structural steel and aluminum num general requirements a prequalification .
structural steel and aluminum fabricators performing work for the department are required to prequalify according to the american institute of steel constructions aisc quality certification program and obtain approval from the chief structural materials engineer .
plants and shops must be registered and certified under the aisc program with sbr certified bridge fabricatorsimple ibr certified bridge fabricatorintermediate abr certified bridge fabricatoradvanced or bcmp standard for bridge and highway metal component manufacturers certification as applicable and must submit a valid certificate to the chief structural materials engineer at num lab lane harrisburg pa num .
annual submission of an endorsed copy of the certificate is required for continued prequalification .
fabricators applying for initial bulletin num approval or approved fabricators wishing to upgrade certification must obtain approval to fabricate structures which have publication num section specific bulletin num fabricator listings or to fabricate high performance steel hps members and are required to furnish acceptable references for which the fabricator has successfully completed fabrication of similar members .
if unable to furnish acceptable references the fabricator must satisfactorily produce a sample member to obtain department approval and listing in bulletin num .
only fabricators having abr certification including the fracture critical endorsement may fabricate the following main members for arches continuous span trusses cablestayed bridges and suspension bridges .
only fabricators having either ibr or abr certification including the fracture critical endorsement may fabricate the following fracture critical members and attachments except as specified above .
only fabricators having either ibr or abr certification may fabricate the following main bridge members except for certain rolled beams welded floor beams cross frames and diaphragms for curved bridges bracing portals and stiffening members for arches trusses cablestayed and suspension bridges rolled beams with butt welds or that are heatcurved heatcambered or cold cambered .
fabricators having either sbr ibr or abr certification may fabricate the following rolled beams with bearing stiffeners and diaphragm connection or cover platesnum cross frames and diaphragms for straight bridges shopfabricated material for reinforcing existing bridgesnum lateral bracing except for arches trusses cablestayed and suspension bridgesnum note num fabricate in an ibr or abr certified plant if welding is required .
note num sbr certified plants must qualify for initial approval from the chief structural materials engineer to perform heat cambering or cold cambering on rolled beams .
fabricators having sbr ibr abr or bcmp certification may fabricate the following expansion dams bridge drainage material welded bearings inspection walks steel grid flooring overhead sign structures numa nume num num change no .
num welded sound barrier supports bridge railing pedestrian railing structure mounted guide rail welded protective barrier traffic lighting or camera poles aisc certification is not required for the following castings forgings and machined parts not welded nonmetallic bearing protective fence material not requiring shop fabrication or shop welding such as plates and shapes for strengthening existing bridges and manufactured items accepted by certification prequalification of machine shops who provide services and materials to approved fabricators for listing in bulletin num is required .
approved fabricators are not required to prequalify as machine shops .
approved machine shops may perform one or more of the following operationsnum cutting or shearing materials to finish size grinding drilling or punching cold bending machining flattening note num individual shop operations may be limited .
refer to bulletin num for limitations .
machine shops can not produce fracture critical members without project specific approval from the chief structural materials engineer except if the material is being produced for and shipped to a fabricator having aisc ibr or abr certification including fracture critical endorsement .
b standard reference .
section num c shop drawings .
section numand as follows shop drawings stamped accepted as noted allow fabrication only .
the fabricator will make the noted changes to the drawings and resubmit for final approval before shipping .
accepted drawing are required for shipment to project .
bridge members and other structures are generally designed in lengths depths and widths that can be transported from the fabrication source to the project .
field splices if required must be indicated and detailed on the shop drawings .
if required by the district executive submit design computations prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state according to the design manual part num structures .
the district executive will not review requests for elimination of field splices unless a notice is included from the bomo that a hauling permit can be obtained to ship beams exceeding the dimensions shown on the structure drawings .
d erection drawings .
section numc num.d e inspection .
num .
general .
the bdtds structural materials section will oversee and manage inplant qa inspection .
the fabricator is responsible for notifying their assigned consultant inspection firm a minimum of num hours excluding weekends and holidays before the beginning of work so that arrangements can be made for inspection .
the representative may waive shop inspection and make a complete inspection at a later stage in the construction sequence .
furnish certified mill reports in duplicate covering the structural steel used .
num .
facilities for inspection .
furnish necessary facilities for the inspection of material and workmanship .
furnish an inspectors field office type c as specified in section numa except provide a fourdrawer fireresistant nume numa num num change no .
num dlabel metal file cabinet in place of a twodrawer fireresistant dlabel metal file cabinet .
allow inspectors employed by the department unrestricted access to work in process and stored material during plant working hours .
num .
plant inspectors authority .
plant inspectors have the authority to reject any material or work not conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
in case of dispute the contractor may appeal to the representative whose decision will be final .
num .
rejections .
material workmanship or finished members accepted by the inspector at the shop may be rejected later if they do not conform to the specifications .
repair or replace rejected material or members .
num .
testing .
if directed furnish test specimens of material as well as equipment tools and labor necessary to prepare the specimens and to make the tests .
num .
mill orders and shipping statements .
furnish copies of mill orders and shipping statements as directed .
show the weights of the individual members on the statement .
ensure that the fabricator submits a copy of the shipping invoice to the departments shop inspector to be stamped for verification of inspection and acceptance of steel items before shipment .
forward the stamped copy of the shipping invoice with the shipment for the project file .
the shop inspector will review and accept mill certifications and return them to the fabricator .
f storage of materials .
section num and as follows store materials on platforms skids or other supports .
place and support materials to avoid overstress deformation or damage .
exercise special care for curved members .
keep materials free from dirt grease and other foreign materials .
ensure proper drainage and protect materials from corrosion .
g qc .
num .
general .
establish and maintain a level of qc based on uniform fabrication practices .
do not initiate fabrication without an approved qc plan .
num .
qc plan .
shops seeking prequalification must submit a qc plan to the chief structural materials engineer for review and approval .
develop the plan in accordance with the criteria established in aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration document snum .
num steel bridge fabrication qcqa guide specification refer to publication num for an outline of the qc plan criteria .
facilities performing welding that require nondestructive testing must submit their written practice according to the current version of asnt snttcnuma .
prequalified shops must submit an updated qc plan to the chief structural materials engineer if there are any changes in materials processes or personnel .
num .
qc personnel .
assign sufficient qualified personnel with structural steel andor aluminum fabrication experience to be responsible for qc during the fabrication process storage and shipment .
do not proceed with fabrication until qualified qc personnel are present and approved by the department .
provide an aws certified welding inspector cwi on site as the fabricators designated qc representative to oversee all processes of fabrication that involve welding application of heat or straightening of material .
num material a structural steel and aluminum .
num .
general .
aashto m num astm anum num .
carbon steel .
aashto m num astm anum grade num astm anum grade nums astm anum structural steel shapes .
num.a coldformed welded and seamless carbon steel structural tubing in rounds and shapes .
astm anum grade a b or c. or astm anum grade a .
num.b hotformed welded and seamless carbon steel structural tubing .
astm anum numa numa num num change no .
num num .
highstrength lowalloy structural steel for welding .
num.a highstrength lowalloy quenched and tempered high performance steel hps structural steel plate .
aashto m num astm anum grade hps numw and grade hps numw including requirements for non fracture critical material toughness testing or fracture critical material toughness testing for zone num as applicable .
identify fracture critical material fcm on the shop drawings .
grade substitution for any hps material indicated on the plans is not allowed .
provide mill test reports that indicate either quenched and tempered qt or thermomechanical control process tmcp and also indicate on the asbuilt shop drawings .
mill orders must stipulate that no welded repairs are to be performed by the producing mill .
limit plate length to num feet maximum mill delivery length for qt plate .
num.b highstrength lowalloy tmcp structural steel plate .
aashto m num astm anum grade hps numw up to num inches thick and meeting the requirements of section numanum.a .
num.c highstrength lowalloy structural steel .
aashto m num astm anum grades num numw or hps numw astm anum grade num of a quality suitable for welding .
num.d highstrength lowalloy columbiumvanadium steel of structural quality .
aashto m num astm num grade num astm anum grade num .
num.e highstrength lowalloy structural steel with num pounds per square inch minimum yield point to num inches thick .
aashto m num astm anum grade numw astm anum grades a b and c onlynum .
note num plate thicknesses greater than num inches are required to conform to the physical properties listed in the specification for plate thicknesses num inches and under .
num.f highyield strength quenched and tempered alloy steel plate .
num.f.num highyield strength quenched and tempered alloy steel plate suitable for welding .
aashto m num astm anum grade numw .
num.f.num highstrength alloy steel plates quenched and tempered for pressure vessels .
astm anum .
conforming to the supplementary notch toughness requirements of aashto m num .
num.f.num quenched and tempered alloy steel structural shapes and seamless mechanical tubing .
products conforming to all of the mechanical and chemical requirements of astm anum grade hps numw steel except with a maximum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch for structural shapes and num pounds per square inch for seamless mechanical tubing are to be considered as astm anum .
num.g .
stainless steel .
as indicated on the plans .
use only prequalified base metals listed in aashtoaws dnummdnum num .
num .
aluminum .
as indicated on the plans .
use only prequalified based metals listed in aashtoaws dnummdnum num .
num .
supplemental requirements for notch toughness .
unless otherwise indicated provide structural steel conforming to the supplementary notch toughness requirements for the longitudinal charpy vnotch tests specified for zone num of the applicable aashto materials specifications .
unless otherwise indicated the supplemental requirements are mandatory for the following loadcarrying member components subject to tensile stress rolled shapes webs tension flanges of builtup beams numa numc num num change no .
num beam splice material truss members and gusset plates attached to such truss members .
diaphragms xframes bracing and connecting plates for curved girder bridges or straight girder bridges if the skew is less than num degrees .
the requirements are not mandatory for stiffeners drainage material expansion dams bearings other secondary material diaphragms xframes bracing and connecting plates for straight girder bridges if the skew is num degrees or greater or unless otherwise indicated as requiring notch toughness .
if directed provide samples for charpy vnotch testing from steel used in fabricating fracturecritical plates and shapes .
submit the samples to the chief structural materials engineer bdtd structural materials section num lab lane harrisburg pa num .
obtain the samples from plates delivered to the fabricator .
b bedding material for bridge shoes .
section numh c bolts nuts and washers .
from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num and as follows unless otherwise indicated or specified num .
bolts for general application .
astm anum grades a or b num.a nuts .
use astm anum nuts of the grade and style corresponding to the grade and diameter of astm anum bolts of all surface finishes as follows unless otherwise specified bolts inch nuts grade a num to num num grade a hex grade a over num num to num grade a heavy hex grade b num to num grade a heavy hex nuts of other grades and styles having specified proof load stresses astm anum table num greater than the grade and style of nuts shown above are also suitable .
overtap and lubricate galvanized nuts in conformance with astm anum .
num.b washers .
astm num type num or ansi bnumm num .
anchor bolts .
aashto m num astm anum grade num anchor bolts headed or nonheaded either straight or bent and cap screws hot dip or mechanically galvanize as specified in section nums .
num.a nuts .
astm anum of suitable style as specified in the contract documents .
hot dip or mechanically galvanize to match anchor bolt coating process as specified in section nums .
galvanized nuts must be grade dh .
overtap and lubricate galvanized nuts in conformance with astm anum .
overtap only to the minimum extent necessary to permit assembly on the bolt threads .
numc numd num num change no .
num num.b washers .
astm fnum type num hot dip or mechanically galvanize as specified in section nums .
num .
anchor bolts .
astm fnum grades num num num anchor bolts headed or nonheaded either straight or bent and cap screws fully threaded shank hot dip or mechanically galvanize as specified in section nums .
num.a nuts .
astm anum of suitable style as recommended in astm fnum section num unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
hot dip or mechanically galvanize to match anchor bolt coating process as specified in section nums .
galvanized nuts must be grade dh .
overtap and lubricate galvanized nuts in conformance with astm anum .
overtap only to the minimum extent necessary to permit assembly on the bolt threads .
num.b washers .
astm fnum type num hot dip or mechanically galvanize as specified in section nums .
d highstrength bolt assemblies .
provide highstrength heat treated steel structural bolts suitable nuts hardened washers and if specified direct tension indicator devices dtis for structural joints from manufacturers listed in bulletin num and unless otherwise indicated or specified conforming to the following requirements for painted galvanized or metalized steel structures including coated portions of weathering steel structures use type num bolts nuts and washers mechanically galvanized except astm anum assemblies in accordance with astm bnum as specified in section nums .
astm anum bolts if approved for use must not be galvanized under any circumstances .
galvanized bolts nuts and washers of an assembly must each be galvanized by the same process .
for uncoated bare aashto m num astm anum grades numw hps numw hps numw or hps numw weathering steel structures use plain uncoated type num bolts nuts and washers conforming to atmospheric corrosion resistance requirements of aashto m num astm anum grade numw .
perform testing of bolts nuts and washers including initial rotational capacity testing of assemblies as specified in section numdnum below .
num .
identifying marks .
permanently mark all bolts nuts and washers by the respective manufacturers in conformance with the product marking section of the applicable aashto or astm standards .
num .
dimensions .
ensure bolt and nut dimensions conform to the requirements for heavy hex structural bolts and for heavy hex nuts given in ansiasme standards bnum and bnum respectively .
conform to the requirements of astm fnum for washer dimensions .
num .
bolts .
astm anum or astm anum except as amended and revised below astm anum bolts are prohibited unless specifically approved for use by the chief bridge engineer .
provide a lot number on the suppliers certification corresponding to that appearing on the shipping package and certification form csnum .
note on the suppliers certification when and where all testing was done including the rotational capacity tests specified .
if galvanized astm anum bolts are used include the zinc thickness on the suppliers certification .
furnish bolts with diameters of num inch to num inch inclusive .
astm anum bolts must have a maximum hardness of num hrc .
provide plain uncoated bolts oily to the touch when installed .
num .
nuts .
heavy hex astm anum or aashto m num astm anum as applicable except as otherwise specified .
use only the grade and finish of nuts corresponding to the bolt type and finish as listed below bolts nuts astm anum type num uncoated astm anum grades c cnum d dh dhnum or anum grade numh uncoated astm anum type num galvanized astm anum grade dh or anum grade numh galvanized astm anum type num uncoated astm anum grades cnum dhnum uncoated astm anum type num uncoated astm anum grades dh dhnum or anum grade numh uncoated astm anum type num uncoated astm anum grade dhnum uncoated mechanically galvanize all nuts in accordance with astm bnum as specified in section nums .
lubricate all galvanized nuts .
use a lubricant containing a dye of any color that contrasts with the color of the galvanizing so that a visual check can be made for the lubricant at the time of field installation .
at a minimum apply lubricant to the threaded portions and to both bearing faces of each nut .
numd numd num num change no .
num plain nuts must have a minimum hardness of num hrb .
maximum hardness can not exceed the limits in astm anum .
furnish galvanized nuts that are tapped oversize only to the minimum extent necessary to allow assembly on the bolt thread in the coated condition .
tap oversize before galvanizing .
when astm anum grade numh nuts are supplied the zinc coating overtapping lubrication and rotational capacity testing must be in accordance with these specifications and astm anum .
furnish plain uncoated nuts oily to the touch when installed .
num .
washers .
hardened steel washers astm fnum except as otherwise specified .
when indicated mechanically galvanize in accordance with astm bnum as specified in section nums .
use type num washers with type num bolts and type num washers with type num bolts .
num .
direct tension indicator dti devices .
astm fnum except as amended as follows each lot of dtis delivered to a penndot project must be sampled and tested by penndot before use .
select at random according to ptm no .
num a minimum of num samples from each lot and forward these along with form tr num to the lts for testing .
provide dtis with each having a hardness not greater than num hrb num hrc and within num hrb of the lots target hrb as indicated on the csnum certification provided by the manufacturer .
furnish type num or type num dtis for use with astm anum type num or astm anum type num bolts respectively .
furnish type num or type num num dtis with astm anum type num or astm anum type num bolts respectively .
where galvanized dtis are specified mechanically galvanize in accordance with astm bnum as specified in section nums .
ship each lot in protective containers marked with the type lot number quantity and total lot size .
include a copy of the certification with each shipment .
handle and store dti devices according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
testing .
test bolts nuts washers and assemblies according to their applicable astm standards and as follows num.a bolts .
perform proof load tests according to astm fnum section num method num .
perform wedge tests according to astm fnum section num .
perform the tests on full size bolts unless otherwise specifically approved by penndot and at the minimum frequency specified in astm anum section num or astm anum section num as applicable .
if astm anum bolts are to be galvanized perform testing after galvanizing .
determine the thickness of zinc coating on galvanized bolts by taking measurements on the wrench flats or on the top of the bolt head .
num.b nuts .
perform proof load tests according to astm fnum section num at the minimum frequency specified in astm anum section num or aashto m num astm anum section num as applicable .
if nuts are to be galvanized perform testing after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
determine the thickness of zinc coating on galvanized nuts by taking measurements on the wrench flats .
num.c washers .
if galvanized washers are supplied perform hardness testing after galvanizing .
remove the galvanized coating before taking hardness measurements .
if galvanized washers are supplied measure the thickness of zinc coating .
num.d assembly testing and installation .
manufacturers and suppliers of bolt nut and washer assemblies are required to perform initial rotationalcapacity tests on all plain uncoated and galvanized bolt nut and washer assemblies before delivery to the fabricator or contractor .
test galvanized assemblies after galvanizing .
washers are required as part of the test even if not required as part of the installation procedure .
perform rotational capacity testing according to astm anum except as modified by the aashto bridge construction specifications num edition num section num ptm no .
num and as follows unless otherwise approved by penndot when dtis are planned for use in the assembly omit the dtis from the rotational capacity test .
test each bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot in combination as an assembly .
if washers are not required as part of the installation procedure do not include in the lot identification .
numd nume num num change no .
num assign a rotationalcapacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
test a minimum of two assemblies per rotationalcapacity lot .
test the bolt nut and washer assembly in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device .
test bolts too short to test in a calibrator according to ptm no .
num .
num.d.num installation .
install test and inspect high strength bolt assemblies as specified in section numcnum ptm no .
num and ptm no .
num unless otherwise specified .
num .
documentation .
report the results of all tests including zinc coating thickness on the appropriate test reports as required in the applicable penndot aashto andor astm standards and as specified below .
report the location where tests were performed and date of testing .
ensure that the manufacturer or distributor performing tests certifies that the results recorded are accurate .
num.a mill test report mtr .
furnish a mtr for all mill steel used in manufacturing bolts nuts and washers .
indicate where the material was melted and manufactured .
num.b manufacturer certified test report mctr .
provide a mctr for each item furnished .
ensure that the manufacturer performing the rotationalcapacity test include the following on the mctr the lot number of each of the items tested .
the rotationalcapacity lot number .
the results of required tests .
the location where tests were performed and date of testing .
certification that the mctrs for the items conform to this specification and the applicable aashto or astm standards .
the location where the bolt nut and washer assembly components were manufactured and coated .
num.c distributor certified test report dctr .
ensure that the distributor performing tests furnish a certified test report including the following the mctr for the various bolt nut and washer assembly components .
the results of all required tests including the rotationalcapacity test if performed by the distributor instead of the manufacturer .
the location where tests were performed and date of testing .
the rotationalcapacity lot number .
certification that the mctrs conform to this specification and the applicable aashto or astm standards .
e welded stud shear connectors .
num .
materials .
provide shear connector studs conforming to aashto m num astm anum cold drawn bars grade num num or num either semior fullykilled .
if flux retaining caps are used furnish caps of low carbon grade steel suitable for welding and conforming to astm anum .
nume numg num num change no .
num num .
testing .
determine tensile properties of either bar stock after drawing or of finished studs according to the applicable sections of astm anum .
perform tensile tests of finished studs on studs welded to test plates using a test fixture similar to that shown in figure num of aashtoaws dnummdnum num .
if fracture occurs outside of the middle half of the gage length repeat the test .
the required tensile properties are tensile strength num psi min .
yield strength num psi min .
elongation num in num inches min .
reduction of area num min .
as determined by a num offset method .
num .
finish .
provide finished studs of uniform quality and condition free from injurious laps fins seams cracks twists bends or other injurious defects .
produce finish by cold drawing cold rolling or machining .
num .
certification .
provide the manufacturers certification that the studs as delivered conform to the material requirements of this section .
furnish certified copies of inplant qc test reports to the representative upon request .
num .
check samples .
if required provide check samples of studs of each type and size used under the contract .
the representative will select the samples .
f steel forgings and steel shafting .
num .
steel forgings .
furnish steel forgings conforming to aashto m num astm anum classes c d f or g. num .
coldfinished carbon steel shafting .
furnish coldfinished carbon steel shafting conforming to aashto m num astm anum uns designations gnumgnum inclusive unless otherwise indicated or specified .
g steel castings .
num .
mild steel castings .
furnish steel castings for use in highway bridge components conforming to aashto m num astm anum .
provide steel of class num or grades num respectively unless otherwise indicated or specified .
num .
chromiumalloy steel castings .
furnish chromium alloysteel castings conforming to aashto m num astm anum grade canum unless otherwise indicated or specified .
num .
workmanship and finish .
furnish castings true to pattern in form and dimensions free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blowholes and other defects in positions affecting the castings strength and value for the service intended .
provide boldly filleted angles and sharp and perfect arrises .
the contractor may correct defects not affecting the strength and value of the casting for the service intended if allowed in writing by the chief bridge engineer .
the representative may reject castings containing a blowhole having a length greater than num inch a crosssectional area greater than num square inch or a depth greater than num inch .
a group of holes in a straight line with a total length greater than or equal to num foot measured on the surface of the casting and with an aggregate length greater than num inch .
num .
testing .
num.a major castings .
major castings are those subject to high loading whose failure in service would cause major damage e.g .
bridge bearings or machinery parts in movable bridges .
all castings over num pounds are major castings .
test major castings by radiographing with xray or gamma ray apparatus according to astm enum enum or enum as applicable and according to table a below .
numg numh num num change no .
num num.b minor castings .
minor castings are those whose failure would not lead to failure of main bridge members e.g .
scuppers or gratings .
test minor castings by suspending them and hammering them all over .
num.c rejection .
the representative may reject castings that contain cracks flaws or other defects that appear during or after testing .
h iron castings .
num .
gray iron castings .
furnish gray iron castings conforming to aashto m num astm anum class numb unless otherwise indicated or specified .
for castings subject to traffic loads furnish gray iron castings conforming to aashto m num astm anum class numb and aashto m num unless otherwise indicated or specified .
num .
malleable iron castings .
furnish malleable iron castings conforming to astm anum grade num unless otherwise indicated or specified .
num .
ductile iron castings .
furnish ductile iron castings conforming to astm anum grade num unless otherwise indicated or specified .
in addition to the specified test coupons test specimens from parts integral with the castings such as risers for castings having a weight more than num pounds .
ensure that the required quality is obtained in the castings in the finished condition .
numh numj num num change no .
num table a severity levels radiographically inspected castings specification astm designation discontinuity type designation acceptable severity level remarks enum up to num inches a b cnum cnum cnum cnum d e f g num num num num num num none allowed none allowed none allowed none allowed enum num inches to num num inches a b cnum cnum cnum d e f num num num num num none allowed none allowed none allowed enum num num inches to num inches a b cnum cnum cnum d e f num num num num num none allowed none allowed none allowed radiograph all critical areas but not less than num of each casting or num of all castings as indicated or as directed .
if unacceptable defects are found in more than num of the radiographs radiograph num of castings until the accumulated rejection level falls to num or less .
the contractor may then resume testing num of castings .
num .
workmanship and finish .
furnish iron castings true to pattern in form and dimensions free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting the castings strength and value for the service intended .
provide boldly filleted angles and sharp and perfect arrises .
num .
cleaning .
remove scale and sand from all castings to provide a smooth clean and uniform surface .
i bronze bearing and expansion plates .
aashto m num astm bnum alloy no .
cnum or cnum except with a maximum of num num lead unless otherwise indicated or specified .
if indicated make surfaces permanently selflubricated .
provide a coefficient of friction of less than num or as indicated .
j steel pipe .
num .
pipe and couplings .
astm anum num .
flanges and pipe fittings .
astm anum num .
welded fittings .
astm anum numj nums num num change no .
num num .
threaded parts .
apply one coat of primer to all threads immediately before assembly .
wipe clean after assembly .
k lowalloy steel pipe .
num .
pipe and couplings .
manufactured from lowalloy steel aashto m num astm anum grade num or grade numw type num or aashto m num astm anum grade numw and conforming to either astm anum or to astm anum class num grade v. num .
flanges and pipe fittings .
astm anum num .
welding fittings .
astm anum num .
threaded parts .
apply one coat of primer to all threads immediately before assembly .
wipe clean after assembly .
l not used .
m steel tubing .
astm anum or astm anum n cast iron pipe .
astm anum or astm anum o not used .
p sheet copper .
aashto m num astm bnum and conforming to the requirements of the embrittlement test section num of aashto m num astm bnum and astm bnum .
make lapped joints by soldering or by riveting and soldering .
q sheet zinc .
astm bnum type ii .
make lapped joints by soldering .
r sheet lead .
common desilverized lead a as specified for pig lead astm bnum .
s galvanizing .
from a galvanizer listed in bulletin num and as follows num .
general .
if indicated or specified galvanize materials as specified in the applicable material specifications .
if the applicable material specifications do not include galvanizing galvanize according to astm anum astm bnum astm anum class num coating aashto m num and m num astm bnum and bnum aashto m numastm anum or aashto m num astm anum as applicable .
test for the specified weight of galvanizing according to aashto t num astm anum .
comply with astm anum and astm anum .
before galvanizing provide a blast surface as specified in section num .
grind all cut edges .
num .
repair of damaged galvanizing .
after erecting galvanized material in place repair in accordance with astm anum .
num .
quenching after galvanizing .
quenching after galvanizing is allowed for the following items nonwelded secondary bridge members railings drainage scuppers downspouts inlet grates nums numa num num change no .
num utility brackets angle supports embedded plates quenching after galvanizing is not allowed for the following items without approval of the engineer primary bridge members welded secondary members sign structures traffic and lighting poles any member to be painted after galvanizing items not listed may not be quenched without approval of the engineer .
t welding material .
aashtoaws dnummdnum modified as specified in section nummnum .
u paint .
section num v certification .
section numbnum w eyebars .
furnish a weldable grade of steel for eyebars .
acceptable grades include structural steel for bridges aashto m num astm anum grade num astm anum .
structural steel for bridges aashto m num astm anum grades num numw and hps numw astm anum grade num astm anum grades a b and c only .
num fabrication a straightening material and curving rolled beams and welded girders .
section numcnum and as follows num .
materials .
num.a general .
do not heat straighten or heat curve steels that are manufactured to a specified minimum yield point greater than num pounds per square inch without approval .
num.b .
high performance steel .
section numanum.a .
use procedures approved by the chief structural materials engineer when applying short term application of heat to high performance steel for heat curving heat straightening or camber and sweep adjustments .
limit heat to numf maximum unless otherwise approved .
num .
type of heating .
curve beams and girders by either continuous or vtype heating unless otherwise approved .
num.a continuous heating .
for the continuous method heat a strip or intermittent strips along the edge of the top and bottom flange approximately simultaneously depending on flange widths and thicknesses .
use a strip of sufficient width and temperature to obtain the required curvature .
numa numa num num change no .
num num.b vtype heating .
for the vtype heating heat the top and bottom flanges in truncated triangular or wedge shaped areas having their base along the flange edge and spaced at regular intervals along each flange .
use the spacing and temperature necessary to obtain the required curvature and to allow heating to progress along the top and bottom at approximately the same rate .
terminate the apex of the truncated triangular area applied to the inside flange surface just before the junction of the web and the flange is reached .
when heating the inside flange surface the surfaces that intersect the web do not apply heat directly to the web .
if the radius of curvature is num feet or more extend the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern applied to the outside flange surface to the juncture of the flange and web .
if the radius of curvature is less than num feet extend the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern applied to the outside flange surface past the web for a distance equal to oneeighth of the flange or num inches whichever is less .
for the truncated triangular pattern provide an included angle of approximately num to num degrees but do not exceed num inches for the base of the triangle .
do not make variations in the patterns prescribed above unless permitted .
for both types of heating heat the flange edges that will be on the inside of the horizontal curve after cooling .
heat both the inside and outside flange surfaces only if the flange thickness is num num inches or greater .
heat the two surfaces concurrently .
num .
geometric limitations for heat curving .
heat curving of rolled beams and constant depth welded isection plate girders will be allowed if all of the following criteria in section numanum.a through section numanum.d below is satisfied .
num.a crosssectional criteria .
r num feet if tf num in .
or b num in .
otherwise r num feet  num f num tnf tf in which      f   num where r horizontal radius of curvature measured to the centerline of the girder web b width of wider flange inch bnf width of narrower flange inch dw clear distance between flanges inch tf thickness of wider flange inch tnf thickness of narrower flange inch tw web thickness inch num.b minimum radius for doublysymmetric beams and girders .
the horizontal radius of curvature measured to the centerline of web in inches for heat curved doublysymmetric beams and girders can not be less than a value calculated from the following if   num  then r num     num numa numa num num change no .
num otherwise r num  where fyw specified minimum yield strength of a web kilopound per square inch num.c minimum radius for singlysymmetric beams and girders .
the horizontal radius of curvature measured to the centerline of web in inches for heat curved singlysymmetric beams and girders can not be less than that calculated for doublysymmetric members in section numanum.b .
additionally for singlysymmetric girders with  greater than or equal to num and with f less than fo the radius can not be less than the value calculated from the following r num num   num num num  in which  num num num.d minimum radius for hybrid girders .
heat curving of hybrid girders which meet the following criteria will be allowed   and   if  num   if  num in which       where fyfw yield stress of flange with lower yield stress kilopound per square inch fyf yield stress of flange with higher yield stress kilopound per square inch fyw yield stress of web kilopound per square inch byfw width of flange with lower yield stress inch byf width of flange with higher yield stress inch for hybrid sections with  num and  num the horizontal radius of curvature measured to the centerline of the girder in inches cannnot be less than the minimum radius determined from section numanum.b and section numanum.c with fyf substituted for fyw in section numanum.c .
for hybrid sections with  num the horizontal radius of curvature measured to the centerline of the girder in inches can not be less than the minimum radius determined from section numanum.b .
additionally for girders with numa numc num num change no .
num  greater than or equal to num and with  less than   the radius can not be less than that determined as r num num   num  num num  num .
temperature .
conduct the heatcurving operation in such a manner that the steel temperature does not exceed numf as measured by temperature indicating crayons or other suitable means .
do not artificially cool the girder until after it naturally cools to numf .
obtain approval for the method of artificial cooling .
num .
position for heating .
heatcurve the girder with the web in either a vertical or a horizontal position .
if curved in the vertical position brace or support the girder in such a manner that the tendency of the girder to deflect laterally during the heatcurving process will not cause the girder to overturn .
if curved in the horizontal position support the girder near its ends and at intermediate points as necessary to obtain a uniform curvature .
do not allow the bending stress in the flanges due to the dead weight of the girder to exceed the usual allowable design stress .
maintain intermediate safety catch blocks at the midlength of the girder within num inches of the flanges at all times during the heating process to guard against a sudden sag due to plastic flange buckling .
num .
sequence of operations .
heatcurve the girder in the fabrication shop before it is painted .
conduct the heat curving operation either before or after all the required welding of transverse intermediate stiffeners is completed .
however unless provisions are made for girder shrinkage locate and attach connection plates and bearing stiffeners after heat curving .
if longitudinal stiffeners are required heatcurve or oxygencut them separately and then weld them to the curved girder .
when cover plates are to be attached to rolled beams attach them before heat curving if the total thickness of one flange and cover plate is less than num num inches and the radius of curvature is greater than num feet .
for other rolled beams with cover plates heatcurve the beams before the cover plates are attached either heatcurve or oxygencut cover plates separately then weld them to the curved beam .
num .
camber .
camber girders before heat curving .
obtain camber for rolled beams using approved heatcambering or cold cambering methods .
for plate girders cut the web to the prescribed camber with suitable allowance for shrinkage due to cutting welding and heatcurving .
however if permitted correct moderate deviations from specified camber by a carefully supervised application of heat .
correct deviations from the specified camber according to publication num .
num .
measurement of curvature and camber .
measure horizontal curvature and vertical camber after all welding and heating operations are completed and the flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature .
check horizontal curvature with the girder in the vertical position .
b finish .
finish exposed work .
shear flame cut and chip carefully and accurately .
make sharp corners and round edges by grinding or other acceptable means .
when aashto m num astm anum grade numw grade hps numw grade hps numw or astm anum grades a b and c weathering steels are specified for beams or girders blast clean only the fascia side of exterior beams or girders in the field according to sspcspnum commercial blast cleaning .
blast clean from the top outside fascia edge of the top flange to the inside edge of the bottom flange including the bottom of the bottom flange .
blast clean the faying surfaces of splices and connections of all structural elements according to sspcspnum .
reblast unpainted elements that remain unassembled for a period of num months following the initial cleaning .
c bolt holes .
num .
general .
unless otherwise specified only punch or drill holes for bolts as indicated below .
unless subpunching and reaming are specified in section numd punch material forming parts of a member composed of not more than five thicknesses of metal num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts whenever the thickness of the material is not greater than num inch for structural steel num inch for highstrength steel or num inch for quenched and tempered alloy steel .
if there are more than five thicknesses or if any of the main material is thicker than num inch for structural steel num inch for highstrength steel or num inch for quenched and tempered alloy steel either subdrill and ream or drill all holes full size .
numc numd num num change no .
num when specified either subpunch or subdrill if thickness limitation governs all holes num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the bolts and after assembling ream to num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts or drill all holes full size to num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
when indicated provide enlarged or slotted holes with highstrength bolts .
obtain advance approval from the chief structural materials engineer to produce round or slotted holes using plasma laser water jet or oxygen acetylene methods .
provide samples when requested to verify dimensional accuracy and edge quality in advance of fabrication for the size of places to be used in production .
num .
punched holes .
furnish dies with diameters that do not exceed the diameter of the corresponding punch by more than num inch .
ream any holes that must be enlarged to admit the bolts .
cut holes clean without torn or ragged edges .
the slightly conical hole that naturally results from punching operations is considered acceptable .
num .
reamed or drilled holes .
furnish reamed or drilled holes perpendicular to the member cylindrical and conforming to the size requirements specified in section numcnum .
where practical direct reamers by mechanical means .
remove burrs on the outside surfaces .
use twist drills twist reamers or rotobroach cutters for reaming and drilling .
assemble and securely hold connecting parts while they are being reamed or drilled .
match mark the connecting parts before disassembling .
num .
accuracy of holes .
furnish holes not more than num inch larger in diameter than the true decimal equivalent of the nominal diameter .
the slightly conical hole that results from punching operations is acceptable .
ensure that the width of slotted holes produced by flame cutting or a combination of drilling and flame cutting or punching and flame cutting are not more than num inch greater than the nominal width .
grind the flame cut surface smooth to obtain a maximum surface roughness of ansi num mil .
num .
numericallycontrolled drilled field connections .
instead of reaming subsized holes or drilling full sized holes while assembled the contractor may use numerically controlled nc drilling or punching equipment to drill or punch fullsized bolt holes in unassembled pieces connections and templates for use with matching subsized and reamed holes .
the contractor may use nc equipment to either drill or punch holes through individual pieces or drill through any combination of pieces held tightly together .
fullsize punched holes shall meet the requirements of section numcnum .
if nc drilling or punching equipment is used demonstrate the accuracy of the drilling or punching procedure by means of check assemblies as specified in section numg .
num .
holes for turned bolts or other approved bearing type bolts .
subpunch or subdrill all holes num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the bolt for turned bolts or other approved bearingtype bolts .
after assembling either ream drill to a steel template or drill from the solid .
provide a driving fit for the finished holes as indicated or as specified in the special provisions .
d preparation of field connections .
unless otherwise approved prepare bolt holes for field connections and field splices as follows field connections and field splices of main members of trusses arches continuous beam spans bents towers each face plate girders and rigid frames subpunch or subdrill and subsequently ream while assembled or drill full size through a steel template while assembled .
field splices of rolled beam stringers continuous over floor beams or cross frames the fabricator may drill full size unassembled to a steel template .
floor beams or cross frames the fabricator may drill full size unassembled to a steel template .
floor beam and stringer field end connections subpunch and ream while assembled or drill full size to a steel template while assembled .
for any connection instead of subpunching and reaming or subdrilling and reaming the fabricator may drill holes full size with all thicknesses of material assembled in proper position .
when using a steel template ream and drill full size all field connection holes through the template after the template numd numg num num change no .
num has been placed in the proper position and angle and firmly bolted into place .
use templates that are exact duplicates for reaming matching members or the opposite faces of a single member .
accurately locate templates used for connections on like parts or members so that the parts or members are duplicates and require no matchmarking .
e accuracy of hole group .
num .
accuracy before reaming .
punch full size subpunch or subdrill holes such that after assembling and before any reaming is done a cylindrical pin num inch smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the hole may be entered perpendicularly to the face of the member without drifting in at least num of the contiguous holes in the same plane .
the representative will reject pieces that do not conform to this requirement .
also the representative may reject any piece that contains at least one hole that will not pass a pin num inch smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the hole .
num .
accuracy after reaming .
after holes are reamed or drilled ensure that the offset between adjacent thicknesses of metal is no greater than num inch for at least num of the holes in any contiguous group .
for all steel templates provide hardened steel bushings in holes accurately dimensioned from the centerlines of the connection as inscribed on the template .
use the centerlines to accurately locate the template from the milled or scribed ends of the members .
f bolting .
clean surfaces of metal in contact before assembling .
assemble pin and firmly draw together the parts of a member before drilling reaming or bolting .
if necessary dismantle assembled pieces to remove burrs and shavings produced by the operation .
furnish members free from twists bends and other deformation .
when assembling allow enough drifting to bring the parts into position however do not allow the drifting to enlarge the holes or distort the metal .
g preassembly of field connections .
num .
general .
as necessary preassemble field connections of main members of trusses arches continuous beams plate girders bents towers and rigid frames before erection to verify the geometry of the completed structure or unit and to verify or prepare field splices .
submit an appropriate method of preassembly for approval .
provide a method and details of assembly consistent with the erection procedure indicated on the approved erection plans and camber diagrams .
at a minimum provide a preassembly procedure consisting of assembling three contiguous panels accurately adjusted for line and camber .
provide a procedure for progressive assemblies consisting of at least one section or panel of the previous assembly repositioned if necessary and adequately pinned to ensure accurate alignment plus two or more sections or panels added at the advancing end .
for structures longer than num feet furnish a procedure for assemblies not less than num feet long regardless of the length of individual continuous panels or sections .
the contractor may start the sequence of assembly from any location in the structure and proceed in one or both directions provided that the preceding requirements are satisfied .
use the progressive truss and girder assembly unless otherwise specified in the proposal .
num .
bolted connections .
for bolted connections prepare holes as specified in section numc .
where applicable assemble major components of compression members with finishedtobear ends in full bearing and then ream the subsized holes to the specified size .
num .
check assemblynumerically controlled drilling .
when using numerically controlled drilling furnish a check assembly for each major structural type of each project unless otherwise indicated or specified in the special provisions .
provide check assemblies consisting of at least three contiguous shop sections or for a truss all members in at least three contiguous panels but not less than the number of panels associated with three contiguous chord lengths i.e .
length between field splices .
base check assemblies on the proposed order of erection joints in bearings special complex points and similar considerations .
special complex points include the portals of skewed trusses .
use the first sections of each major structural type to be fabricated as the check assemblies .
obtain approval for each nc drilled check assembly before reaming or dismantling the assembly .
if a check assembly fails to demonstrate that the required accuracy is being obtained for camber alignment accuracy of holes and fit of milled joints the representative may require additional check assemblies .
additional check assemblies will be at no additional cost to the department .
numg numj num num change no .
num num .
field welded connections .
preassemble field welded connections as specified in section numgnum and verify the fit of members including the proper space between abutting flanges .
h matchmarking .
matchmark connecting parts preassembled in the shop to ensure proper fit in the field .
furnish a diagram showing matchmarks to the representative .
i connections using unfinished or turned bolts .
num .
general .
when unfinished bolts are specified furnish unfinished or turned bolts conforming to astm anum grade a bolts .
provide bolts with single selflocking nuts or double nuts unless otherwise indicated or specified in the special provisions .
use beveled washers where bearing faces have a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
for bolted connections fabricated with highstrength bolts assemble connections as specified in section numj .
num .
turned bolts .
provide turned bolts with an ansi roughness rating value of num for the surface of the body of the bolts .
furnish hexagonal heads and nuts with standard dimensions for bolts of the nominal size specified or the next larger nominal size .
provide thread diameters equal to the body of the bolt or the nominal diameter of the bolt specified .
carefully ream holes for turned bolts with bolts furnished to provide for a light driving fit .
furnish bolts with threads that are entirely outside of the holes .
provide a washer under the nut .
j connections using high strength bolts .
section numcnum and as follows num .
general .
furnish bolts nuts and washers as specified in section numd .
provide bolt holes as specified in section numc .
when turnofnut tightening method is used provide hardened washers as specified in section numdnum under the element turned in tightening .
num .
bolted parts .
use steel for all material within the grip of the bolt do not use compressible material such as gaskets or insulation within the grip .
ensure that bolted steel parts solidly fit together after the bolts are tightened .
bolted steel parts may be coated or uncoated .
do not exceed a slope of num for the surfaces of parts in contact with the bolt head or nut with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
num .
surface conditions .
at the time of assembly ensure that all joint surfaces including surfaces adjacent to the bolt head and nut are free of scale except tight mill scale dirt or other foreign material .
remove burrs that would prevent solid seating of the connected parts .
paint is allowed on the faying surface in connections except for slipcritical connections as defined in article num of the lrfd specification .
prepare faying surfaces for slipcritical connections according to the following requirements as applicable num.a noncoated joints .
exclude paint including any inadvertent over spray from the area within the bolt pattern and areas closer than one bolt diameter but not less than num inch from the edge of any hole .
num.b joints with painted faying surfaces .
blast clean joints specified to have painted faying surfaces .
except as specified in section numjnum.c coat the joints with a class a or b paint according to section num of the lrfd specification .
num.c coatings with low slip coefficient .
if permitted and provided that the mean slip coefficient is established tested according to section num of the lrfd specification and the allowable slip load per unit area is achieved the contractor may use a coating providing a slip coefficient less than num .
num.d minimum coating curing time .
do not assemble coated joints before the coating has cured for the minimum time used in the qualifying test .
num.e galvanized faying surfaces .
hotdip galvanize faying surfaces specified to be galvanized according to aashto m num astm anum .
subsequently roughen galvanized surfaces by hand wire brushing .
do not roughen using power wire brushes .
numj numm num num change no .
num num.f existing field surfaces .
for connections to existing structures provide surface conditions according to the contract documents k plate cut edges .
num .
edge planning .
plane mill grind or thermal cut to a depth of num inch the sheared edges of plates more than num inch thick that carry calculated stress .
num .
thermal cutting and other cutting methods .
section nump .
num .
visual inspection and repair of plate cut edges .
perform visual inspection and repair of plate cut edges according to the aashtoaws dnummd num. l not used .
m welding .
all weld procedure specifications must be based upon weld procedure specification wps qualification tests pretests and verification tests which have been performed not more than num months in advance of production welding .
wps qualification welding must be witnessed by a department representative unless otherwise approved by the chief structural materials engineer .
for welding aluminum structures conduct welding welder qualification prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds in accordance with aws dnummdnum .
for the purpose of establishing weld acceptance criteria define all welded aluminum structures as class ii structures .
for welding sheet steel conduct welding welder qualification prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds in accordance with aws dnummdnum .
for welding stainless steel or stainless steel to carbon steel conduct welding welder qualification prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds in accordance with aws dnummdnum .
unless otherwise indicated or specified for tubular steel structures conduct welding welder qualifications prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds according to aashtoaws dnummdnum subject to the following limitations use on lowhydrogen electrodes provide a minimum preheat and interpass temperature of at least numf .
conduct welding welder qualifications prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds according to the aashtoaws dnummdnum .
do not weld or tack brackets clips shipping devices or other material not indicated or specified in the special provisions to any member unless shown on the shop drawings and approved .
num .
weld structural steel for highway bridges according to the aashtoaws dnumm dnum with the following modifications section num .
revise completely as follows all references to acceptance or approval will denote acceptance or approval by the engineer .
the term engineer refers to the chief bridge engineer or the chief bridge engineers representative namely the chief structural materials engineer .
section num .
delete this section .
section num .
welding of ancillary products .
delete this section .
section num .
plug and slot welds .
delete this section .
section num .
details of plug and slot welds .
delete this section .
section num revise second sentence as follows design connections or splices made with fillet welds for the average of the calculated stress and numm numm num num change no .
num the strength of the member but no less than num of the strength of the member .
section num .
revise completely as follows use web flatness tolerances for all girders in accordance with the following equation and the web flatness tolerance table below .
num num num num t d t where d web depth in t web thickness in .
verify web flatness in all girder panels in the presence of the department inspector .
flatness variations and locations exceeding the allowable tolerance must be documented .
submit a repair procedure to the chief structural materials engineer for review and approval prior to repair .
numm numm num num change no .
num web flatness tolerance table web thickness in .
web depth in .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note for actual dimensions not shown use the next higher value .
for values beyond the table dimensions shown calculate web flatness in accordance with the equation above and round to the next higher numinch increment .
numm numm num num change no .
num section num .
revise the first paragraph in this section completely as follows fit bearing stiffeners as specified in section numu .
flatness tolerance of sole plates after welding as specified in section numc class b .
section num .
delete this section .
table num .
matching filler metal requirements for wpss qualified in accordance with num .
delete all references to electroslag or electrogas welding .
clause num .
part e electroslag welding esw and electrogas welding egw .
delete this part .
clause num .
part f plug and slot welds .
delete this part .
section num .
duration .
add the following unless directed .
section num .
electroslag and electrogas welding .
delete this section .
table num .
additional pqr essential variable changes requiring wps requalification for electroslag or electrogas welding .
delete this table .
section num .
delete item num .
section num .
esw and egw specimens .
delete this section .
clause num part b radiographic testing rt of groove welds in butt joints .
digital radiography is allowed with the approval of the chief structural materials engineer .
if approved code variations from clause num will be incorporated into a formal procedure and included in the qc plan .
section num .
revise completely as follows nondestructively test complete penetration groove welds as specified in section nummnum .
section num .
delete this section .
section num .
revise completely as follows twentyfive percent of each joint subject to compression or shear .
section numd .
delete this section .
section num .
revise the first sentence as follows at least num inches will be tested in every numfoot length and num inches of such welds less than num feet length of each size of weld and type joint in main members including the end connections of such members .
section num .
revise completely as follows electromagnetic yokes having lifting forces conforming to the following requirements yoke pole leg spacing yps in .
current numypsnum numypsnum type numypsnum numypsnum ac num lb num lb halfwave rectified dc or dc pulsed num lb num lb numm numm num num change no .
num section num .
consumable requirements delete all references to optional supplemental diffusible hydrogen designator hnum .
num.a grades hps numw and hps numw .
conform to section nummnum and the following additional requirements .
for final welds only use the submerged arc and shielded metal arc welding processes .
meet consumable handling requirements in accordance with aashtoaws dnummdnum sections num and num using hydrogen control level hnum for submerged arc welding saw consumables .
do not heat milnumhpni flux above the manufacturers recommended temperature .
remove all mill scale by grinding or blasting from the weld area of the grade hps numw and grade hps numw steel before welding .
wpss for singlepass tack welds completely remelted by subsequent saw shall use electrodes meeting aashtoaws dnum table num or num requirements .
processes other than shielded metal arc welding smaw may be approved based on qualification testing in conformance with aashtoaws dnum clause num and where the manufacturers consumable certification show that the deposited weld metal has a diffusible hydrogen level equivalent of hnum or less .
num.b filler metal requirements .
num.b.num use filler metals in conformance with aashtoaws dnummdnum table num hydrogen control level hnum or less for aashto m numastm anum grade numw grade hps numw or grade hps numw as applicable for the base metal for all fillet welds unless otherwise required by design or noted on the plans .
use undermatched welds for flangetoweb welds of grades hps numw or hps numw when welded to grade numw or grades hps numw and hps numw respectively .
use only electrodes with the designator hz or r where hz indicates the diffusible hydrogen level of either hnum or hnum depending on the preheat and where r indicates a moistureresistant coating .
the higher preheat and interpass temperatures listed in table num also apply to hnum electrodes .
num.b.num make all num inch and smaller fillet welds in a single pass .
make all fillet welds larger then num inch with a root pass of sufficient size to prevent cracking .
num.b.num conform to the requirements for grade numw or grade hps numw base metal as listed in aashtoaws dnummdnum table num or those listed in section nummnum.c at the fabricators option for filler metals in all full penetration groove welds connecting a grade hps numw plate to a grade numw or grade hps numw plate .
similarly conform to the requirements for grade hps numw base metal as listed in aashtoaws dnummdnum table num or those listed in section nummnum.c at the fabricators option for filler metals in all full penetration groove welds connecting a grade hps numw plate to a grade hps numw plate .
num.c groove weld requirementsmatching base metals .
conform to the following requirements for either two grade hps numw plates or two grade hps numw plates .
num.c.num saw consumables .
use saw consumables meeting the hydrogen control level of hnum as discussed in aashtoaws dnummdnum annex g section gnum .
follow the minimum preheat and interpass temperature limits and other conditions listed in table num .
fabricators with multiple plants under a common umbrella of welding equipment welding training and supervision need to perform the hd testing only once per combination of consumables for each location .
plants audited as a single facility by the aisc as part of their quality certification program are considered one location .
multiple plants not falling under the aisc single facility audit definition are considered separate facilities and additional wps and hd tests are required .
num.c.num.a grade hps numw saw consumables .
use electrodes conforming to table num of aashtoaws d.nummdnum .
num.c.num.b grade hps numw saw consumables .
use lanum electrode with milnumhpni flux manufactured by lincoln electric company .
num.c.num.c alternate grade hps num saw consumables .
in lieu of the filler metals for saw in section nummnum.c.num.a and section nummnum.c.num.b request approval of alternate consumables from the engineer .
in addition to the requirements for wps qualification in accordance with aashtoaws dnummdnum numm numm num num change no .
num num when using alternate consumables perform diffusible hydrogen hd tests on the weld metal .
provide the full range of weld tests as required by aashtoaws dnummdnum section num .
use minimum preheat and interpass temperatures with alternate consumables in accordance with aashtoaws dnummdnum table num .
provide a diffusible hydrogen level equivalent to num mlnumg or less in the deposited weld metal .
prepare hd test specimens at the fabrication plant .
test specimens in accordance with aws anum .
test results in excess of num mlnumg are unacceptable and a retest is required with or without revised welding procedures .
aashtoaws dnummdnum num section num exemption from further testing is applicable but wps or hd results are not transferable from fabricatortofabricator .
num.c.num smaw consumables .
grade hps numw enummhzr hnum or less grade hps numw enummhzr hnum only the designator r for moistureresistant coating is required for all smaw electrode used for welding grade hps numw and grade hps numw .
use saw consumables and smaw electrodes producing weld deposits meeting the requirements of aashtoaws dnummdnum table num except for single pass fillet welds up to num inch maximum for smaw and up to num inch for saw or welds that will be fully incorporated into a finished weld with satisfactory weathering characteristics .
num.d qualification testing .
filler metal procedure qualification test requirements for groove matching welding of grade hps numw are as listed in table num of aashtoaws dnummdnum .
for matching groove welds using grade hps numw meet the minimum properties equal to or greater than base metal requirements as specified in astm anum for qualification pretest and verification test requirements .
filler metal qualification test requirements for all hybrid designs and undermatched fillet welds are listed in aashtoaws dnummdnum table num for the lowest strength base metal used in the hybrid design as applicable .
individually qualify wpss for joint welding combinations of different strength grades such as grade hps numw to grade numw or grade hps numw or grade hps numw to grade hps numw in accordance with aashtoaws dnummdnum clause num .
for example when welding grade numw webs to grade hps numw flanges will require a procedure plate composed of half grade numw and half grade hps numw .
in addition to radiographic testing all procedure qualification tests must be ultrasonically tested in conformance with the requirements of aashtoaws dnum .
nummdnum clause num part c. evaluate in accordance with aashtoaws dnum .
nummdnum table num ultrasonic acceptance rejection criteria tensile stress .
disregard indications found at the interface of the backing bar regardless of defect rating .
num.e .
preheat and interpass temperature num.e.num matching strength welds .
use minimum preheat and interpass temperatures for matching strength fillet and groove welding for two grade hps numw steel plates using consumables listed in sections nummnum.b.num and .nummnum.b.num in accordance with table num .
limit the maximum interpass temperature for welding grades hps numw and hps numw steel to numf and numf respectively .
for hybrids welds joining both grades limit the maximum interpass temperature to numf .
num.e.num undermatched fillet welds fillet welds on hybrid members .
use preheatinterpass temperature requirements in accordance with note b of table num .
num.e.num drying preheat .
as an absolute minimum for all permanent welds apply to the joint a drying preheat sufficient to remove any existing moisture before to welding .
table num minimum preheat and interpass temperature thickness of thickest part at point of welding numm numm num num change no .
num grade welding process base metal to num in .
inclusive over num in .
to num in .
inclusive over num in .
to num in .
inclusive over num in .
hps numw hps numw saw smaw num num num num notes a if satisfactory results are not achieved with the above minimum preheat and interpass temperatures during development of the wps and increased preheat temperatures are used to produce a satisfactory pqr use the higher preheat temperature during bridge fabrication used for the pqr .
b where joints are composed of base metals with different minimum preheats use the highest of the minimum preheat and interpass temperature from above or from table num in aashtoaws dnummdnum .
c for fracture critical members comply with the above requirements including the additional requirements of aashtoaws dnummdnum chapter num num.f heat input hi .
num.f.num saw .
for hps grade numw or hybrid combinations of hps grade numw and hps grade numw limit heat input to num kilojoules per inch minimum num kilojoules per inch maximum as determined using aashtoaws dnummdnum section num .
heat inputs about num kilojoules per inch for grade hps numw or hybrid grade hps numw to grade hps numw joints where multiple wire saw applications are used may be approved if qualified in accordance with the provisions listed herein .
for hps grade numw limit heat input to num kilojoules per inch minimum num kilojoules per inch maximum as determined using aashtoaws dnummdnum section num .
num.f.num smaw .
use welding heat input parameters recommended by the individual consumable manufacturer .
num.g backing .
whenever possible use steel backing material for wps test plates from the same grade as the weld test plates .
for production and qualification welding of grade hps numw steel backing material for wps test plates that is either grades numw or hps numw may be used .
for production and qualification welding of grade hps numw steel backing material for wps test plates that are either grades numw hps numw or numw may be used .
for all cases limit the maximum sulfur content of the backing material to num maximum num .
do not weld to flanges in tension areas unless indicated .
num .
show specification grade type and any supplementary requirements for each steel indicated on the shop drawings .
num .
do not weld temporary fabrication and construction details such as rails for deck finishing equipment bar supports or deckforming devices to beams girders or other main members unless permitted .
identify locations of such welds on the shop drawings .
num .
do not use electroslag or electrogas welding .
num .
gas metal arc welding gmaw and flux cored arc welding fcaw shop application only .
num.a main load carrying bridge members .
do not use the gmaw or fcaw processes including tack welding except as otherwise approved herein for any of the following conditions webtoweb weldsnum webtoflange weldsnum flangetoflange weldsnum and welds on truss members and gusset platesnum .
note num including rolled shapes numm numo num num change no .
num for stiffener and connection plate welds to flanges and webs and for xframes and diaphragms considered main members the fabricator may use the fcawg gas shielded process and the gmaw process subject to the following restrictions use only gmaw spray and constant voltage pulsed spray transfer modes .
use only metal cored electrodes for gmaw on fracture critical members .
use only gmaw equipment with the following features a lock out feature to prevent the operator from adjusting the equipment outside the approved wps parameters .
an adaptive mode capable of automatically correcting amperage etc .
due to operator variations stickout etc .
to maintain the desired transfer mode .
for fracture critical members only metal cored electrodes are allowed .
singlepass gmaw tack welds and root passes are allowed for all joints on all main load carrying members provided the contractor can demonstrate that such welds are completely remelted by subsequent saw passes .
other applications may be allowed by the engineer if prior approval is received .
num.b secondary members and other welded structures .
either the gmaw or fcawg process may be used for welding bridge drainage material expansion dams bearings bracing those xframes and diaphragms not considered main members soldier piles sound barrier posts and other welded structures .
both globular and short circuit gmaw transfer modes are prohibited unless otherwise specifically approved or specified .
num .
do not use plug welds to repair misplaced holes .
num .
nondestructively test all groove welds in main members according to the aashtoaws dnummdnum .
unless otherwise indicated or specified use radiographic testing on butt joints .
use radiographic or ultrasonic testing for corner or t joints .
use magnetic particle testing according to aashtoaws dnummdnum section num .
num.a grade hps numw and hps numw .
for nonfracture critical members radiographically test num of all complete penetration groove welds for grade hps numw steel plates regardless of the type of stress in the plate .
test fillet welds in accordance with aashtoaws dnum .
nummdnum section num on grade hps numw and hps numw steel by magnetic particle testing .
use the yoke technique as described in aashtoaws dnum .
nummdnum section num as modified in section numm num .
the prod technique is not allowed .
for non fracture critical members perform testing not less than num hours after completion of welding .
for fracture critical members comply with the above including any additional requirements of aashtoaws dnummdnum chapter num .
num .
all welding consumables electrodes and electrodeflux combinations used for welding of fracture critical members will conform to the diffusible hydrogen requirements of the aws filler metal specifications optional supplemental designator hnum or hnum only .
num .
perform weld repairs according to specified welding code and department approved procedures .
do not repair individual locations more than three times without written permission of the engineer .
following the third unsuccessful attempt submit a proposed repair procedure for review .
num .
do not repair any individual area on welded pole to base or splice plate to chord or gusset plate connections for luminaire supports traffic signal supports and sign structure supports more than one time without written permission of the engineer .
n weld repairs and geometric corrections using applied heat .
for nonfracture critical members only refer to publication num for preapproved base metal repair procedures and heat correction procedures .
the fabricator may use the preapproved procedures after the departments inspector has verified that the discontinuity to be repaired is covered by the specific procedure .
any repairs performed are subject to inspection by the departments inspector .
o not used .
nump numt num num change no .
num p thermal cutting .
unless otherwise approved cut steel and weld metal using oxyfuel gas air plasma arc or oxygen plasma arc processes .
conduct cutting for all processes according to the aashtoaws dnummdnum .
do not submerge base metal in water during any process unless otherwise indicated .
num .
other cutting methods .
laser and water jet cutting may be used with approval from the chief structural materials engineer .
q facing of bearing surfaces .
ensure that the surface finishes of bearing and base plates and other bearing surfaces in contact with each other or concrete conform to the ansi surface roughness requirements defined in ansiasme bnum and listed below steel slabs ansi num mils heavy plates in contact with shoes to be welded ansi num mil milled ends of compression members finishedtobear milled or ansi num mil ground ends of stiffeners and fillers bridge rollers and rockers ansi num mil pins and pin holes ansi num mil sliding bearing ansi num mil sliding bearingsstainless steel to ansi num mil polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe fabricate bearing surfaces according to the following additional requirements machine sliding bearings having a surface roughness of num mil or rougher so the lay of the cut is parallel to the direction of movement .
provide machined surfaces plane and true conforming to the indicated dimensions .
for surfaces designed to be flat machine surfaces to within num inch of flatness .
determine flatness as specified in section numc .
maintain uniform and even contact when assembling adjacent bearing surfaces .
unless a closer tolerance is indicated or specified do not exceed a gap of num inch between bearing surfaces .
machine all sliding surfaces of base plates .
do not machine any surfaces of fabricated members until all fabrication and welding of the assembly or subassembly is complete .
machine heattreated components after completion of heat treating .
r abutting joints .
mill or sawcut abutting joints in compression members of trusses and columns to obtain a square joint and uniform bearing .
do not allow the opening at other joints not required to be faced to exceed num inch .
s plates direction of rolling .
fabrication of members .
unless otherwise indicated cut and fabricate steel plates for main members and splice plates for flanges and main tension members not secondary members so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the main tensile and compressive stresses .
unless otherwise indicated or specified fabricate ishaped beams and girders so that when erected and under their own weight the webs are within the allowable tolerance of vertical .
provide flanges normal to the web unless otherwise indicated .
t bent plates .
numt numw num num change no .
num num .
general .
fabricate bent unwelded loadcarrying rolledsteel plates from the stock plates so that the bend lines will be at right angles to the direction of rolling .
if allowed coldbent ribs for orthotropicdeck bridges may be bent with bend lines in the direction of rolling .
when bend lines must be oriented parallel to the direction of the plate increase the bend radii indicated in section numtnum by an additional factor of num unless otherwise specified or approved .
before bending round the corners of the plate where bending is to occur to a radius of num inch .
num .
cold bending .
cold bend such that no cracking of the plate occurs .
unless otherwise approved provide a minimum bend radii measured to the concave face of the metal of numt for all grades and thickness of aashto m num astm anum steel including material substitutions allowed for aashto m num astm anum where t is the thickness of the plate in inches .
when bend lines are oriented parallel to the final rolling direction increase the minimum bend radius to not less than num times the plate thickness .
for all other grades of steel provide minimum bend radii in accordance with the applicable material specification where provided or as follows thickness t in inches up to num over num to num over num to num bend radii numt numt numt provide allowance for springback of grades num numw and hps numw steels of about three times that for grade num steel .
for break press forming provide a lower die span of at least num times the plate thickness .
multiple hits are advisable .
cold bending of fracture critical members is prohibited .
num .
hot bending .
if a radius shorter than the minimum specified for cold bending is necessary hot bend bars and plates at a temperature not less than numf and not greater than numf .
limit hot bending temperatures for grades num numw and hps numw steel plates to not greater than numf .
u fit of stiffeners .
ensure that at least num of the bearing area of end bearing stiffeners for girders and stiffeners intended as supports for concentrated loads have full bearing on the flanges that they transmit load to or receive load from .
full bearing is defined as a gap not exceeding num inch .
the maximum gap between the bearing stiffener and the flange on the remaining num may not exceed num inch .
mill or grind the ends of bearing stiffeners to achieve the required bearing on the flanges .
for weldable steel in compression areas of flanges weld stiffeners as indicated or specified .
provide a tight fit against the compression flange for intermediate stiffeners not intended to support concentrated loads unless otherwise indicated or specified .
tight fit is defined as a gap not exceeding num inch .
v eyebars .
flame cut pin holes at least num inches smaller in diameter than the finished pin diameter .
securely fasten together all eyebars that are to be placed side by side in the structure in the order that they will be placed on the pin and bore both ends while clamped .
pack and matchmark eyebars for shipment and erection .
stamp all identifying marks on the edge of one head of each member with steel stencils after fabrication is completed so that the marks are visible when the bars are nested in place on the structure .
provide low stress type steel die stamps .
furnish eyebars straight and free from twists .
accurately locate pin holes on the centerline of the bar .
limit inclination of any bar to the plane of the truss to num inch to a foot .
simultaneously cut the edge of eyebars that lie between the transverse centerline of their pin holes with two mechanically operated torches abreast of each other and guided by a substantial template .
prevent distortion of the plates .
w annealing and stress relieving .
anneal full annealing and normalize structural members indicated according to astm anum .
finish machining boring and straightening structural members subsequent to heat treatment .
maintain the temperature uniformly throughout the furnace during heating and cooling so that the temperatures of any two points on the member differ by no more than numf at any one time .
do not anneal or normalize members consisting of grades numw hps numw num and hps numw steel .
stress relieve these members only if permitted .
do not allow the holding temperatures for stress relieving grades num and hps numw or grades numw and hps numw steels to exceed numf and numf respectively .
furnish a record of each furnace charge identifying the pieces in the charge and showing the temperature and schedule actually used .
provide proper instruments including recording pyrometers to determine the temperatures of numw numee num num change no .
num members in the furnace at any time .
submit the records of the treatment operation for approval .
when indicated or specified stress relieve members such as bridge shoes pedestals or other parts that are built up by welding sections of plate together according to section num of the aashtoaws dnummdnum .
x pins and rollers .
turn pins and rollers to the dimensions indicated and ensure that they are straight smooth and free from flaws .
forge and anneal pins and rollers more than num inches in diameter .
either forge and anneal or use coldfinished carbonsteel shafting for pins and rollers num inches or less in diameter .
in pins larger than num inches in diameter bore a hole not less than num inches in diameter full length along the axis of the pin after the forging has cooled to a temperature below the critical range and before annealing .
bore the hole under suitable conditions to prevent damage by cooling too rapidly .
y boring pin holes .
bore pin holes true to the specified diameter smooth and straight at right angles with the axis of the member and parallel with each other unless otherwise indicated or specified .
produce the final surface by a finishing cut .
do not allow the diameter of the pin hole to exceed that of the pin by more than num inch for pins num inches or less in diameter or by more than num inch for pins larger than num inches in diameter .
do not allow the distance outside to outside of end holes in tension members and inside to inside of end holes in compression members to vary more than num inch from that indicated or specified .
bore pin holes in builtup members after the member has been assembled .
z threads for bolts and pins .
provide threads for all bolts and pins for structural steel construction conforming to unified standard series unc ansi bnum class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads except furnish pin ends having a diameter of num num inches or threaded more than six threads to num inch .
aa full size tests .
when full size tests of fabricated structural members or eyebars are indicated or specified provide suitable facilities material supervision and labor necessary for making and recording the required tests .
bb marking and shipping .
paint or mark each member with an erection mark for identification .
furnish an erection diagram to the representative indicating the location of the erection marks on each member so that the marks can be located in the field .
furnish copies of material orders shipping statements and erection diagrams to the representative .
show the weights of the individual members on the statements .
mark the weights of members with a weight greater than num tons on the members .
load structural members on trucks or cars in such a manner that they may be transported and unloaded at their destination without being excessively stressed deformed or otherwise damaged .
pack bolts of one length and diameter and loose nuts or washers of each size separately .
ship pins small parts and packages of bolts washers and nuts in boxes crates kegs or barrels but do not allow the gross weight of any package to exceed num pounds .
plainly display a list and description of contents on the outside of each shipping container .
cc painting .
section num and as follows include the manufacturer of the complete selfcuring inorganic zinc system consisting of the primer intermediate tie and finish coats on the shipping papers .
dd identification of steel during fabrication .
use a system of assemblymarking individual pieces and issuing cutting instructions to the shop generally by crossreferencing the assemblymarks indicated on the shop drawings with the corresponding item covered on the mill purchase order that maintains the identity of the original piece .
only furnish steel from stock material that can be identified by heat number and mill test report .
during fabrication up to the point of assembling members clearly and legibly show the grade designation on each piece of steel other than grade num steel .
either write the grade designation on the piece or submit an alternate marking procedure to the chief structural materials engineer for approval .
use low stress die stamp or firmly attach a substantial tag to identify the grade designation of those pieces of steel other than grade num steel that before being assembled into members will be subjected to fabricating operations such as blast cleaning galvanizing heating for forming or painting that might obliterate paint color code markings .
if requested by the representative furnish an affidavit certifying that the identification of the steel was maintained according to this specification throughout the fabrication operation .
ee welded connections .
ensure that surfaces and edges to be welded are smooth uniform clean and free of defects that would adversely affect the quality of the weld .
prepare edges according to the aashtoaws dnummdnum .
numff numhh num num change no .
num ff numericallycontrolled drilled field connections .
section numcnum .
gg facing of bolted surfaces .
astm anum and as follows provide surfaces plane and true within the specified tolerances .
variations for surfaces designed to be flat conforming to astm anum tables anum anum and anum unless otherwise indicated or specified .
complete all welded attachments to bolted surfaces before machining surfaces to required tolerances .
grind only on surfaces less than num inches wide unless otherwise allowed .
use milling or other acceptable procedures to correct plate flatness to within the specified tolerances provide plate thickness as indicated .
identify each plate and the methods used to correct plate flatness to the specified tolerances .
replace rejected plates at no additional cost to the department .
hh determination of surface flatness .
furnish surfaces having flatness as determined by the following method place a precision straightedge that is a minimum of num inches longer than the surface to be measured in contact with and as parallel as possible to the surface .
the straightedge may be located in any position on the surface being evaluated and not necessarily at num degrees to the edge .
attempt to insert a feeler gage having the required tolerance under the straightedge .
flatness is acceptable if the feeler gage does not pass between the straightedge and the surface .
num numc num num change no .
num section numprestressed concrete bridge beams num general requirements a description .
this work is the fabrication storage and transportation of prestressed concrete bridge beams .
b shop drawings .
section num and as follows num .
drawing details .
include the following details items such as chairs hold downs tie rod tubes inserts and steel bearing plates incorporated into the beams .
list inserts and steel bearing plates by source type and supplier .
incidental items such as plain neoprene bearings tie rods and anchor bolts .
subassemblies .
strand patterns .
type of strand .
debonding .
deviation from tolerances specified in section nume .
anticipated camber based on the contract drawings .
if draped strands are used show the following additional information hold up and hold down forces .
other required data .
num.a deviations from the contract drawings .
the total force and the center of gravity of the strands may be adjusted to fit the strand type selected alternate strand patterns and the provision of additional strands in the beam for convenience may be used .
submit bridge shop drawings as specified in section numd for review and acceptance showing the alternate pattern and stress computation documenting the change .
num.b debonding of strands .
compute stresses in the beam end zones at each stress change location .
submit computations documenting these stresses .
stress calculations in the beam end zones for ibeams using debonding are not required .
reduce tensile stresses due to initial prestress force in the end sections of box beams to a maximum of f ci num by selective strand debonding .
if this can not be accomplished provide additional reinforcement bars to carry the full tensile force of the tensile stress block .
note fci cylinder strength of concrete pounds per square inch at initial prestress .
for box beam end block crack control do not debond more than num of the total number of strands for the end num inches and num of the total number of strands for the end num inches .
if debonding of ibeams is not specified the fabricator may debond up to num of the total number of strands for the end num inches .
do not debond more than num of the strands in any one row .
if debonding results in a fractional number of strands the number of debonded strands may be rounded up to the next higher number .
debonding the exterior strands of any row in the bottom flange is not allowed .
show debonding on the shop drawings .
num .
other shop drawings .
prepare separate shop drawings for prestressed beam subitems or items fabricated separately such as steel bearings moment connections and posttensioning operations .
shop drawings are not required for such items as closed cell neoprene sponge waterproofing and laminated metal shim neoprene bearing pads .
c definitions of terms .
num .
pretensioning .
prestressing with strands or wires called tendons to a predetermined force before placing concrete .
after the concrete hardens the tendons are released and the concrete is stressed by bonding .
numc numn num num change no .
num num .
posttensioning .
stressing the concrete after it has hardened by tensioning the tendons which are free to move in sheaths and anchoring them at each end of the member introducing the required force .
num .
preposttensioning .
a combination of pretensioning and posttensioning .
d rejections .
the representative may reject members accepted at the plant if they are found to be defective .
members which do not meet all specification requirements but may be suitable for use may be submitted to the department for evaluation and final disposition in accordance with section numc .
replace rejected members .
num materialconforming to the following requirements a cement .
type i ip is ii or iiisection num .
use the same cement source and type for all beams in the contract .
b pozzolan .
section num. c fine aggregate .
type asection num d coarse aggregate .
type a no .
num or no .
numsection num e water .
section num f admixtures .
section num g reinforcement bars .
section num h steel dowels .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
plain barsastm a num grade num or num threaded barsastm a num grade num num num or num threaded barsastm a num grade num num num or num threaded barsastm a num grade num or num i steel anchor bolts .
section numc j corrosion resistant fabricated structural steel for bearings .
aashto m num astm a num grade num or numw .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
k burlap .
section numd m box beam void forms .
construct using preformed cellular polystyrene astm c num type num or another acceptable material .
the use of cardboard void forms is specifically prohibited .
construct box beam void forms to be watertight and resistant to breakage and deformation during concrete placement .
waterproof the outside of forms if not constructed of approved preformed cellular polystyrene or an acceptable hotmelt wax coated polymer coated or asphaltpenetrated material .
test load or subject box beam void forms to a successful member installation as directed before acceptance .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
n tendons .
num .
general .
include two copies of typical loadelongation curves with each shipment .
give one copy to the inspector .
attach identification tags to each shipment .
at the fabrication plant a representative of the department will select samples to be submitted to the lts .
do not use strand larger than numinch diameter .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
numn nump num num change no .
num num .
samples for testing posttension members .
num feet of wire requiring heading .
enough wire not requiring heading to simulate numfoot parallellay cable .
num feet of strand between fittings .
num feet of bar between threads one sample per heat and not less than one sample per num bars .
two anchorage assemblies of each size and type each assembly complete with distribution plates .
num .
description .
num.a prestressing wire .
astm a num num.b numwire strand .
astm a num grade num num.c numwire uncoated normal relaxation stressrelieved strand .
aashto m num astm a num grade num.unless otherwise indicated use strand conforming to the following requirements nominal diameter of strand in .
minimum breaking strength of strand lbf minimum load at num extension lbf minimum elongation at breaking strength num num num num num num num num num num num num num.d numwire uncoated lowrelaxation strand .
aashto m num astm a num grade num .
unless otherwise indicated use strand conforming to the following requirements nominal diameter of strand in .
minimum breaking strength of strand lbf minimum load at num extension lbf minimum elongation at breaking strength num num num num num num num num num num num num num.e high tensile strength alloy bars .
manufacture and process from steel conforming to astm a num and a num .
stressrelieve by heat treatment and coldstretch proof stretch to the minimum yield strength specified below .
required physical properties after coldstretching guaranteed minimum ultimate tensile strength as certified by the manufacturer num pounds per square inch minimum yield strength measured by the num extension under load method num of ultimate minimum modulus of elasticity num pounds per square inch minimum elongation length in num bar diameters after rupture num minimum reduction of area after rupture num diameter tolerance num inch num inch calculate physical properties using nominal bar areas .
num.f special grade high tensile strength alloy bars .
required physical properties are identical to those for high tensile strength alloy bars as specified in section numnnum.e except that a guaranteed minimum ultimate tensile strength of num pounds per square inch is required .
tag and identify these bars for verification with mill certification .
p neoprene joint material .
identify neoprene material according to the type class and grade .
print stencil or otherwise affix this code to each pad at intervals of not more than num inches and in letters and numerals of not less than numinch height .
additional information such as lot or batch numbers date plant and place of manufacture trademark or name of manufacturer may also be added .
nump numa num num change no .
num certify as specified in section numbnum .
num .
closedcell neoprene sponge .
pads may be manufactured as sponge neoprene or expanded neoprene and may be composed of laminations .
use material conforming to the following astm d num type num class c grade num including the requirements of suffixes bnum and fnum astm d num quality retention rating of num after num weeks exposure num beam construction a plants and plant sites .
num .
general .
submit plans to the chief bridge engineer for review and acceptance of the design redesign or change in the use of accepted beds anchorage abutments and the deflecting facilities for draped strands .
provide adequate lighting for operations not completed in the daylight .
provide a drainage system for the removal of rainfall and curing water .
for member storage stabilize areas and grade to a level surface .
furnish necessary facilities for the inspection of material and workmanship .
the necessary facilities for inspection include a plant office as specified in section numa except a fourdrawer fireresistant dlabel metal file cabinet will be required in place of a twodrawer fireresistant dlabel metal file cabinet .
allow inspectors employed by the department unrestricted access to work in process and stored materials during plant working hours .
num .
plant chief engineer .
engage a chief engineer who has the overall responsibility for the adequacy of production facilities qc testing and the fabrication of members and who will ensure that beams are fabricated as designed .
for plants that offer design service the chief engineer is required to be a professional engineer registered in the state .
num .
beds and forms .
support casting beds on unyielding foundations .
for standard members use fixed and movable steel forms .
for nonstandard members and bulkheads that have limited use forms may be of lumber plywood or other material .
maintain accurate form alignment during the casting operation .
check alignment and grade for each setting and for proper strand clearance .
verify that the pallet is flat and level in the vicinity of the bearing area .
make joints smooth and tight to prevent leakage of mortar .
plug holes and slots in the forms .
for exposed members use form ties chairs and inserts that are recessed in the concrete by at least num inch or use stainless steel accessories .
do not use continuous soffit forms longer than num feet if the forms are rigidly anchored to the bed .
if slight differential movements between forms and beds can cause damage to the member anchor the forms to prevent differential movements or loosen them so movements can occur without damage to the member or forms .
clean beds and forms after each use .
prevent accumulation of coatings used for bond breakers .
num .
plant acceptance .
num.a general .
do not begin fabrication before the chief structural materials engineers inspection and acceptance of the plant .
plant expansions are subject to the same inspection and acceptance .
all beams are to be produced from a single producer and plant location .
provide a permanent building for the departments acceptance .
new plants will be required to satisfactorily produce a sample beam and demonstrate and acceptable level of qc and conformance with specifications and product tolerances before receiving approval to begin production .
currently accepted plants will retain approved status unless the acceptance is rescinded for failure to comply with the plant requirements specified in section numa or until ownership changes .
reinstatement will be based on conformance with the plant requirements specified in section numa .
material equipment testing procedures methods of fabrication handling storage and transportation are subject to inspection and acceptance .
plants may be accepted to fabricate one or more of the following beam types box beamswith straight strands ibeamswith straight strands numa numb num num change no .
num pa bulbtee beamswith straight strands box beamswith straight and draped strands ibeamswith straight and draped strands pa bulbtee beamswith straight and draped strands box beamswith straight and debonded strands ibeamswith straight and debonded strands pa bulbtee beamswith straight and debonded strands box beamswith preposttensioned tendons ibeamswith preposttensioned tendons pa bulbtee beamswith preposttensioned tendons nextbeam nonstandard beam sections each beam type will be subject to inspection during manufacturing storage and shipment .
register and certify the plant under the prestress concrete institute pci plant certification program and submit a valid certificate to the chief structural materials engineer at num lab lane harrisburg pa num .
submit an annual endorsed copy for continued qualification .
num.b bed approval .
for each casting bed offered for production submit a complete set of construction drawings and detailed design calculations sealed and signed by a professional engineer registered in the state to the chief bridge engineer for review .
theoretical analysis and applicable design code review must be based on a test load equal to num times the maximum working load and include the following non self stressing beds overturning safety factor of abutments with beds having vertical uprights embedded into the foundation stress analysis of embedded vertical uprights including buckling and foundation analysis buckling analysis of bed slab including the effects of hold down forces for draped strands when applicable bulkhead design for transferring the strand forces to the uprights computed theoretical shortening of the bed under full test load cumulative deflections of all structural components including tilting of uprights into the full test load and flexure of the bulkhead beams self stressing beds anchorage of the bed to the foundation buckling and overturning safety factors and theoretical bed shortening under the full test load when the above requirements are satisfactorily met test load each bed for approval under the supervision of the department .
each bed will be approved for and limited to a maximum allowable bed moment force and eccentricity that may be used during production and equal to the maximum bed moment applied during the bed test divided by num. b qc .
num .
general .
establish a level of qc based on uniform production practices .
submit a qc plan developed in accordance with the guidelines listed in publication num including mix designs to the chief structural materials engineer bridge design and technology division structural materials section for review and approval .
include with the qc plan a company organizational chart indicating a separate chain of command from the qc manager to the ownerplant manager independent of the production manager .
resubmit the qc plan mix design and organizational chart when required due to changes in materials processes or personnel .
num .
qc manager .
provide a qc manager who has overall responsibility for the adequacy of production facilities qc sampling and testing and fabrication of the product and who will ensure that items are fabricated as designed and specified .
numb numc num num change no .
num num .
qc personnel .
do not proceed with production until qualified personnel are present and approved by the department .
assign sufficient qualified personnel with prestress concrete fabrication experience to be responsible for qc and sampling and testing during the complete fabrication process storage and shipment .
technicians responsible for concrete sampling and testing are required to provide written evidence that they successfully completed the certification requirements for an aci grade i field technician or have approval from the chief structural materials engineer as a technicianintraining .
after initially obtaining the aci certification technicians are not required to obtain recertification unless there has been more than a num month interval where actual plastic concrete testing has not been performed by the technician .
assign plant qc personnel certified in the pci quality control personnel certification program level ii during tensioning detensioning and casting operations .
assign plant qc managers certified in the pci quality control personnel certification program level iii with overall responsibility for the quality control program .
these requirements may be waived by the chief structural materials engineer if alternative experience andor certifications are submitted and considered to be equivalent .
c prestressing .
for all methods of tensioning determine force in the tendons through application of applied force and verified by elongation .. do not have the jacking stress exceed num of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel num fs .
measure elongations to an accuracy of num inches .
verify at the completion of tensioning that the two control measurements force and elongation agree algebraically within num of the computed theoretical values .
suspend the tensioning operation if discrepancies are in excess of num until the source of error is determined and corrected .
if the measurements do not agree within num a load cell may be added at the dead end .
if force measurements agree within num between the gauge at the live end and the load cell the elongation agreement may be waived .
num .
safety .
provide safety measures to prevent accidents due to breakage of prestressing steel or slippage of grips .
num .
methods of force measurement .
measure forces using a primary measuring system .
check primary measurements using a secondary measuring system .
acceptable methods of stressing force measurement consist of num.a curves .
elongation determined from current stressstrain or loadelongation curves furnished by the manufacturer .
an average modulus may be used if acceptable provided the force indicated falls within the specified tolerance limits .
num.b pressure gages .
pressure gages that measure force by the pressure applied to hydraulic jacks .
furnish digital readouts or dials for these gages a minimum of num inches in diameter and calibrated with the jacking system .
num.c dynamometers .
dynamometers that are connected in tension into the stressing system for the initial force application .
num .
gauging system .
equip tensioning systems with accurately calibrated gages for measuring the stressing forces .
calibrate hydraulic gages dynamometers load cells or other devices for measuring the stressing load to an accuracy of reading within num .
ensure that a qualified testing laboratory calibrate and issue a certified calibration curve with each gage .
recalibrate if a gauging system shows indication of erratic results and in any case at intervals not greater than one year .
gages for single strand jacks may be calibrated by an acceptable and calibrated load cell .
calibrate gages for large multiple strand jacks acting singly or in parallel by proving rings or by load cells placed on either side of the movable end carriage .
provide pressure gages and dynamometers with a fullpressure or load capacity of approximately twice their normal working ranges .
limit the loads to not less than num or more than num of the total graduated capacity unless calibration data establish consistent accuracy over a wider range .
each gage is required to indicate loads directly in pounds or be accompanied by a chart with which the dial reading can be converted into pounds .
direct reading gages are preferred .
equip tensioning systems employing hydraulic gages with appropriate bypass pipes valves and fittings so the gage pointers remain steady until the jacking force is released .
mount gages near eye level within num feet of the operator and position so readings can be obtained without parallax .
num .
control of jacking force .
use either manual or automatic pressure cutoff valves for stopping the jacks at the required force .
for automatic pressure cutoff valves use valves capable of adjustment so that the jacking force numc numc num num change no .
num corresponds to the required force .
verify the setting accuracy for automatic pressure cutoff valves whenever there is reason to suspect improper results and at the beginning of each days operation .
num .
wire failure in tendons .
locate wire breaks and tie the ends to the strand with wire to preclude the possibility of raveling during concrete vibration .
for sevenwire strands remove and replace strands with more than one broken wire or with more than the following number of wire breaks in a strand pattern less than num strands no wire breaks allowed num to num strands one wire break allowed num to num strands two wire breaks allowed num and more strands three wire breaks allowed failure of wires in parallelwire posttensioned tendons is acceptable provided the total area of wire failure is not more than num of the total area of tendons in any member or no more than one wire fails in any tendon .
num .
pretensioning .
num.a general .
in systems of pretensioning apply the load in two increments .
apply the initial load to the individual strands to straighten them to eliminate slack and to provide a starting or reference point for measuring elongation .
apply the final load for which elongation of tendons is computed and measured .
without verification of strand tension by load cells the maximum permissible holding time for tensioned strands before starting concrete placement is num hours .
if it is anticipated that the holding time for tensioned strands will exceed num hours place load cells during initial tensioning on two separate strands selected by the representative to verify that the strand tension remains within num of the theoretical value .
num.b forms bond breakers strand surfaces .
before stringing strands inspect the bottom of forms for cleanliness and accuracy of alignment .
apply bond breaker coating to the contact surface of forms .
use a form coating that dries to a surface hardness and does not contaminate the strands .
make sure the coating is dry before the strands come in contact with it .
num.c stringing strands .
furnish strands in either coils packs without reels or on reels .
string strands individually or in multiples .
relieve the strand rotation when strands are pulled from coils or packs without reels .
do not reuse strands containing former visegrip points unless the points are outside the new strand vise locations .
do not reuse portions of strands that have been in contact with draping mechanisms .
num.d strand vises .
use strand vises capable of anchoring stressing loads positively with a minimum of slippage .
assemble strand chucks with compatible components from the same manufacturer to avoid improper fit and seating on strands .
clean lubricate and inspect the vises between each use .
do not use grips that become visibly worn or distorted or that allow slippage in excess of numinch .
clean and inspect a full set of strand vises before starting each stressing operation .
num.e measurement of forces .
for gage readings elongation measurements and calculations for elongation include appropriate allowances for operational losses in the tensioning system .
losses include strand slippage movement of anchorages and abutments elongation of abutment anchorage rods strand rotation temperature variation friction bed shortening and other forces and influences acting on the strands .
make calculations for elongation available for inspection .
after applying initial tensioning establish reference points for measuring the elongation due to final tensioning .
num.f operational losses .
num.f.num friction in jacking system .
num.f.num.a single strand tensioning .
if rams used in jacks for single strand tensioning are small friction losses in the jacking system may usually be ignored .
verify gage pressure by measured elongation or load cells .
numc numc num num change no .
num num.f.num.b multiple strand tensioning .
in multiple strand tensioning systems clean and lubricate the sliding surfaces to minimize friction .
determine and establish a force override compensatory operational loss correction for strand patterns if the primary and secondary force measurement systems exceed the allowable num variation .
num.f.num thermal effect .
for anchored abutment non self stressing beds make thermal adjustments to compensate for the loss in stress due to the change in temperature if the prestressing steel is tensioned at a temperature more than numf lower than the estimated temperature of the concrete and the prestressing steel at the time of initial set of the concrete .
increase the calculated elongation num for each numf of temperature variation .
prestress strands only if the ambient temperature is above numf .
after the strands are tensioned maintain the temperature of the air surrounding the strand at numf or more .
num.g initial tensioning .
for num inch and num inch diameter strand do not exceed num of the specified final tensioning force or num pounds whichever is greater .
when num inch diameter strands are approved for use do not exceed num pounds .
measure the initial load within a tolerance of num pounds .
do not use elongation measurement as an initial force measure .
in single strand tensioning the initial and final loads may be applied in immediate succession on each strand .
acceptable methods of applying initial stress are num.g.num pressure jacks .
use the same jack for single strand tensioning as for initial tensioning provided the jack is equipped with a proper gauging system for measuring the initial force .
num.g.num fence stretchers .
apply load using fence stretchers and measure with a dynamometer .
refer to section numcnum for capacity .
num.g.num other methods .
acceptable methods that provide a definite and uniform load .
num.h final tensioning .
use paint to permanently mark the reference point on strands to be used to check slippage .
num.h.num tensioning straight strands .
num.h.num.a single strand tensioning .
use jackmounted pressure gages for the primary system of force measurement .
check elongation against pressure gage readings on the first and last strands tensioned and at least num of the remaining strands but on not less than six strands .
check slippage at strand vises .
the computed elongation including operational losses and equivalent elongation for initial tensioning converted into force is required to be within num of the pressure gage reading .
at least every num calendar days or when directed use load cells as a check of the gauging or tensioning system .
num.h.num.a.num .
form shortening .
for self stressing beds if the loss in tension from form shortening is expected to exceed num adjust the strand tension of the previously tensioned strands .
retension strands with losses exceeding num .
do not exceed a strand stress after seating of num of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength .
num.h.num.b multiple strand tensioning .
use jackmounted pressure gages for the primary system of force measurement .
for uniform application of load to strand the face of the anchorage at final load is required to be in a plane parallel to its position under initial load .
verify parallel movement by equal measurements of movement on opposite anchorage sides and check the plumb position of the anchorage before and after final load application .
check slippage at strand vises .
at least every num calendar days or when directed use load cells as a check of the gauging or tensioning system .
num.h.num tensioning draped strands .
tension draped pretensioned strands initially and finally by one of the following methods tensioned in the final design position .
numc numc num num change no .
num tensioned first and then deflected to the final design position .
use primary and secondary force measuring systems approved by the department .
num.h.num.a tensioning strand in the final design position .
num.h.num.a.num single strand tensioning .
stress the strands to their final value in their design position for the fulllength of the bed .
pass the strands over saddles roller fixtures or pins with a minimum numinch diameter to minimize friction at deflection points and to prevent strand damage .
design holdup and holddown devices with an adequate factor of safety but not exceeding num of the yield strength of the material used .
maintain strand positions within required tolerances under the induced loads .
design holddown devices that are free to move and are able to bisect the drape angle .
if devices are not free to move use safety procedures to eliminate strand bonding or restrain at holdup or holddown .
measure strand force and elongation as specified in section numcnum .
when final tensioning is done by jacking strands from one end of the bed place two load cells at the dead anchor end of two different strands selected by the representative .
the force indicated by these load cells is required to be not less than num of the specified design value .
if the computed elongation has not been attained at the jacking end when the load value shown by the pressure gage or load cells is exceeded by num jack the strand from the other end to the balance of the computed elongation .
if achieving the computed elongation results in an overstress in excess of num as shown on the gage reduce the number of deflection points and consequently the number of members on the bed until the elongation can be attained with not more than num overload .
num.h.num.a.num multiple strand tensioning .
for draped strands control the specified tension in strands without exceeding the force tolerance limits specified in section numcnum.h.num.a.num .
num.h.num.b tensioning of strand in straight condition and subsequent deflection .
arrange beams symmetrically to midbed .
position deflection devices in longitudinal and vertical directions to fit the anchor system .
measure the intermediate force value by pressure gage and elongation as specified in section numcnum .
place two load cells on two separate strands selected by the representative to verify the design load .
at the discretion of the representative the application of these load cells may be required only at each third line of beams on the same bed for the same bed layout .
provide for simultaneous lifting or depressing at all bed points in order to distribute friction and any restraint at deflection devices .
however if acceptable depressing may be done on at least num of the deflection points simultaneously and alternately symmetrical to the bed center .
load cell readings are required to be within num of each other and each within num of the gage reading .
num.h.num debonded strand at ends of member .
debond as shown on the shop drawings .
use acceptable sleeves or taping .
num.h.num strand splices .
only one splice per strand is allowed unless force measurement is by load cell .
for single strand tensioning the number of strands that may be spliced in each bed is not restricted .
for multiple strand tensioning either splice all strands and adjust the elongation for average slippage or splice no more than num of the strands in which case no slippage allowance is required place strands in the same lay or direction of twist .
cut the ends using shears or abrasive cutting wheels .
do not splice strand within the form where other strands are under applied force .
num.h.num strand position .
position strands as indicated .
use chairs to eliminate sagging of strands in the bottom rows .
num.i detensioning .
num.i.num general .
transfer force to members after the concrete strength determined by cylinder tests has reached the specified transfer strength .
transfer force immediately following the curing period while the concrete is still warm and moist .
numc numd num num change no .
num remove or loosen forms ties inserts holddowns or other devices that restrict the members longitudinal movement along the bed or perform alternate detensioning by a method and sequence to minimize longitudinal movement .
keep the prestressing forces nearly symmetrical around the members vertical axis and release the tension using a method to minimize sudden or shock loading .
limit eccentricity around the vertical axis to one strand .
num.i.num detensioning of draped strands .
detension using a procedure provided by the fabricators representative for the type of system used .
num.i.num multiple strand detensioning for straight strands or draped strands .
provide a length of num inches or more between bulkheads .
num.i.num strand detensioning by cutting .
in single strand detensioning release the strands by heatcutting according to a pattern and cutting chart that is available at each cutting location along the bed .
the fabricators engineer will provide a pattern and cutting chart for each plant and bed .
num.i.num .
coating of strand ends .
as an option to a grouted recess as shown in bcnumm and when the ends of the beams are to be incorporated into a continuity diaphragm cut prestressing strands off flush with the end of the member clean the exposed strand and the end of the beam within num inch of any exposed strands by wire brushing or abrasive blast cleaning to remove all dirt and residue that is not firmly bonded to the metal or concrete surfaces and apply zincrich paint to the exposed strand conforming to the requirements of astm a num to achieve an average dry film thickness over the cut ends of not less than num mil .
num .
posttensioning .
fabricate members as indicated and as specified in section num .
perform posttensioning at the plant unless otherwise designated or specified .
num .
preposttensioning .
fabricate members as indicated .
d fabrication .
num .
protection of prestressing steel .
store prestressing steel under shelter and keep free of deleterious material such as grease oil wax dirt paint loose rust or other similar contaminants that reduce the bond between steel and concrete .
do not use steel showing corrosion etching pitting or scaling of the surfaces .
a light coating of surface rust is acceptable if it can be removed completely from the steel by wiping with a cloth .
do not store prestressing steel on a surface that contributes to galvanic or battery action .
do not use as a ground for electric welding .
protect from electric welding sparks .
num .
bars mesh reinforcement inserts and chairs .
fabricate and place bar and mesh reinforcement as indicated and within specified tolerances .
secure reinforcing to beds and forms using chairs blocking or ties to tendons so that the reinforcing maintains its position during placement and vibration of concrete .
bars may be fabricated into cages by tying and tack welding using lowhydrogen electrodes .
use only qualified tack welders to perform tack welding .
inspect welds for soundness and for freedom from undercutting .
do not weld immediately adjacent to a cold bend .
to provide maximum cover bend tiewire ends into the member .
do not support cages on tensioned strands .
place inserts as shown on the shop drawings .
recess scaffolding inserts in the concrete at least numinch or as indicated .
recessing is not required for structural inserts intended to anchor threaded reinforcing bars for diaphragms or utility supports .
fabricate inserts for utility supports from corrosionresistant material galvanize or apply another acceptable equal coating .
install selfdrilling inserts only at the fabrication plant and test for soundness .
use chairs that support and space the strands and mild reinforcing within the tolerances specified in section nume .
use stainlesssteel or plasticcoated legs for chairs set on the bottom pallet or set against a form side .
concrete block supports may be used on boxbeam void form tops .
when indicated place epoxycoated reinforcement as specified in section num in the top slab of adjacent box beams .
num .
bearing areas .
numd numd num num change no .
num num.a embedded steel bearing plates .
set embedded plates level align parallel to each other and anchor in the exact location indicated .
num.b concrete bearing areas .
finish concrete bearing areas that receive neoprene bearing pads to true flat planes to ensure uniform bearing on the entire area .
use smooth and unyielding pallet forms .
num .
forms for internal voids .
use the type shown on the accepted shop drawings .
during placement and vibration of concrete maintain form positions within the limits of dimensional tolerances with respect to the horizontal and vertical axis of the member .
do not strap void forms to prestressed strands .
during vibration of the concrete restrain the tendency of void forms to float .
check void positions during casting at least every num feet .
seal ends and splices by taping or by other acceptable means .
unless required void forms manufactured to provide very tight seams need not be sealed .
vent and drain rectangular void forms for each spliced subunit and for the full void compartment length .
puncture box beam void forms at vent and drainage holes after removing the beam from the casting bed .
num .
concrete .
num.a testing .
verify that the concrete attains both the required detensioning and numday minimum strengths shown on the approved shop drawings .
if the test results of the acceptance cylinders fail to meet the required numday minimum concrete strength the disposition of the concrete beams will be resolved as specified in section num .
num.b air content .
provide an air content of num num for traditional mixes and num num for self consolidating scc mixes .
the air content requirement may be waived if the mix meets the following additional qualification tests before production rapid chloride permeability aashto t num num coulombs at numdays freeze thaw resistance astm c num procedure a or b minimum durability factor of num at num cycles .
num.c mixture .
provide concrete conforming to section num aci num and meeting the specified compressive strength or other requirements shown on the approved shop drawings .
use enough water to obtain workability but do not exceed a water cement ratio of num .
use a maximum of num pounds of cement per cubic yard .
make trial mixtures according to aci num .
mold cure and test cylinders using the procedures specified for the beam concrete .
unless otherwise approved produce all beams from a single concrete mix design .
num.c.num traditional nonself consolidating mixtures .
select an appropriate slump value that will provide a workable mix for the prestressed beams .
at no time is the slump upper limit to exceed num inches for mixes with high range waterreducing admixtures superplasticizers .
reject the concrete if the upper limit is exceeded on any slump test .
maintain the cement concrete consistency with num num inches on either side of the selected value .
num.c.num self consolidating concrete mixtures scc .
perform slump flow testing in accordance with astm c num .
evaluate the visual stability index vsi of the mixture when the slump flow is measured during testing .
reject mixtures with a vsinum .
conduct jring testing in accordance with astm c num whenever the slump flow test is performed .
establish a slump flow target for production of not less than num inches nor more than num inches and maintain the slump flow within a range of num inches of the target .
reject the concrete if the upper specification limit is exceeded .
if the slump flow test result is less than the lower production range limit or the difference between the slump flow and jring results is greater than num inches reject the concrete mixture unless the mixture has been approved for vibration and is subsequently vibrated .
take immediate corrective action whenever the slump flow limits or action points are exceeded and test succeeding batches until material control has been reestablished .
perform the following additional qualification tests for scc mixtures before production column segregation test astm c num num maximum rapid chloride permeability aashto t num num coulombs at numdays numd numd num num change no .
num freeze thaw resistance astm c num procedure a or b minimum durability factor of num strand bond qualification ptm no .
num num.d mixing and placing conditions .
mix and deliver the concrete as specified in section num .
discard concrete that develops initial hardening or has become unsatisfactory for any reason .
do not remix or add water .
do not use materials containing frost lumps or crusts of hardened material .
do not place concrete in forms on casting beds around reinforcement on prestressing steel or on other fixtures if the ambient temperature is below numf or above numf .
place only concrete having a temperature of numf numf .
num.d.num during cool weather .
if the air temperature is below numf but not lower than numf heat the mixing water to not less than numf or more than numf .
ensure that the aggregate is free of frozen lumps and maintain aggregate temperature at not less than numf or more than numf at the time the aggregate is charged into the mixer .
do not use water in excess of numf until the cement has been mixed with the aggregate .
num.e placing concrete .
place concrete without segregation using an acceptable method .
deposit the concrete in its final position in each part of the form .
do not work or flow the concrete along the forms from the point of deposit .
work the concrete under and around the prestressing steel and reinforcement .
once concrete placement has begun continue for all beams on the bed .
if the concreting operation is stopped for an extended period of time due to mechanical failure inclement weather or other causes begin curing completed beams .
remove the concrete from unfinished beams .
strands may be reused if not damaged during concrete removal and with approval of the chief structural materials engineer .
place concrete in lifts as shown on the shop drawings or as otherwise directed .
do not consolidate ssc mixtures without approval and unless the mixture was qualified within num inches of the upper production slump flow limit during the trial batching and evaluation phase .
for traditional mixtures consolidate the plastic concrete by internal vibration .
use vibrators with numinch to num numinch heads for penetrating the strand pattern .
use vibrators only to consolidate the concrete after it has been properly placed .
operate vibrators vertically pushing into and pulling out of the concrete slowly .
do not hold the vibrators in one spot long enough to cause segregation .
external vibrators may be used to reduce surface blemishes .
num.e.num test cylinders .
mold a minimum of four concrete acceptance cylinders for each beam cast under the supervision of a department representative .
mold the cylinders according to ptm no .
num from the concrete being placed into each unit .
handle and cure the cylinders in the same manner as the beam .
remove test cylinders from the bed a minimum of num hour before the scheduled time for detensioning .
cool cylinders from heatcured beds for approximately numhour when bonded capping methods are used according to ptm no .
num .
cure the capped cylinders for numhour before testing .
test the cylinders according to ptm no .
num to verify minimum concrete transfer strength and numday minimum concrete strength .
test cylinders under the supervision of a department representative .
match and mark test cylinders with the beams they represent and record test results so the beams can be readily identified .
submit the test results to the department representative at the plant .
if acceptance test cylinders fail to meet the numday minimum strength requirement refer to section num for evaluation and disposition of the beams .
num.e.num finishing .
make concrete surfaces true and even free from rough open or honeycombed areas depressions or projections .
do not use brush or bag finishing .
do not paint with grout or neat cement .
do not add water to the concrete to facilitate finishing .
after the concrete has been placed as specified in section numdnum.e use a template to strikeoff the top of beams level .
before the concrete has initially set finish the top surface with a stiff wire bristle broom flat tine wire broom or template .
run the broom or template from edge to edge of the beam in a transverse direction to produce not less than num scores per inch to achieve a final texture from num inch to num inch in depth .
do not penetrate the concrete to depths where the brooming or tining operation pulls coarse aggregate to the surface .
finish the top of the beam with the type of finish shown on the shop drawings .
numd numd num num change no .
num num.f repairs and patching .
do not repair damaged areas unless preapproved procedures are used or otherwise approved by the chief structural materials engineer .
ensure uniform appearance and color .
the departments representative will inspect repairs .
maintain a minimum numf environment until the repaired areas have cured .
if at any time during the curing period the curing temperature falls below numf the departments representative will consider the work deficient and will reject the work .
before patching clean holes left by tie rods strand holddown devices recessed strand pockets or other temporary inserts .
use a hammer to pack the holes with stiff dry mortar of the same material used in the concrete .
fill surface blemishes on the outside fascia beam surfaces with mortar as specified in section numd .
num.g curing concrete .
cure and protect concrete until prestress transfer has been accomplished .
construct and maintain a suitable curing enclosure to retain heat and moisture around the beams .
do not use membrane curing .
the full concrete curing cycle consists of the initial curing phase the intermediate curing phase and the final curing phase .
num.g.num initial curing phase .
the initial curing phase begins when each beam is completely covered with saturated covering .
after each beam has been cast and immediately after the concrete has initially set cover exposed surfaces using a double thickness of saturated burlap or cotton or jute mats .
place covering carefully to avoid damaging the concrete .
during the initial curing phase which extends over a period of not less than num hours or more than the time required to achieve initial set apply artificial heat if necessary to maintain the temperature at approximately numf within the enclosure .
num.g.num intermediate curing phase .
cure beams using either steam curing or saturated cover curing .
maintain curing for num hours or until at least one hour after the required transfer strength is attained whichever is greater .
an additional hour of curing is not required if the transfer strength is attained after num hours .
num.g.num.a steam curing .
raise the temperature within the enclosure to between numf and numf at a rate not exceeding numf per hour .
use steam of num relative humidity .
ensure full circulation between the beams and the enclosure .
do not direct steam jets onto forms or beams .
num.g.num.b saturated cover curing .
raise the temperature within the enclosure and the temperature of the covering material to between numf and numf at a rate not exceeding numf per hour .
keep the covering thoroughly saturated throughout the curing process .
use water with a temperature that is not more that numf from the enclosure temperature .
control the temperature of the water to maintain a uniform enclosure temperature at the beam surface .
forms may be removed after num hours provided saturated cover curing is continued on all beam surfaces up to the time of transfer .
num.g.num.c record of curing temperatures .
record curing temperatures for the full curing cycle up to removal of beams from the bed .
provide one continuous record chart of curing temperatures for every num feet of casting bed .
use accurate automatic recording devices with temperature pickup devices properly placed either within the curing enclosure or embedded in the beam .
locate the temperature pickup devices away from direct contact with steam or water jets .
if enclosures are removed to facilitate form removal place any nonembedded pickup devices on top of a numinch board directly on the saturated covering and overlay three additional layers of saturated covering .
if embedded probes must be temporarily disconnected from the beam during this process reattach immediately .
mark the curing chart to indicate the point at which this change of pickup location is made .
use recording charts covering a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours per one full revolution or as otherwise permitted .
record beam number shop drawing number date start time and time concrete placement was completed and time of prestress transfer on the chart .
every year certify the accuracy of the recording device .
display the certificate with the recorder .
place the recorder so the chart may be observed at all times during the curing cycle .
after completion of curing submit the charts to the inspectorincharge .
num.g.num final curing phase .
this phase consists of prestress transfer and beam storage .
numd nume num num change no .
num following prestress transfer lower the enclosure temperature to numf at a rate not exceeding numf per hour until ambient temperature is reached .
conduct transfer of prestress as specified in section numdnum.h .
store beams as specified in section numf for a minimum of num hours .
num.h transfer of prestress .
do not transfer prestress before the specified concrete strength has been attained .
retain the saturated covering on the top and sides of the beams and continue curing until final prestress transfer is complete .
transfer prestress as specified in section numcnum.i .
transfer prestress not later than num days after casting provided the minimum specified concrete strength at transfer has been reached .
if this strength has not been reached the representative will declare the concrete deficient in strength and may reject the deficient member .
e tolerances .
num .
prestressed concrete members .
fabricate members to plan dimensions within the following tolerances tolerances are not cumulative .
the representative will not accept members that deviate from tolerances unless they are accepted in accordance with section num c . num.a prestressed concrete ibeamspa bulbtee beams .
depth flanges web and fillets num inch depth overall num inch num inch width flanges and fillets num inch num inch width web num inch num inch length of beam longitudinal tolerances based on design length as indicated at centerline num inch num inch centertocenter of bearings num inch num inch web perpendicularity greater of num inch or num inchvertical foot measurement while the beam is on the fabrication bed verify web perpendicularity at beam ends midspan and quarter points using a bubble level .
if the level indicates the web is not truly vertical verify and record measurements establishing offset from center of top flange to center of bottom flange using a plumb bob square or other method acceptable to the chief structural materials engineer at beam ends midspan and quarter points along the length of the beam .
nume nume num num change no .
num centerline of bearing to beam end num inch exposed beam ends deviation from square or designated skew horizontal numinch vertical num inch per inch of beam height but not more than num inch for beams up to num inches in depth and num inch for beams over num inches in depth .
threaded inserts spacing between the center of inserts and from center of inserts to ends of beams num inch concrete bearing area deviation from plane at bottom of beam num inch dap depths deviation from the specified dap depth dimensions as measured from a straightedge parallel to the centerline of the beam .
num inch out of plane deviation from one beam end relative to the other beam end measured on the bottom of the beam with a level at a right angle to the beam length.num num inch stirrup bars projection above top of beam num inch stirrup bars longitudinal spacing num inches num inch for num inches or greater spacing and numinch for spacing less than num inches horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the beam centerline num inch per num feet horizontal misalignment of adjacent form sections numinch max .
location of each strand num inch location of each deflected strand at the beam end num inch position of posttensioning duct num inch longitudinal position of holddown points for deflected strands num inches longitudinal position of handling devices num inches nume nume num num change no .
num camber differential between adjacent beamsnum num inch per num feet of span up to a maximum of num num inches for beams up to num feet in length and num num inches for beams over num feet in length .
camber deviation from plan camber as measured at release or at beginning of beam storage at the fabricating plant plan camber num inch or greater num plan camber less than num inch num inch position of positive moment connection reinforcement bars beams made continuous horizontal position of the bar at end face of beam and end of projection measured perpendicular to the end face of beam num inch projection from end face of beam num inch note num verify tolerance approximately num weeks before shipping .
num.b prestressed concrete box beams .
depth overall num inch num inch width overall num inch beam length at centerline longitudinal tolerances based on design length indicated num inch num inch wall thickness web num inch num inch depth top slab num inch spread box num inch num inch adjacent box depth bottom slab num inch num inch web perpendicularity greater of num inch or num inchvertical foot measurement while the beam is on the fabrication bed verify web perpendicularity at beam ends midspan and quarter points using a bubble level .
nume nume num num change no .
num if the level indicates the web is not truly vertical verify and record measurements establishing offset from center of top flange to center of bottom flange using a plumb bob square or other method acceptable to the chief structural materials engineer at beam ends midspan and quarter points along the length of the beam .
horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the beam centerline up to numfoot lengths num inch numfoot to numfoot lengths num inch greater than numfoot lengths num inch horizontal misalignment of adjacent form sections numinch max .
camber deviation from plan camber as measured at release or at beginning of beam storage at the fabrication plant plan camber num inch or greater num plan camber less than num inch num inch camber differential between adjacent beamsnum num inch per num feet but not greater than numinch for beams up to num feet in length and num num inches for beams over num feet up to num feet in length .
camber differential between minimum and maximum camber in one spannum num inches max .
location of each strand num inch stirrup bars projection above top of beam num inch spread box num inch adjacent box stirrup bars longitudinal spacing num inches num inch for num inches or greater spacing and numinch for spacing less than num inches longitudinal position of holddown points for deflected strands num inches bridge barrier bars projection above top of beam numinch numinch longitudinal position of handling devices num inches concrete bearing area variation from plane surface when tested with a numinch nume nume num num change no .
num straightedge through middle half of member dap depths deviation from the specified dap depth dimensions as measured from a straightedge parallel to the centerline of the beam .
numinch out of plane deviation from one beam end relative to the other beam end measured on the bottom of the beam with a level at a right angle to the beam length.num num inch dowel tubes spacing between the tube centers and from the tube centers to the member ends numinch tie rod tubes spacing between the tube centers and from the tube centers to the member ends numinch tie rod tubes spacing from tube centers to the beam bottom numinch threaded inserts spacing between the center of inserts and from center of inserts to ends of beams numinch square ends deviation from square numinch skew ends deviation from designated skew num inch vertical and slanted ends deviation from plan dimension numinch for beams up to num inches in depth and numinch for beams over num inches in depth .
slab void position numinch from end of void to center of posttensioning hole position of posttensioning duct num inch position of positive moment connection reinforcement bars beams made continuous horizontal position of the bar at end face of beam and end of projection measured perpendicular to the end face of beam num inch projection from end face of beam num inch note num verify tolerance approximately num weeks before shipping .
num.c prestressed concrete next beams .
nume nume num num change no .
num depth stem and fillets num inch thickness top flange num inch num inch depth overall num inch width flanges num inch width stem num inch length of beam longitudinal tolerances based on design length as indicated at centerline num inch num inch centertocenter of bearings num inch centerline of bearing to beam end num inch stem perpendicularity num inchvertical foot measurement while the beam is on the fabrication bed verify stem perpendicularity at beam ends using a special constructed jig .
distance between stems num inch exposed beam ends deviation from square or designated skew horizontal numinch vertical num inch per foot of beam height but no more than num inch deviations of ends vertical batter num inch threaded inserts spacing between the center of inserts and from center of inserts to ends of beams num inch concrete bearing area deviation from plane at bottom of beam num inch blockoutdap depths deviation from the specified dap depth dimensions as measured from a straightedge parallel to the centerline of the beam num inch stirrup bars projection above top of beam num inch stirrup bars longitudinal spacing num inches num inch for num inches or greater spacing and numinch for spacing less than num inches nume numf num num change no .
num horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the beam centerline num inch per num feet horizontal misalignment of adjacent form sections numinch max .
location of each strand num inch position of posttensioning duct num inch longitudinal position of handling devices num inches camber differential between adjacent beamsnum num inch per num feet of span up to a maximum of num inch .
position of positive moment connection reinforcement bars beams made continuous horizontal position of the bar at end face of beam and end of projection measured perpendicular to the end face of beam num inch projection from end face of beam num inch note num verify tolerance approximately num weeks before shipping .
num .
void forms outside dimensions .
length num inch height and width num inch num inch num .
closedcell neoprene sponge .
do not exceed num inch for laminate unevenness at the edge of finished laminated closedcell neoprene sponge pads .
num .
maximum width of deck .
outtoout of beams specified width plus num inch per joint for adjacent boxes .
num .
steel bearings .
section numq f handling and storage .
members may be handled immediately after completion of stressing .
if stressing is not done in a continuous operation do not handle members before they are sufficiently stressed to sustain the forces and bending moments due to handling .
for handling lift beams from the locations shown on the shop drawings using accepted devices .
if the air temperature is below numf do not remove beams from the beds until they are surfacedry .
if the air temperature is below numf do not place beams outside the beds unless the differential between the beam temperature and the air temperature is less than numf .
store beams to maintain the same direction of reactions as in the final position in the bridge deck .
support stored beams with battens between the center of the lift points shown on the shop drawings and the nearest beam end .
store the beams in areas that are suitable and accessible for inspection until the numday compressive strength is attained .
maintain beams in horizontal and upright positions at all times .
numf numg num num change no .
num separate stacked members and support them by battens placed across the full width of each bearing point .
stack members so lifting devices are accessible and undamaged .
do not use the upper members of a stacked tier as storage areas for shorter members or for heavy equipment .
before shipment provide a rough texture to the entire keyway on adjacent box beams and completely remove oil grease dirt or other material that would prevent bonding by sandblasting or other methods approved by the chief structural materials engineer .
before shipment mark each beam with an individual and consecutive identification mark at a permanently exposed beam location .
use the identification mark shown on the approved shop drawings and erect beams according to the framing plan .
do not ship beams until the inspector places a stamp of acceptance on each beam .
g transportation .
unless authorized by the representative do not ship beams until they have attained the minimum numday compressive strength shown on the shop drawings or until num hours total storage time has elapsed following prestress transfer whichever is greater .
support the members as shown on the shop drawings using adequate bracing to maintain the vertical position .
ensure that supports bracing and shipment methods dampen vibrations .
provide adequate padding material between tie chains or cables to prevent concrete chipping .
for medium length members poletype trailers are satisfactory with the member serving as the connection between truck and trailer .
trucks with double bolsters are generally satisfactory provided that members are fully seated on the outer bolsters at not more than a distance equal to the member depth from the end of the member and the inner bolsters are not more than num feet from the members end or at the designated pickup point .
observe hauling restrictions as specified in section num .
num numd num num change no .
num section numposttensioning operations num general requirements a description .
this work is prestressing grouting and other work related to posttensioning operations .
b general .
perform posttensioning operations in the presence of an authorized representative of the department either in a prestressing plant or on the project site .
retain a professional engineer registered in the state experienced in posttensioning operations to be present and in charge of tensioning and grouting operations .
two weeks before the start of the posttensioning operations submit in writing to the district bridge engineer the engineers name and the date and place of posttensioning .
a professional engineer registered in the state is not necessary for posttensioning box culverts or transversely post tensioning adjacent box beam bridges .
c shop drawings .
section num and as follows show the proposed method material and equipment including any changes to reinforcing steel .
show the method and sequence of stressing including complete specifications and details of the prestressing steel and anchoring devices bearing devices location of splices or couplings working stresses anchoring stresses type of ducts steel corrosion protection proposed arrangement of the prestressing steel in the members pressuregrouting material and equipment and vent details including size type spacing and location and direction of grouting .
provide a detailed stressing force diagram showing the following deviations from design forces sequence of loading stages friction coefficients for the duct and tendon combinations friction and jacking forces jacking techniques e.g .
overjacking friction loss diagram superimposed on the force diagram and elongation computations .
provide shop drawings that are signed dated and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state .
unless indicated or specified do not use a working stress greater than num fu a temporary stress greater than num fu or an anchoring stress greater than num fu .
fu specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of prestressing steel .
working force and working stress are the force and stress remaining in the prestressing steel after losses including concrete creep and shrinkage elastic concrete compression steel losses due to stressing sequence steel relaxation friction and take up at anchorages and other losses peculiar to the prestressing system .
num material a prestressing steel .
use wire strand or bar conforming to the requirements specified in section numn .
b corrosion inhibitor .
obtain from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
submit the grout mixture to the dmedmm for review and approval before use .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
c anchorages bearing devices fittings and couplings .
design anchorages to develop num fu .
design couplings to develop num fu .
use bearing devices designed to transmit the anchor force to the concrete at bearing stress no greater than num pounds per square inch .
limit bearing device stress to num of its yield strength when the prestressing steel is stressed to num fu .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d duct sheathing .
unless otherwise indicated use corrugated rigid or semirigid type galvanized steel sheathing .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
numd numg num num change no .
num minimum duct thickness for metal ducts shall be as follows strand tendonsnum gauge diameter for ducts less than or equal to num inches in diameter and num gauge diameter for ducts greater than num inches in diameter bar tendonsnum gauge diameter e epoxy resin .
section numb f water .
section num g unbonded prestressing steel for precast box culverts and adjacent box beams .
encased corrosion protected prestressing strand for unbonded posttensioning comprised of the following components num .
special grade numwire uncoated lowrelaxation strand .
section numnnum.d num .
polymer sheathing .
num.a material .
polypropylene cell classification pp num bnum conforming to astm d num or polyethylene high density type ii conforming to astm d num and astm d num .
num.b thickness and diameter .
provide a minimum sheathing wall thickness of num inch and an inside diameter of num inch greater than the maximum diameter of the strand .
num.c application .
apply around prestressing strand in a seamless hotmelt extrusion process .
provide a smooth circular outside with no visible reveal of the lay of the strand .
num .
corrosion inhibitor compound .
num.a material properties .
provides corrosion protection to the strand lubrication between the strand and sheathing continuous nonbrittle coating if exposed to a temperature of numf resists flow within temperature range of numf to numf and chemically stable and nonreactive with prestressing strand reinforcing steel sheathing material and concrete .
num.b quantity .
not less than num pounds per num feet for numinch diameter strand and num pounds per num feet for numinch diameter strand .
completely fill the annular space between the strand and sheathing along the entire length of strand .
num.c performance criteria .
table a .
table a performance specification for corrosion inhibitor compound test description test method acceptance criteria dropping point astm d num or astm d num minimum numf oil separation at numf ftms federal test method standard numb method num num max by weight water content astm d num num maximum flash point refers to oil content astm d num minimum numf corrosion test num salt fog at numf num mils astm b num rest grade num or better after num hours of exposure according to astm d num watersoluble ions a. chlorides b. nitrates astm d num astm d num num ppm maximum num ppm maximum numg numd num num change no .
num c. sulfides apha american public health association numsnume num ppm maximum soak test num salt fog at numf num mils coating q panel type s. immerse panels num in a num salt solution and expose to salt fog astm b num modified no emulsification of the coating after num hours of exposure .
compatibility with sheathing a. hardness and volume after exposure of polymer to grease num days at numf b. tensile strength change of polymer after exposure to grease num days at numf astm d num astm d num for density astm d num permissible change in hardness num volume num .
permissible change in tensile strength num .
procedure the inside bottom and sides of a num l pyrex beaker approximate outside diameter num mm num mm height is thoroughly coated with num num g of corrosion inhibitor compound .
the coated beaker is filled with approximately num cc of distilled water and heated in an oven at a controlled temperature of num c num for num hours .
the water extraction is tested by the noted test procedures for the appropriate watersoluble ions .
results are reported as ppm in the extracted water .
num construction a posttensioning systems .
include anchorages fittings sheathing tendons and grout .
b corrosion protection .
protect prestressing steel against physical damage rust and corrosion .
do not use prestressing steel that has sustained physical damage pitting or that has rust that can not be removed by wiping with a dry cloth .
do not retain prestressing steel in an ungrouted duct for more than num days without special acceptable corrosion protection .
pack prestressing steel in containers or other shipping forms for protection against physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
place a corrosion inhibitor that prevents rust or other corrosion in the package or form or when allowed apply it directly to the steel or to the tendon .
mark on the shipping package or form that the package contains highstrength prestressing steel and the care to be used in handling .
state the type kind and amount of corrosion inhibitor used including placement date safety orders and instructions for use .
when stressing and grouting are completed within num calendar days after the prestressing steel installation rust that may form will not be cause for rejection .
in this case use of a corrosion inhibitor is not necessary .
before use submit the coating system for tendon corrosion protection in a bonded system for approval .
protect bar tendons from corrosion at the job site by spraying with a rust preventative and by use of an approved protective covering over the bars .
c anchorages and bearing devices .
use permanenttype anchorages to secure prestressing steel at the ends .
steel distribution plates or assemblies may be omitted if large enough anchorages are used in conjunction with a steel grill embedded in the concrete to effectively distribute the compressive stresses to the concrete .
for all systems of posttensioning set each anchorage device in all directions perpendicular to the prestressing steel axis .
at both tendon ends make accurate measurements of anchorage loss due to slippage or other causes .
compare these losses with the assumed losses shown in the posttensioning schedule on the shop drawings .
when necessary make adjustments or corrections in the operation .
for special anchorage devices test according to aashto standard specification division ii section num. d installation of sheathing ducts .
form and place sheathing and secure it to prevent movement when concrete is placed .
make splices grouttight .
after installation blow the ducts clear using oilfree compressed air for at least num seconds each .
plug the duct ends to prevent the entry of water or debris .
furnish sheathing ducts with interlocked seams .
make joints with positive metallic connections which do not result in angle changes at the joints .
use waterproof tape at the connections to seal seams .
provide ducts or anchorage assemblies with pipes or connections for grout injection .
install pipe vents that are num inch or larger in size near the high points of each duct .
use metallic structural fasteners to make connections to ducts .
numd numf num num change no .
num make vents grouttight tape as necessary and provide means for grout injection .
remove vent ends num inch below the member surface after grouting has been completed .
for tendons made up of single prestressing bar or strand make the inside diameter at least num inch greater than the diameter of the prestressing bar or strand .
for tendons made up of a number of prestressing bars or strands make the ducts crosssectional area at least twice the net area of prestressing steel .
locate ducts within the specified tolerances .
for curved members place the ducts on or symmetrically about the member axis parallel to the curvature direction .
provide concrete cover a minimum of num num inches for sheathing up to num inches o.d .
and a minimum of num inches of cover for larger sheathing .
provide a minimum of num numinch clear spacing between the sheathing at the beam ends or provide num num times the maximum aggregate size whichever is greater .
after the prestressing steel has been installed do not weld or ground for welding equipment on steel in the member .
do not flame cut unless the ducts and tendons are effectively shielded .
e prestressing .
tension prestressing steel using hydraulic jacks so the force in the prestressing steel is not less than the value indicated or on the accepted shop drawings with appropriate allowance for all losses .
within num days before stressing calibrate all jacks and pressure gauge system and furnish certified copies of the load calibration curves to the engineer except jack calibration for post tensioning of box culverts and adjacent box beams .
for post tensioning of box culverts and adjacent box beams accompany jack gages with a current certified calibration chart not older than num months .
equip each jack with a pressure gage having an accurate reading dial at least num inches in diameter .
calibrate each jack and its gage as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position it will be in at final jacking force .
recalibrate stressing equipment at nummonth intervals and at other times when required .
do not interchange jacks and gauges without recalibration .
check the certified calibration chart for hydraulic jacks and pressure gages used for tensioning prestressing steel both before and during tensioning operations .
do not stress tendons until the concrete has attained its numday strength unless partial stressing is allowed at a lower strength .
apply to the tendon an initial load of num of the full load to take up slack and to provide a starting point for measurement of elongations .
apply the final load including any overload .
apply the load at a rate consistent with procedures recommended by the manufacturer of the system .
unless otherwise indicated in simple span members stress by jacking from one end only with onehalf of the prestressing steel in each member tensioned from one end and the other onehalf tensioned from the opposite end .
when the same tendons are jacked from two ends both jacking operations may be done simultaneously provided uniform tensioning forces are applied at each end .
the stressing forces measured by jacking pressures and elongation are required to agree within num .
if the measurements can not be reconciled within this range halt the stressing examine the procedure and determine the sources of error so the measured force can be verified within this limit .
if sources of error can not be determined or verified by the professional engineer in charge of posttensioning operations to the satisfaction of the engineer the posttensioning of the member will be stopped and the member rejected .
in continuous members tension by jacking at each tendon end unless otherwise indicated .
jacking of both ends need not be done simultaneously unless otherwise indicated .
f bonding and grouting .
start grouting promptly after tensioning .
num .
grout .
use grout consisting of portland cement water and admixtures .
use type i ii or iii portland cement .
use nonshrink admixture and antibleed admixture of the type recommended by the manufacturer of an accepted tendon .
do not use admixtures containing chlorides or nitrates or that release free hydrogen .
use enough grout plastic to pump and completely fill the ducts .
no grout shrinkage is allowed while in the plastic state .
before posttensioning design the mix and verify that it has a strength of num pounds per square inch at num days and has num to num expansion .
verify strength by testing according to astm c num .
limit the water content of the grout to the minimum volume necessary to produce a mix that can be pumped with a maximum of num gallons per bag of cement .
prepare test cylinders from each days grouting .
visually determine the grouts ability to be pumped .
place water in the mixer then add cement and admixture .
strength testing of grout for precast box culverts is not required .
num .
grouting equipment .
use equipment capable of grouting at a pressure of at least num pounds per square inch .
furnish equipment with a pressure gage that has a fullscale reading of not more than num pounds per square inch .
provide standby flushing equipment and compressed air equipment capable of developing a pumping pressure numf numf num num change no .
num at num pounds per square inch and large enough to flush out partially grouted ducts .
provide working pressure meters on the group pumps meters that show the grout pressure at the injector nozzle discharge end .
num .
grouting .
clear ducts of deleterious materials that would impair grout bonding or interfere with grouting procedures .
after curing blow ducts free of water and keep them dry until grouting .
immediately before grouting flush the ducts with clean water then remove excess water by blowing out with oilfree compressed air .
mix the grout in mechanical mixing equipment that produces uniform and thoroughly mixed grout .
do not retemper grout .
agitate the grout continuously until it is pumped .
before entry into the pump screen grout through numinch maximum clear opening screen .
grout the ducts on the day of completion of the tensioning operation of each unit unless otherwise directed .
equip grout injection pipes with positive mechanical shutoff valves .
fit vents and ejection pipes with valves caps or other devices capable of withstanding the pumping pressures .
do not remove or open valves and caps until directed generally after the grout has set .
apply grout by pumping toward open vents .
pump continuously using moderate pressure at the entry point in the duct until entrapped air is forced out the open vent or vents and until visible slugs of water or air are ejected .
close the outlet pipe .
with the entire duct filled and discharge vents closed raise the pressure to a minimum of num pounds per square inch and hold for a minimum of num minute then plug the injection point to prevent any grout loss .
close the valve at the inlet while maintaining this pressure .
using an abrasive blast clean the concrete surfaces at anchorage assemblies until clean aggregate is exposed to ensure concrete bonding or grout encasement of assemblies .
where the end of a posttensioned assembly is not embedded in concrete recess the anchorages so the prestressing steel ends and parts of the anchorages will be at least num inches inside of the member end surface unless a greater embedment is indicated .
following posttensioning clean the recesses fill with nonshrinking mortar and finish flush .
after curing paint surfaces with two coats of epoxy resin .
num nume num num change no .
num section numguide rail and metal median barrier num railsas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a rail elements .
aashto m num class a type ii mark to show the approximate radius of curved rails .
b rubbing rails .
fabricate from steel astm anumanumm with mechanical properties conforming to aashto m num astm anum grade num .
galvanize as specified in section nums aashto m num .
shop form when required on curves having a radius of less than num feet as follows notch flanges to form a curve with a series of chords of equal lengths not exceeding num inches for radii from num to num feet num feet for radii from num feet to num feet and num num feet for radii from num feet to num feet cut notches to the proper angle and weld .
form so the midpoint of the chord is tangent to the curve .
mark to show the approximate radius of curvature .
num terminal sectionsas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a alternate terminal sections .
aashto m num class a type ii .
b terminal section bridge connection .
aashto m num class b type ii .
c flared terminal section .
aashto m num class a type ii .
num posts a steel ibeam posts .
aashto m num astm anum grade num or astm anumanumm .
galvanize as specified in section nums aashto m num. b steel cposts and channel posts .
fabricate from steel astm anumanumm with mechanical properties conforming to aashto m num astm anum grade num .
galvanize as specified in section nums aashto m num. c wood guide rail posts .
aashto m num .
as shown on the standard drawings and as follows label each wood item with lot or batch number plant place and date of manufacture .
manufacture from timber having a minimum grade of num pounds per square inch according to the current standard grading and dressing rules of the west coast lumber inspection bureau the southern pine inspection bureau or other acceptable timber associations .
timber to be either rough sawn unplanned or surfaced four sides snums to the dimensions indicated .
size in the direction parallel to the axis of bolt holes to be within a tolerance of num inch .
use one type of surface finish for posts and offset blocks in a continuous run of guide rail .
treat timber with a preservative according to aashto m num after end cuts are made and holes are drilled .
aashto m num designates awpa cnum and awpa cnum as the respective specifications .
in cases of conflict awpa cnum will govern .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d breakaway terminal wood posts .
section numc e breakaway terminal foundation wood posts .
section numc num num num num change no .
num num offset brackets a general requirements .
provide offset brackets from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
b wood offset brackets .
as shown on the standard drawings andor the approved shop drawings manufactured from timber having a minimum grade of num pounds per square inch according to the standard grading and dressing rules of the west coast lumber inspection bureau the southern pine inspection bureau or other acceptable timber associations .
treat timber with a preservative according to aashto m num after cutting ends drilling bolt holes and if applicable routing .
provide brackets with a numinch dimension tolerance in the direction of the bolt hole .
num .
nonrouted .
use with wood posts .
num .
routed .
use with steel posts .
c composite offset brackets .
as shown on the standard drawings andor the approved shop drawings and manufactured from a combination of either virgin or recycled wood plastic rubber or other materials .
provide brackets with a numinch dimension tolerance in the direction of the bolt hole .
num .
nonrouted .
use with wood posts .
num .
routed .
use with steel posts .
num miscellaneous materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a nuts bolts and washers .
section numcnum .
galvanize as specified in section nums astm anum or astm bnum and bnum .
b base plates post plates end post support angles and hardware .
aashto m num astm anum grade num .
galvanize base plates and hardware after fabrication as specified in section nums aashto m num .
do not punch drill grind cut or weld after galvanizing .
repair minor abrasions of galvanized surfaces with two coats of galvanizing paint .
c rotating bracket .
fabricate from malleable cast iron astm anum or structural steel aashto m num astm anum grade num .
galvanize as specified in section nums aashto m num. d steel spacer tube .
astm anum type s grade b plain end schedule num steel pipe .
galvanize as specified in section nums .
num galvanizinggalvanize metal parts as specified in section nums astm anum unless otherwise specified and conform to the requirements of aashto m num section num .
num galvanizing paintastm anum section num num welding materialsection numt num certificationsection numbnum num num num num change no .
num section numrightofway fence num wire fabric and componentsas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a type num rightofway fence .
num .
fabric .
aashto m num type i ii or iv numinch no .
num gage coated wire size with the same type of coating throughout the project .
galvanize type i fabric with a class d coating .
num .
fasteners .
for attaching the fabric to line posts numinch no .
num gage aluminum wire or numinch no .
num gage galvanized preformed clips .
for attaching the fabric to tension wires numinch no .
num gage galvanized steel wire or aluminum hog rings of comparable size .
galvanize at a minimum of num ounces per square foot of actual surface area .
num .
tension wire .
aashto m num b type num and type num rightofway fence .
num .
fabric .
galvanized numinch no .
num gage steel wire numinch no .
num gage aluminum coated steel wire conforming to astm anum or galvanized numinch no .
num gage steel wire top and bottom with galvanized num inch no .
num gage steel intermediate wires .
join vertical stays at each horizontal wire by electric arc welding or by a hingetype method consisting of not less than num num tightly wrapped twists .
galvanize at a minimum of num ounce per square foot of actual surface area as specified in section num .
num .
fasteners .
for attaching the fabric to posts aluminum or galvanized steel bands or clamps galvanized staples set in the post flanges or another acceptable method .
num end posts corner and pull posts line posts braces stretcher bars truss rods fittings and hardwareas shown on the standard drawings and as follows straight posts true to section .
braces fittings and hardware of commercialquality steel or malleable iron .
posts of commercial quality steel or malleable iron or aluminum alloys numtnum numtnum or numtnum according to astm bnum tubular and open type sections .
moistureexcluding caps firmly and rigidly secured to the post top .
galvanize or coat both the inside and outside of tubular and opentype sections according to aashto m num .
either of two alternate coating systems may be used as follows outside .
hotdipped zinc coating according to astm bnum at a minimum of num num ounce per square foot of actual surface area chromate conversion coating at num micrograms per square inch num micrograms per square inch of actual surface area thermoplastic electrostatically applied acrylic coating num mil num mil in thickness .
and num numb num num change no .
num inside .
zinc base coating num mil num mil thickness num ounce per square foot num ounce per square foot with a minimum of num zinc powder by weight .
or outside and inside .
hotdipped pure aluminum coating commonly identified as type num with a minimum weight of coating of num ounce per square foot of actual surface area triple spot test and num ounce per square foot of actual surface area single spot test as measured according to aashto t num a chromate conversion coating and a thin acrylic resin film .
a type num rightofway fence .
num .
end posts .
round rectangular or square tubular sections conforming to the requirements of table a if acceptable other posts sections conforming to the requirements of table a .
table a minimum bending moment inlba fence height ft end corner and pull post line post major axis minor axis major axis test load lbsb num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num a. bending moment inlb yield strength psi x section modulus in b .
test a numinch section of line post for bending capacity about the major axis of its cross section .
apply the test load concentrated at span center with supports spaced at num inches .
ensure that the test section achieves the test load as indicated in table a within the elastic limit of the material .
num .
corner and pull posts .
section numanum .
except finish brace clamps or attaching devices adjustable to various horizontal and vertical angles .
num .
line posts .
tubular hcolumn or ibeam sections conforming to the requirements of table a if acceptable other post sections conforming to the requirements of table a .
num .
braces stretcher bars and truss rods .
braces numinch o.d .
tubular steel section with a minimum bending moment of num inchpounds num num inches by num num inches roll formed ushaped steel section at nominal num pounds per linear foot or equal .
stretcher bars for attaching the fabric at least numinch by numinch flat steel or equal .
truss rods numinch nominal diameter good quality steel or equal with a turnbuckle or other provision for adjustment .
b type num and type num rightofway fence .
num .
end corner and pull posts .
tubular angle or other acceptable section conforming to the requirements of table a .
num .
line posts .
tubular ribbed tee ushaped angle or other acceptable section conforming to the requirements of table a .
attach an acceptable plate or other device to the posts to hold plumb and to keep properly aligned .
fasten the plate or device by welding or riveting not less than two rivets or by another acceptable method .
numb num num num change no .
num num .
braces .
numinch o.d .
tubular steel section with a minimum bending moment of num inchpounds numinch by numinch by numinch angle or equal .
num gatesas shown on the standard drawings and as follows swingtype gates with latches stops keepers hinges and locks .
steel wire fabric of same type material as the fence .
hinges of adequate strength to support the gate and that do not twist or turn under the gates action .
plungebartype latches that can be locked full gate height and located in a manner that engages the gate stop .
forked latches may be allowed for single gates less than num feet wide .
stops are to consist of a flush plate anchored in concrete to engage the plungebar of the latch .
other types of stops may be allowed for single gates less than num feet wide .
substantial devices are necessary for securing and supporting the free end of the gate in an open position .
num galvanizinggalvanize fabric posts post caps braces fittings and hardware by electrolytic hopdip mechanical or other acceptable methods as specified in section nums and as follows for electrolytic method astm bnum for hotdip method posts braces and fittingsastm anum or astm anum fabricastm anum hardwareastm anum for mechanical method hardware only astm bnum test galvanizing by weight according to astm anum .
num inspectionmaterial will be inspected if considered necessary at the place of manufacture before shipment .
provide facilities for the department inspector to determine that the material is being furnished as indicated .
num certificationsection numbnum num drive anchoranchors from a manufacturer listed in bulletin num .
num numc num num change no .
num section numhigh load multirotational bearings num descriptionthis work is the fabrication of high load multirotational bearings as indicated .
num materialuse new material at all times with no reclaimed material incorporated in the finished bearing .
a steel .
conform to aashto m num astm anum grade num num or numw except for steel for guide bars and shear restriction pins and sleeves .
furnish guide bars and shear restriction mechanisms as specified by the manufacturer and that are approved .
b elastomeric disc .
num .
pot bearings .
provide shore a num durometer and conform to the following requirements furnish only virgin crystallizationresistant polychloroprene neoprene or virgin natural polyisoprene natural rubber as the raw polymer for the elastomeric rotational element used in the construction of pot bearings .
use individually molded and onepiece elastomers .
provide neoprene and natural rubber used in these bearings with physical properties which conform to the following astm or aashto requirements with the modification noted compound astm requirement aashto requirement neoprene astm dnum line call out mnumbcnumanumbnum aashto m num natural rubber astm dnum line call out mnumaanumanumbnum aashto m num modification num samples for compression set tests shall be prepared using a type num die .
num shore a durometer hardness num num points num .
disc bearings .
provide polyether urethane conforming to the following requirements physical property astm test method requirements compound a compound b min .
max .
min .
max .
hardness type d durometer dnum num num num num tensile stress psi at num elongation at num elongation dnum num num num num tensile strength psi dnum num num ultimate elongation dnum num num compression set num h numf dnum method b num num c sliding surfaces .
num .
general .
provide polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe resin sheets ptfe fabric interlocked bronze and ptfe structures ptfeperforated metal composite backup materials and all other parts of fixed or expansion bearings containing ptfe materials having the friction mechanical physical and weathering properties specified in numc or indicated .
num .
ptfe resin .
furnish virgin ptfe resin not reprocessed conforming to the requirements of astm dnum .
provide resin with specific gravity of num to num and second melting peak temperature of numf numf .
num .
filler material .
when filler material is used furnish milled glass fibers num maximum filler percent by weight carbon num maximum filler percent by weight or fabric containing ptfe fibers or other approved inert numc numc num num change no .
num filler materials .
num .
adhesive material .
use heat cured high temperature epoxy capable of withstanding temperatures of numf to numf when bonding the ptfe to its steel substrate .
provide adhesive material in epoxy resin conforming to the requirements of federal specification mmmanum fep film or approved equal .
num .
unfilled ptfe sheet .
make finished unfilled ptfe sheet from virgin ptfe resin .
ensure that finished unfilled ptfe sheet conforms to the following requirements tensile strength minimum astm dnum num psi elongation minimum astm dnum num num .
filled ptfe sheet .
make filled ptfe sheet from virgin ptfe resin uniformly blended with inert material .
ensure that finished filled ptfe sheets containing glass fiber or carbon conform to the following requirements requirement astm method num glass fibers num carbon mechanical tensile strength minimum elongation minimum dnum dnum num psi num num psi num physical specific gravity melting point dnum dnum dnum num num numf numf num num numf numf num .
fabric containing ptfe fibers .
use manufactured fabric produced from oriented multifilament ptfe fluorocarbon fibers and other fibers as required by proprietary designs .
use ptfe fibers with the following typical physical properties physical requirement astm method ptfe fibers tensile strength minimum dnum num psi elongation minimum dnum num num .
interlocked bronze and filled ptfe structures .
supply interlocking bronze and filled ptfe structures consisting of a phosphor bronze plate with a numinch thick porous bronze surface layer into which is impregnated a leadptfe compound .
provide an overlay of compounded ptfe not less than num inch thick .
ensure that the phosphor bronze back plate conforms to astm bnum and the porous bronze layer conforms to astm bnumbnumm .
num .
ptfe metal composite .
supply ptfe metal composite consisting of virgin ptfe molded on each side and completely through a numinch perforated stainless steel astm anum type num sheet .
num .
surface treatment .
where ptfe sheets are to be epoxy bonded have an approved manufacturer factory treat one side of the ptfe sheet using the sodium naphthalene or sodium ammonia process .
num .
stainless steel mating surface .
furnish stainless steel sliding surfaces conforming to astm anum type num with an ansi num mil surface finish or less .
attach a stainless steel sheet by an approved welding procedure which keeps the sheet in contact with the substrate or weld a stainless steel overlay using type numl electrodes .
use numinch minimum thickness stainless steel .
num .
manufacturing requirements .
manufacture the expansion bearing to the dimensions of and to conform to the requirements of the method of fastening to the structure as indicated .
num.a attachment of ptfe material .
factorybond mechanically connect or recess into the backup material ptfe material as indicated .
num.a.num bonding .
perform the bonding at the factory of the manufacturer of the fixed or expansion bearings under controlled conditions and according to the written instructions of the manufacturer of the approved adhesive system .
ensure that after completion of the bonding operation the ptfe surface is smooth and free from bubbles .
numc numa num num change no .
num then polish filled ptfe surfaces .
num.a.num mechanically fastened .
if mechanically fastened fasten ptfe sheet as indicated with the size type and number of fasteners required taking care to have full bearing of the fastener used in the ptfe sheet and backup material .
num.a.num fabric containing ptfe fibers .
bond or mechanically attach the fabric to a rigid substrate .
supply fabric capable of carrying unit loads of num pounds per square inch without cold flow .
provide a fabric substrate bond capable of withstanding a shear force equal to num of the perpendicular or normal application loading without delamination in addition to the shear force developed as a result of the natural bearing friction shear force .
d sealing rings .
num .
rings with rectangular cross sections .
furnish brass sealing rings conforming to astm bnumbnumm .
num .
rings with circular cross sections .
furnish round cross section metal sealing rings conforming to astm bnum temper hnum half hard .
e bronze elements .
ensure that bronze bearing and expansion plates conform to the specification for bronze castings for bridges and turntables astm bnum .
furnish alloy cnum unless otherwise specified .
cast bronze plates according to the indicated details .
plane sliding surfaces parallel to the movement of the spans and polish them unless otherwise indicated .
f lubricant .
furnish solid lubricant consisting of a combination of solids having nondeteriorating characteristics as well as lubricating qualities and capable of withstanding long term atmospheric exposure deicing materials and water .
do not use molybdenum disulfide and other ingredients which promote electrolytic or chemical action between the bearing elements .
do not use shellac tars and asphalts or petroleum solvents as binders .
num fabrication a rotational elements .
furnish elements conforming to the following requirements num .
pot and disc bearings .
manufacture from a solid plate by machining or fabricate by welding a flamecut shape to a plate .
test all welded areas by the magnetic particle method meeting aws dnumdnumm clause num requirements .
welding is as specified in section numm .
machine inside diameter id of pots to a tolerance of num inch up to num inches id and num inch over num inches id .
pots machined parallel to the inside to class a tolerance .
machined surfaces to an ansi num microinch rms finish or better .
elastomeric discs with tolerances as follows diameters up to num inches num inch diameters greater than num inches num inch total thickness of all pieces num inch num inch mold discs in one piece do not layer elastomer .
pistons with tolerances as follows diameters up to num inches num inch .
diameters greater than num inches num inch .
numa numb num num change no .
num upper side class a tolerance .
lower side class b tolerance .
num .
disc bearings .
provide discs with tolerances as follows diameters up to num inches num inch .
diameters greater than num inches num inch .
thickness num inch num inch .
mold discs in one piece do not layer elastomer .
furnish bearing plates for discs with tolerances as follows diameters up to num inches num inch .
diameters greater than num inches num inch .
inside surfaces facing disc class a tolerance and minimum ansi num microinch rms finish .
outside surfaces class a tolerance and minimum ansi num microinch rms finish .
num .
spherical bearings .
provide spherical bearings with tolerances as follows machined diameters num inch .
convex radius dimensions num inch num inch .
concave radius dimensions num inch num inch .
mating surfaces to be as indicated external edges may be as cast or flamecut .
lower surface of convex element class c tolerance .
b nonrotational elements all bearings .
furnish elements conforming to the following requirements furnish masonry and distribution plates with tolerances as follows plan dimensions up to num inches num inch num inch plan dimensions over num inches num inch num inch thickness tolerance num inch num inch masonry plates used with pot disc or spherical bearings class c tolerance for the underside and class a tolerance for the upper side .
provide ptfe sliding surfaces with tolerances as follows plan dimensions total design area num num substrate flatness class a tolerance for pot and disc bearings class b tolerance for spherical bearings .
thickness num inch num inch per aashto lrfd construction specifications table num seal weld the stainless steel sheet around the entire perimeter using techniques which ensure it will remain in numb numd num num change no .
num contact with the backing plate .
provide an ansi num microinch rms finish or better .
flatness to class a tolerance .
furnish sole plates with tolerances as follows plan dimensions up to num inches num inch num inch plan dimensions over num inches num inch num inch center line thickness num inch num inch flatness of surface in contact with steel beams class b tolerance in contact with fresh concrete none in contact with stainless steel sliding surface class a tolerance in contact with another steel plate class b tolerance .
minimum edge thickness num inch machined bevels to an angular tolerance of num radians num degrees flatness of beveled surfaces class a tolerance provide guide bar with tolerances as follows length unless integral with plate num inch section dimensions num inch flatness where it bears on another plate class a tolerance bartobar nominal dimension num inch not more than num inch out of parallel overall bearing height not more than num inch or less than num inch from nominal dimension .
chamfer all edges .
c determination of flatness and tolerances .
furnish bearings with flatness determined by the following method place a precision straightedge longer than the nominal dimension to be measured in contact with the surface to be measured or as parallel to it as possible .
select a feeler gage having a tolerance of num inch and attempt to insert it under the straightedge using the least number of blades .
flatness is acceptable if the feeler gage does not pass under the straightedge .
flatness tolerances are arranged in the following classes class a num inch nominal dimension class b num inch nominal dimension class c num inch nominal dimension nominal dimension is defined as the actual dimension of the plate in inches under the straightedge .
in determining flatness the straightedge may be located in any position on the surface being evaluated and not necessarily at num degrees to the edges .
ignore a numinch wide border around the plate in determining flatness .
d painting .
do not paint before completion of welding .
if the time of exposure before welding is to exceed num calendar days provide metal surfaces with a protective coating of clear lacquer or other approved coating .
paint all steel surfaces as indicated and according to recommendations of the coating manufacturer .
nume nume num num change no .
num e testing .
conduct the following tests before installation of the bearings and in the presence of the representative .
num .
sampling .
select one sample for testing purposes at random from each lot of completed bearings at the manufacturers plant .
a lot consists of one of the following no more than num fixed bearings of one load category no more than num expansion bearings of one load category one load category may consist of bearings of differing vertical force capacity but the bearings may not exceed a range of capacity differing by more than num kips .
num .
friction test .
test only those bearings actually fabricated for the project .
test a sample from each lot of expansion bearings .
for all guided and nonguided expansion type bearings measure the sliding coefficient of friction at the bearings design capacity as specified in section numenum.a and on the fifth and fiftieth cycles at a sliding speed of num inch per minute .
calculate the sliding coefficient of friction as the horizontal force necessary to maintain continuous sliding of one bearing divided by the bearings vertical design capacity .
the test results will be evaluated as follows measured sliding coefficients of friction not to exceed num .
visually examine the bearing both during and after the test .
any resultant visual defects such as bond failure physical destruction cold flow of tfe to the point of debonding or damaged components will cause rejection of the lot .
num.a test method .
obtain approval of the test method and equipment and comply with the following requirements arrange the test so that the coefficient of friction on the first movement of the manufactured bearing can be determined .
clean the bearing surface before testing .
conduct the test at maximum working stress for the tfe surface with the test load applied continuously for num hours before measuring friction .
determine the first movement static and dynamic coefficient of friction of the test bearing at a sliding speed of less than num inch per minute which is not to exceed the coefficient of friction for design in article num of the lrfd specification .
subject the bearing specimen to num movements of at least num inch of relative movement and if the test facility allows the full design movement at a speed of less than num foot per minute .
following this test determine the static and kinetic coefficient of friction again which is not to exceed the values specified in section numenum.a fourth bullet .
verify that the bearing or specimen shows no appreciable sign of bond failure or other defects .
bearings represented by test specimens passing the above requirements will be approved for use in the structure subject to onsite inspection for visible defects .
bearings not damaged during the testing of performance characteristics may be used in the work .
num .
proof load test .
test one bearing from each production lot of fixed and expansion bearings .
load a test bearing to num of the bearings rated design capacity and simultaneously subject it to a rotational range of num nume numg num num change no .
num radians num degrees or design rotation whichever is greater for a period of num hour .
visually examine the bearing both during the test and upon disassembly after the test .
any resultant visual defects such as extruded or deformed elastomer polyether urethane or tfe damaged seals or limited or cracked steel will cause rejection of the lot .
during the test for pot bearings maintain continuous and uniform contact between the steel bearing plate and steel piston for the duration of the test .
for disc bearings maintain continuous and uniform contact between the polyether urethane element and the bearing plates and between the sliding steel top plate and the upper bearing plate for the duration of the test .
any observed liftoff will cause rejection of the lot .
num .
material tests .
submit one sample of elastomer and one sample of ptfe from each lot of material to lts for material testing to ensure compliance with appropriate material specifications .
f packing and shipping .
num .
packaging and handling .
ensure that the bearings are securely banded together as units by fabricator shipped to the job site and stored without relative movement of the bearing parts or disassembly at any time .
wrap bearings in moisture resistant and dust resistant material to protect against shipping and job site conditions .
match mark the bearings to indicate normal position of each bearing .
take care to ensure that bearings are stored at the job site in a dry sheltered area free from dirt or dust until installation .
inspect bearings within one week after arriving on the project .
do not disassemble unless the fabricators representative is present .
following inspection rewrap the bearings to keep them clean until installation .
do not remove the sole and top plates of bearings for separate attachment to the structure except under the direct supervision of the fabricator .
do not remove the sole and top plates of bearings for separate attachment to the structure except under the direct supervision of the fabricator .
with each shipment enclose a copy of the materials fabrication and testing compliance certifications .
g shop drawings .
submit as specified in section numd and include the following information the total quantity of each kind of bearing required fixed guidedexpansion or nonguided expansion grouped first according to type load range and then by actual design capacity .
plan view and section elevation including all relative dimensions .
details of all components and sections showing all materials incorporated into the bearing .
all astm aashto and other material designations .
the maximum design coefficient of friction as indicated .
clearly describe and detail any welding process used in the bearing manufacture that does not conform to the approved processes of the aws code .
vertical horizontal rotation movement and load capacity .
a schedule of all bearing offsets if required by the project .
alignment plans .
paint or coating requirements .
installation scheme .
complete design calculations verifying conformance with the provisions of this specification .
stress analysis and the mechanics of standard bearing details are not required .
numg numh num num change no .
num anchorage details .
bearing preset details .
location of the fabrication plant .
the manufacturers name and the name of its representative responsible for coordinating production sampling and testing .
h certification .
ensure that the fabricator provides a certification package as specified in section numbnum and containing the following material test reports for all steels used except aisi cnum and cnum for which a mill conformance certificate is acceptable .
certificate of compliance for all nonferrous metals .
material test reports for any elastomeric components .
certificate of compliance for ptfe and any adhesive used .
a certificate of compliance for the bearings executed by an officer of the manufacturing company .
certificate of compliance for any dowels or bolts supplied .
test reports for the performance tests .
num nume num initial edition section numglued laminated hardwood timber members num general requirements a description .
this work is the fabrication treatment delivery and storage of hardwood glued laminated timber for structural members .
b definitions .
num .
glued laminated hardwood timber .
an engineered stressrated product of a timber laminating plant comprising assemblies of suitably selected and prepared laminations bonded together with adhesives .
num .
lamination .
the separate lamination thickness shall not exceed num inches or be less than num inch .
they may be comprised of pieces jointed to form any specific lamination length .
laminations formed in combination using narrower pieces are not acceptable for bridge stringers .
laminations bent and glued to curve form are accepted for use .
num .
exterior use adhesives .
use adhesives that perform satisfactorily for all moisture conditions including exposure to weather marine use and where approved preservative pressure treatments are used after gluing .
accepted exterior use adhesives conform to current ansiaitc anum requirements .
c prequalification .
unless otherwise specified timber fabricators will be required to prequalify to perform work for the department by establishing proof of their competency in fabricating members conforming to the current ansiaitc anum .
certification of the plantshop will be performed by the lts and submission of a valid certificate to the structural materials engineer at num lab lane harrisburg pa num is required by the department .
an annual endorsed copy is required for continued qualification .
d shop drawings .
section num and as follows design bridge members in lengths depths and widths that can be transported from fabrication source to the project .
provide design computations prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state for department approval .
it is the departments prerogative to accept or reject the changes by the contractor .
e inspection .
num .
general .
the lts will supervise fabrication and treatment inspection .
provide at least num calendar days notice of the beginning of work to the department so that arrangements can be made for inspection .
the department may waive fabrication or treatment shop inspection and make a complete inspection at a later stage of the construction sequence .
provide material certification in duplicate ensuring that the components used in fabrication were in conformance with material specifications .
num .
facilities for inspection .
furnish necessary supplies for the inspection of materials and workmanship .
allow inspectors unrestricted access to the premises during plant working hours .
necessary facilities for inspection include a type c field office as specified in section num .
num .
plant inspectors authority .
plant inspectors have the authority to reject any material or work that does not conform to the requirements of these specifications .
in case of dispute the contractor may appeal to the representative whose decision will be final .
num .
rejections .
material workmanship or finished members accepted by the inspector at the fabricators plant and treatment plant may be rejected later if they do not conform to the specifications .
nume numc num initial edition num .
testing .
perform all certification tests when required according to the provisions of the current aitc num inspection manual or another trade association that certifies glued laminated timber under ansiaitc anum .
perform all preservative testing according to awpa standards .
num .
mill orders and shipping statements .
furnish copies of mill orders and shipping statements as directed .
ensure that the fabricator presents a copy of the shipping invoice to be stamped for verification of inspection and approval of timber items before shipment to the departments shop inspector .
forward the stamped copy with the shipment for the project file .
f storage of materials .
section num and as follows store fabricated glued laminated materials above ground upon suitable platforms skids or other supports .
keep material free from dirt or other foreign materials and properly protected from moisture .
store glued laminated materials to avoid water or high humidity exposure .
num material a lumber .
num .
general .
ensure that lumber conforms to the manufacturers requirements under the american softwood lumber standard ps num .
use only red maple northern red oak or yellow poplar .
num .
grading .
grade the lumber according to appropriate grading agency or inspection bureau rules .
grade red maple and northern red oak according to northeast lumber manufacturers association nelma rules .
grade yellow poplar according to northern softwood lumber bureau nslb rules .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num .
moisture content .
maintain average moisture content of hardwood lumber at num to num .
any deviations from these lumber moisture content conditions must be approved .
b adhesives .
num .
general .
use any fully exterior adhesive for face joint bonding of laminations provided that adhesives have been qualified under appropriate sections of ansiaitc anum .
acceptable face bonding includes either a num resorcinolic adhesive or in formulation with phenolic base adhesives .
endjoint connections must be bonded with a similar fully exterior adhesive or a num melamine base adhesive .
num .
exterior adhesives .
examples of adhesive formulations shown acceptable for face lamination are cascophen rsnum resorcinol adhesive penacolite gnum resorcinol adhesive cascophen ltnum phenol with resorcinol adhesive cascophen ltnum phenol with resorcinol adhesive penacolite gnum phenol with resorcinol adhesive acceptable performance with use of these exterior adhesives is species dependent and is maintained through strict lamination procedures to achieve optimum bond development .
c marking .
num .
mark all glued laminated hardwood timber bending members for orientation of enduse application .
mark straight or slightly cambered members with identification to denote proper top versus bottom beam orientation .
num .
include the word top by permanently labelling with routed letters approximately num inches high with identifications .
numc nume num initial edition members intended for axial load application or of symmetric construction suited for either up or down installation need not be labelled .
appropriately stamp members with a quality mark or other documentation indicating conformance with ansiaitc anum .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d treatment chemicals .
treat northern red oak red maple and yellow poplar glued laminated members with an awpa accepted oil base preservative .
for creosote or creosote solution treat to a minimum num pounds per cubic foot assay retention .
other oil base treatments must meet minimum retentions conforming to awpa cnum .
conduct retention and penetration assay according to awpa cnum .
sample northern red oak and red maple for soil contact as required for southern pine refer to awpa cnum table num .
sample yellow poplar for soil contact as required for pacific coast douglasfir refer to awpa cnum table num .
num fabrication a required standards .
fabricate structural glued laminated hardwood timber according to the requirements put forth in the current ansiaitc anum and aitc num .
treat all structural glued laminated bridge members to minimum retention and penetration requirements .
b lumber preparation .
num .
moisture content .
maintain moisture content for lumber received at the laminators shopplant between num and num .
num .
surfacing tolerances .
current ansiaitc anum .
num .
end joints .
current ansiaitc anum .
c laminating requirements .
current ansiaitc anum .
conduct red maple and yellow poplar lamination fabrication according to the general requirements for a numfenum or numfenum southern pine glued laminated timber refer to aitc num table num with special lumber stiffness and edge knot restrictions as follows outer tension zone num num erated inner tension zone num num erated core num no .
num vsr nelma nslb inner compression zone num num erated outer compression zone num num erated conduct northern red oak lamination according to the aitc num for the fabrication of combination a glued laminated timbers .
for applications other than girders no special laminating requirements apply other than minimum no .
num lumber grade .
provide hardwood glued laminated timbers at the treatment facility conforming to these requirements with a minimum num and maximum num moisture content .
accept only hardwood glued laminated timbers that conform to these requirements .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
d surfacing of laminated members .
surface according to aitc num .
provide industrial appearance hardwood gluedlaminated members .
e holes and countersinks for bolts dowels rods nails and screws .
num .
preservative treatment .
section numbnum num .
location tolerances .
section numbnum and numbnum nume numf num initial edition num .
temporary attachments .
section nume num .
diameter .
size holes for driftpins machine bolts rods and lag screws to allow inservice shrinkage and swelling of the wood .
for dowels drifts pins and rods match the hole diameter with the connection shank .
for lag screws refer to national design specifications nds nds section num .
for machine bolts refer to nds section num for size .
f shop assembly .
ensure that all fabricated members assemble together according to the shop and design drawings before shipping components to the job site .
num treatment a general .
treat all glued laminated hardwood timber surfaces with an approved oilborne preservative conforming to awpa cnum .
b treatment facilities .
all treatment facilities must be prequalified by the department by establishing proof of their competency and efficacy of their treating operation with thelts .
c creosote treating cycle .
an empty cell cycle shall be used for creosote treatment of northern red oak red maple and yellow poplar glued laminated timber bridge members .
provide initial air pressure between num kpa and num pounds per square inch and num pounds per square inch .
creosote solutions shall be introduced into the chamber and pressurized to num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch .
the actual pressure will depend upon hardwood species being treated .
treatment temperature shall be between numf and numf .
continue treatment pressure and temperature until num pounds per cubic foot gauge retention is achieved .
gauge retention is confirmed by assay measurement to ensure a minimum num pounds per cubic foot creosote retention .
following the pressure cycle the pressure shall be released in a slow step down manner over a numhour period .
an expansion bath during the slow pressure release shall be used with an increase in temperature in the treating chamber of numf following the pressure release .
the creosote solution is removed from the cylinder and a minimum vacuum of num pounds per square inch shall be applied for num hours .
at this time the vacuum is released to atmospheric pressure and if possible the surface is steamed for num hour .
a final minimum vacuum of num pounds per square inch is applied to the treated members for num hours .
this treating cycle will ensure a minimum amount of exudate during the service life of the member .
it is the departments prerogative to accept or reject treated hardwood glued laminated members after pressure treatment that do not minimize exudate .
d field treatment .
field treat any preservative treated hardwood according to awpa mnum .
e finish .
oilborne preservative treated hardwood glued laminated members do not require a finish or sealer treatment .
do not use treated hardwood glued laminated railings where prolonged exposure to direct human contact is likely without application of a finish sealer .
provide a twocoat sealer application for finish treatment for treated railings where prolonged exposure is likely .
acceptable sealers include latex epoxy urethane shellac or other finishes that are effective coating agents that adhere to treated rails .
f shipping field storage and field handling .
num .
storage and handling .
section numa num .
cuts and abrasions .
section nume num .
temporary attachments .
section nume num numb num num change no .
num section numplain and laminated neoprene bearing pads num general requirements a description .
this work is the fabrication furnishing transportation and delivery of plain and laminated neoprene bearing pads .
b general requirements .
furnish bearings with the dimensions material properties elastomer grades and laminate types indicated .
c definition of terms .
num .
unreinforced pads .
elastomeric bearing pads consisting of elastomer only .
num .
reinforced pads .
elastomeric bearing pads reinforced with steel or fabric laminates .
num material a elastomer .
furnish virgin neoprene polychloroprene elastomer .
provide low temperature grade num num num num or num elastomer compound .
elastomer compound grades are defined by the testing requirements in table a .
substitution of a higher grade of elastomer for a lower one is permissible .
provide elastomer compound conforming to table a unless otherwise directed .
interpolate test requirements for intermediate hardnesses .
if the material is specified by its shear modulus furnish material with a measured shear modulus that is within num of the specified value .
for the purpose of defining limits for the tests in table a supply material with a consistent value of hardness .
if the material is specified by its hardness furnish material with a measured shear modulus that conforms to table num of the lrfd specification .
when test specimens are cut from the finished product the physical properties are allowed to vary from those specified in table a by num .
conduct all material tests at numf numf unless otherwise noted .
conduct shear modulus tests according to annex a of astm dnum .
b steel laminates .
fabricate steel laminates used for reinforcement from rolled mild steel conforming to a numanumm astm anum or equivalent unless otherwise directed .
furnish laminates with a minimum nominal thickness of num gage .
do not make holes in plates for manufacturing purposes unless indicated .
c fabric reinforcement .
weave fabric reinforcement from num glass fibers of e type yarn with continuous fibers .
provide a minimum thread count in either direction of ten threads per num threads per inch .
furnish fabric having either a crowfoot or an num hardness satin weave .
ensure each ply of fabric has a minimum breaking strength of num pounds per inch in each thread direction .
holes in the fabric are not allowed .
d bond .
provide a vulcanized bond between the fabric reinforcement and elastomer with a minimum peel strength of num pounds per inch .
supply steel laminated bearings that develop a minimum peel strength of num pounds per inch .
perform peel strength tests according to astm dnum method b .
num fabrication a general .
ensure that the bearings conform to the requirements for flash tolerance finish and appearance of the latest edition of the rubber handbook published by the rubber manufacturers association inc. rma fnum and t.num for molded bearings and rma fnum for extruded bearings .
b laminated pads with steel reinforcement .
cast laminated bearings pads with steel reinforcement as a unit in a mold .
bond and vulcanize bearings under heat and pressure .
ensure that the mold finish conforms to standard shop practice .
sand blast and clean the internal steel laminates to remove all surface coatings rust mill scale and dirt before bonding and ensure that the internal steel laminates are free of sharp edges and burrs .
for bearings that are designed to act as a single unit with a given shape factor manufacture the bearings as single units .
repair all cavities numb numf num num change no .
num left in the edges of the pad from the manufacturing process by inplant vulcanizing with neoprene material from the same lot as the bearing pad .
c laminated pads with fabric reinforcement .
vulcanize fabricreinforced bearings in large sheets and cut to size .
perform cutting in such a way to avoid heating the materials and to produce a smooth finish with no separation of the fabric from the elastomer .
furnish at least single ply fabric reinforcement for the top and bottom reinforcement layers and double ply for internal reinforcement layers .
place fabric parallel to the top and bottom surfaces .
ensure that the fabric is free of folds and ripples .
d plain pads .
mold extrude or vulcanize plain pads in large sheets and cut to size .
ensure that cutting does not heat the material but produces a smooth finish .
e marking and certification .
provide the manufacturers certification that each bearing satisfies the requirements of the plans and these specifications .
provide a certified copy of the material test results .
mark each reinforced bearing in indelible ink or flexible paint .
include the orientation the order number lot number bearing identification number and elastomer type and grade number in the marking .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents place the marking on the face that is visible after erection of the bridge .
f testing .
sample the completed pads according to ptm no .
num .
num .
scope .
test materials for elastomeric bearings and finished bearings according to table a and as specified below .
table a neoprene quality control tests property test method minimum requirements type num type num type num physical properties hardness shore a durometer tensile strength min .
psi ultimate elongation min .
astm dnum astm dnum num num num num num num num num num num num num heat resistance change in durometer hardness max .
points change in tensile strength max .
change in ultimate elongation max .
astm dnum num h numf num num num num num num num num num compression set num h num f max .
astm dnum method b num num num ozone num pphm ozone in air by volume num strain numf numf num h astm dnum method b procedure bnum no cracks no cracks no cracks low temperature brittleness grades num num grade num tested numf grade num tested numf grade num tested numf no test required astm dnum procedure b no failure no failure no failure no failure no failure no failure no failure no failure no failure instantaneous thermal stiffening grades num num numf grade num tested numf grade num tested numf grade num tested numf astm dnum stiffnessnum at test temperature not to exceed num times the stiffness measured at numf .
low temperature crystallation grade num grade num num days numf grade num num days numf no test required quad shear test as describednum stiffnessnum at test time and temperature not to exceed num times the stiffness at numf with no time delay .
numf numf num num change no .
num grade num num days numf grade num num days numf num note in table a that astm dnum refers to modulus of rigidity while astm dnum referenced in the text refers to shear modulus stiffness .
the word stiffness is used in table a to cover both terms .
num measure the stiffness with a quad shear rig in an enclosed freezer unit .
take test specimens from a randomly selected bearing .
use a num strain cycle and apply a complete cycle of strain with a period of num seconds .
discard the first num cycle of strain and determine the stiffness by the slope of the force deflection curve for the next num cycle of loading .
num .
frequency of testing .
conduct ambient temperature tests as specified in section numfnum for each lot of bearings .
provide test certificates from the supplier for each lot of reinforcement .
conduct low temperature tests as specified in section numfnum for each lot of bearings .
visually inspect every finished bearing as specified in section numfnum .
conduct shortduration compression tests as specified in section numfnum on every steel reinforced bearing .
if required conduct shear stiffness tests on material from a random sample of the finished bearings as specified in section numfnum .
num .
ambient temperature tests on the elastomer .
use elastomer conforming to table a for durometer hardness tensile strength ultimate elongation heat resistance compression set and ozone resistance .
ensure that the bond to the reinforcement conforms to the requirements specified in section numd .
test the shear modulus of the material at numf according to annex a of astm dnum .
ensure that the measured shear modulus is within num of the specified value .
if no shear modulus is specified ensure that the hardness falls within the range given in article num of the lrfd specification .
instead of performing a shear modulus test for each batch of material the manufacturer may if permitted provide certificates from tests performed on identical formulations within the preceding year .
num .
low temperature tests on the elastomer .
conduct low temperature brittleness tests astm dnum instantaneous low temperature stiffness tests astm dnum and low temperature crystallization tests astm dnum on grades num num and num elastomers .
for grade num elastomers instead of conducting low temperature crystallization tests the manufacturer may provide certificates from low temperature crystallization tests performed on identical material within the last year unless the tests are required .
conduct instantaneous low temperature stiffness tests astm dnum on grades num and num elastomers .
if required conduct low temperature brittleness tests astm dnum and low temperature crystallization tests astm dnum on grades num and num elastomers .
perform all tests according to table a and ensure the compound satisfies all limits for its grade .
num .
visual inspection of the finished bearing .
inspect every finished bearing for compliance with dimensional tolerances and for overall quality of manufacture .
in steel reinforced bearings protect the edges of the steel everywhere from corrosion .
num .
shortduration compression tests on bearings .
load the bearing in compression to num times its maximum design load .
hold the load constant for num minutes remove and reapply for another num minutes .
visually examine the bearing while under the second loading .
if the bulging pattern suggests laminate parallelism or a layer thickness that is outside the specified tolerances or poor laminate bond reject the bearing .
if there are three or more separate surface cracks that are greater than num inch wide and num inch deep reject the bearing .
num .
longduration compression tests on bearings .
load the bearing in compression to num times its maximum design load for a minimum period of num hours .
if during the test the load falls below num times the maximum design load increase the test duration by the period of time for which the load is below this limit .
visually examine the bearing at the end of the test while it is still under load .
if the bulging pattern suggests laminate parallelism or a layer thickness that is outside the specified tolerances or poor laminate bond reject the bearing .
if there are three or more separate surface cracks that are greater than num inch wide and num inch deep reject the bearing .
num .
shear modulus tests on material from bearings .
cut a specimen from the finished bearing and test the numf numh num num change no .
num shear modulus of the material according to annex a of astm dnum or if acceptable conduct a comparable nondestructive stiffness test on a pair of finished bearings .
ensure that the measured shear modulus is within num of the specified value .
if no shear modulus is specified ensure that the hardness falls within the range given in article num of the lrfd specification .
if the test is conducted on finished bearings compute the material shear modulus from the measured shear stiffness of the bearings taking due account of the influence on shear stiffness of bearing geometry and compressive load .
g tolerances .
measure overall height and overall horizontal dimensions according to astm dnum modified as follows measure dimensions num inches or less according to astm dnum procedure b .
measure dimensions greater than num inches according to astm dnum procedure c. provide finished pads within the following tolerances overall height design thickness num num inches or less design thickness over num num inches num inch num inch overall horizontal dimensions num feet or less over num feet num inch num inch thickness of individual layers of elastomer laminated bearings only at any point within the bearings num of design value but no more than num inch parallelism with opposite face top and bottom sides num rad num rad position of exposed connection members hole slots or inserts num inch edge cover embedded laminates or connection members num inch thickness top and bottom cover layer if required num the smaller of num inch and num of the nominal cover layer thickness size holes slots or inserts num inch h bedding material for bridge shoes .
manufacture material from elastomeric material reinforced with organic fiber as filler material .
the fiber may be oriented or random type i or in the form of fabric single or multiple laminations type ii .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
furnish finished pads conforming to the following requirements type i type ii num .
tensile strength .
astm dnum die a min .
num psi num psi num .
oven aging .
num days at numf change in actual tensile strength not to exceed num num num .
compressibility .
astm fnum procedure h. without high temperature preconditioning min .
max .
num num num num numh numh num num change no .
num num .
compressive strength .
numinch by numinch specimen compressed to rupture between flat plates num psi num psi num .
water absorption .
numhour immersion max .
num num num num num num change no .
num section numthrie beam guide rail num railsas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a rail elements .
aashto m num class a type ii mark to show the approximate radius of curved rails .
b transition section .
aashto m num class b type ii mark to show the approximate radius of curved rails .
num terminal sectionsas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a terminal section bridge connection .
aashto m num class b type ii num postsas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a steel ibeam posts .
aashto m num astm anum grade num or astm anum b galvanize as specified in section nums aashto m num num offset bracketssection num num miscellaneous materialas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a nuts bolts and washers .
section numcnum .
galvanize as specified in section nums astm anum or astm bnum and bnum .
b miscellaneous hardware .
aashto m numm numm astm anum grade num .
galvanize hardware after fabrication as specified in section nums aashto m num .
do not punch drill grind cut or weld after galvanizing .
repair minor abrasions of galvanized surfaces with two coats of galvanizing paint .
num galvanizing galvanize metal parts as specified in section nums astm anum unless otherwise specified and conform to the requirements of aashto m num section num .
num galvanizing paintastm anum section num num welding materialsection numt num certificationsection numbnum num numi num num change no .
num section numtemporary traffic control signals num general requirementsprovide install maintain relocate reset and remove portable traffic control signal systems for stationary operations .
document training or proficiency regarding the operation of the devices .
provide bulletin num approved products as indicated in section num .
submit a completed temporary traffic signal permit application as indicated in publication num and obtain department approval prior to installation .
the contractor owns maintains and operates the temporary traffic control signal and shall correct all signal failures or malfunctions in a timely manner .
comply with publication num and part num of the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd .
certify as specified in section numbnum .
num temporary traffic control signals on fixed supports a design .
provide temporary signal system on fixed supports .
furnish install maintain and remove all items required to provide a temporary signal system as indicated on the approved plans .
b signs .
in accordance with sections num num num and num and as follows install additional signs and devices as required in publications num num and num the approved traffic control plan and as required based on actual site conditions and as directed by the representative .
c pavement markings .
in accordance with section num d controller assembly .
in accordance with sections num num and num and as follows provide a controller with minimum numcycle operation automanual switch and a manual control button with flexible cord .
e electrical distribution .
in accordance with sections num num num and num and as follows establish an electrical service agreement with the appropriate power company to furnish and install electrical service to the signal .
follow all power company procedures and specifications for obtaining the agreement and providing power to the system .
provide any additional materials required to provide electrical service at no additional cost .
all agreement fees installation maintenance removal and energy supply costs are incidental to this item .
f signal heads .
sections num num and num g detection .
sections num num and num or otherwise indicated on the approved plans .
h support poles .
section num num and num and as follows use signal poles of wood galvanized steel or painted steel .
steel poles may be used in lieu of wood poles at no additional cost in order to eliminate encroachments on adjacent properties .
provide certification that the signal poles are designed to withstand the anticipated loading .
install the poles to provide transverse and vertical clearance as specified on the approved plans and in accordance with the standard drawings .
all temporary signal equipment especially poles and guy wires must be within public rightofway department or municipal .
if guy wires can not be located on public rightofway written permission from adjacent property owners is required .
i system testing .
notify the representative and the appropriate traffic signals section a minimum of num calendar days before a turnon and a new construction phase .
for locations that are currently unsignalized flash signals for num to num consecutive calendar days before normal operation unless otherwise authorized by the appropriate district traffic engineer .
refer to section numfor additional details .
make any timing adjustments as directed by the representative and document accordingly on the approved plans .
any modifications will require representative authorization and the approved plans to be updated accordingly .
numi nume num num change no .
num submit any proposed signal timing changes to the representative for approval prior to implementation .
timing adjustments andor other approved plan modifications will be considered incidental to this item .
num temporary traffic control signals on pedestalmounted portable traffic control signal systems a system configuration and application .
furnish each pedestalmounted portable traffic control signal system consisting of a minimum of two pedestalmounted signal head units per approach or as directed by the approved plans .
use trailer or pedestalmounted portable traffic signals only for singlelane alternating oneway traffic shortterm stationary applications as directed in publication num which includes daylight work zones emergency nighttime work where work is in active progress and authorized by the district traffic engineer or work which begins during the daylight and continues in active progress during hours of darkness with authorization from the district traffic engineer .
b pedestal units .
num .
structural adequacy .
provide a structurally adequate unit to support all pedestalmounted equipment .
furnish units with adequate structural integrity to enable lifting and placing them as required .
num .
stability .
provide units with acceptable stability and a suitable means for ballasting .
num .
assembly mechanisms .
equip each unit with tires and retractable handles to facilitate deployment relocation and removal .
mount signal heads on a retractable vertical upright equipped with a manual hand crank .
provide assembly mechanisms for simplicity and quick operation to keep set up and take down time to a minimum and to enable operation by one person .
num .
labels .
mark the manufacturer serial number and emergency phone number permanently on each using a decal metal plate or other means suitable to the department .
c signal displays .
num .
vertical clearance .
mount the bottom of the housing of a signal at least num feet but not more than num feet above the sidewalk .
if there is no sidewalk measure the mounting height above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
num .
size and orientation .
mount each signal head vertically with indications num inches in diameter .
num .
signal head design .
furnish yellow signal head housings as specified in section numanum .
provide signal heads with visors having a minimum depth of num inches .
equip all signal heads with backplates as specified in section numanum .
num .
approved material types .
furnish all signal heads with light emitting diode led modules .
provide all led modules and signal housings from a bulletin num manufacturer .
num .
supplemental signal indicator lamps .
provide these lamps on the back side of each unit for a visual status of the signal indications .
the lamp should display red to indicate oncoming traffic is provided with a green indication and the indication should remain off if oncoming traffic is provided with a red indication .
d environmental requirements .
provide a portable traffic control signal system capable of operating acceptably over an ambient temperature range of numf to numf and a relative humidity range of num to num percent .
e power supply .
provide a batterypowered portable traffic control signal system .
furnish a power supply with sufficient capacity to power each unit for num days at numf without charging .
equip each unit with batteries and a battery charger for use with a num v power source .
furnish a visual display of the battery charge status .
enclose the batteries and battery charger in a lockable weatherproof compartment .
key all locks alike for each unit in a system .
provide a system capable of running via existing commercial power .
numf num num num change no .
num f communication .
interconnect all portable traffic control signal systems used for operations via wireless radio link or overhead hardwire to ensure failsafe operation and proper functioning .
interconnect the units to function as a masterslave system .
ensure radio communications conform to applicable fcc requirements .
g modes of operation .
num .
required modes .
provide each system to operate via manuallycontrolled fixedtime trafficactuated and flashing modes .
num .
manuallycontrolled operation .
furnish manual control with wireless remote .
provide a manual control mode prohibiting the operator to interrupt any preprogrammed allred andor allyellow clearance time in a manner that would create a conflict .
num .
fixedtime operation .
provide a system capable of accommodating a minimum of five timing patterns per numhour period .
num .
trafficactuated operation .
use detection systems from a bulletin num manufacturer .
num .
flashing operation .
provide a system capable of both flashing red and flashing yellow operations in programmed flash and cabinet flash modes .
num .
emergency preemption .
as an option provide a bulletin num approved system capable of accommodating an optical radio or soundbased preemption system to provide a green indication for a properlyequipped approaching emergency vehicle .
num .
railroad preemption .
due to the complexity and variation involved with railroad crossings this operation will require a special provision .
h timing parameters .
num .
programmable timing patterns .
allow users of the system to program coordinated signal timings for green periods and cycle lengths to the nearest num second over a range of values from num seconds to num seconds .
phase timings including minimum green green extension yellow clearance and red clearance must be programmable to the nearest num second .
minimum green times must be programmable over a range of num to num seconds .
green extension times must be programmable over a range of num to num seconds .
maximum green times must be programmable for each phase to the nearest second and must be programmable over a range of num to num seconds .
num .
minimum number of phases .
furnish system capable of a minimum of sixphase traffic signal operations .
num .
manual programming .
allow users of the system the ability to program preselected timing patterns .
num .
timing algorithms .
if the system has software to automatically determine timing patterns based on certain input data submit a complete description from the manufacturer of the logic behind the timing algorithm for the representatives review and approval .
i conflict monitoring .
provide a system capable of preventing or detecting the display of conflicting signal indications according to the conflict monitoring provisions of the nema standards .
if a conflicting display is detected provide a system causing a transfer of the signals to flashing red .
j training and documentation .
have the manufacturer provide training and documentation to users of the portable traffic control signal system .
submit documentation to the representative showing that the trained personnel are knowledgeable of the signal systems operation and function .
num temporary traffic control signals on trailermounted portable traffic control signal systems numa numc num num change no .
num a trailer .
num .
general .
provide trailer capable of accommodating a vertical upright and a horizontal mast arm .
num .
structural adequacy .
provide trailer with welded steel construction and with structural adequacy to support all trailermounted equipment and adequate structural integrity to enable lifting and placing vertical upright and horizontal mast arm as required .
num .
stabilizers .
equip trailer with at least four leveling jacks pads or feet one at each comer of the trailer for maintaining the trailer in a level stabilized position and capable of locking in position .
num .
licensing .
equip trailer with all required lighting and other features to legally transport on the public highway system .
provide trailer and all its components with sufficient strength and rating to operate safely upon the public highway system at legal speeds without bending cracking bottoming premature wear or other damage .
num .
lifting and assembly mechanisms .
provide all lifting and other assembly mechanisms for simplicity and quick operation to keep set up and take down time to a minimum and to enable operation by one person .
equip lifting mechanism with a locking device to secure the assembly in a raised position with a horizontal lowered position for transport and with a raised vertical position facing rearwards from the trailer for operation .
num .
vandalresistant features .
furnish trailer and its components to help ensure continued proper placement and to forestall vandalism .
provide trailer with adequate vandalproof housings for all equipment .
provide removable trailer tires and hitch .
provide lockable battery enclosures crank mechanisms for horizontal arms and other mechanisms for adjusting placement or operation to eliminate tampering by unauthorized personnel .
key all lockable items alike .
equip the trailer drawbar with a swingaway screwtype jack .
num .
reflective markings .
place reflective tape or reflectors at each corner on the front rear and sides of the trailer .
num .
labels .
mark the manufacturer serial number and emergency phone number permanently on each trailer using a decal metal plate or other means suitable to the department .
b signal displays .
num .
number and location .
furnish each trailer with a minimum of two signal heads or as directed on the approved temporary traffic signal permit .
mount at least one signal head overhead on the mast arm except when the approved temporary traffic signal permit requires two overhead .
provide horizontal mast arm capable of extending a minimum distance of num feet from the edge of the trailer .
locate signal faces apart a minimum horizontal distance of num feet measured between centers of signal faces along a line perpendicular to the centerline of the approach .
num .
vertical clearance .
suspend the bottom of the housing of a signal face over the roadway a minimum of num feet but not more than num feet above the pavement .
mount the bottom of the housing of a signal face not over the roadway at least num feet but not more than num feet above the sidewalk .
if there is no sidewalk measure the mounting height above the pavement grade at the center of the roadway .
num .
size and orientation .
mount each signal head vertically with indications num inches in diameter and capable of rotating num degrees horizontally .
provide reversible mountings to allow for placing a trailer on both sides of the roadway .
num .
signal head design .
section numcnum num .
approved material types .
section numcnum num .
supplemental signal indicator lamps .
section numcnum c environmental requirements .
section numd numd numi num num change no .
num d power supply .
section nume e communication .
section numf f modes of operation .
section numg g timing parameters .
section numh h conflict monitoring .
section numi i training and documentation .
section numj num numb num num change no .
num section num intelligent transportation system its devices section numits devices general num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installing fully functional and operational intelligent transportation system its devices .
provide furnished items to be new and utilize the most current technology .
provide subsystems that minimize the possibility that failure of any one component or module causes total subsystem failure .
failure of one component or module must not damage any other component or module .
provide device subsystems that proceed automatically to fullfunctional mode at the device location and at the tmcrtmc or remote control location without the need for any human intervention when related electrical power supply is turned on or restored .
comply with the following standards and codes as indicated and where applicable nema ntcip astm iec ul eia nec and aashto .
furnish its devices conforming to and compatible with structures contained in publication num and the standard drawings .
num material a materials acceptance .
section num and as follows .
for all its devices submit for approval at no cost to the department catalog cuts drawings sources of supply and additional submissions as follows before purchasing equipment .
num .
its enclosure .
for enclosure heating and cooling subsystems submit heatload calculation sheets accompanied by related manufacturers data sheets as support materials for justifying the heatingcooling sizing choices .
use worstcase heatload data of the energized devices for the calculations .
submit power usage calculations to support power distribution type and size .
num .
uninterrupted power supply ups .
submit calculation sheets accompanied by manufacturers data sheet listing the power requirement of critical components as support materials for justifying the ups sizing choices .
use worstcase powerload data for the calculations .
b its enclosure .
utilize enclosure for groundmounted polemounted or other structurally mounted enclosure installations in accordance with standard drawings and as indicated .
house all its device electronics in the its enclosures in accordance with publication num and as indicated in the contract documents .
for polemounted and groundmounted enclosures provide all material including mounting equipment and a concrete pad or elevated pedestal to meet the requirements contained in publication num .
num .
nema numr enclosure .
house device electronics in a locking weather resistant nema numr ulnume listed aluminum enclosure .
furnish enclosure to provide protection from rain sleet snow dripping water and corrosion .
construct complete enclosure from num inch thick aluminum alloy type numhnum to provide strong and rigid construction .
provide enclosure with minimal dimensions of height depth and width necessary to accommodate all electrical equipment and wiring plus a minimum additional num of excess empty space for future equipment and maintenance access .
adhere to the minimum requirements on clearances around all components and bending radii for all cables as specified by the manufacturers .
utilize weld nuts for mounting all enclosure inner panels .
provide enclosure seams that are continuous and ground smooth solid welds made by the heliarc or stitch welding method .
provide enclosure welds that are neatly formed and free from cracks blowholes and other irregularities .
where enclosures are not groundmounted provide welded brackets or brackets bolted to the back of the enclosure for enclosure mounting .
where bolted bracket is used bolt the bracket to an interior reinforcing plate fabricated of the same material as the enclosure .
fabricate mounting plates of a minimum num inch thick aluminum .
add body stiffeners where required to prevent the enclosures from sagging or bowing .
equip enclosure with means for locking with pad lock .
furnish door handles which provide for positive latching of the door at three points as viewed when facing the door top bottom and left side .
provide a pin tumbler type lock numb numb num num change no .
num which serves to secure the door handles thereby locking the cabinet doors .
provide two door keys with the cabinet .
coordinate key type with the representative .
furnish door hinges and pins of num stainless steel conforming to astm anum .
provide continuous hinge mechanism along the entire side .
equip door with an adjustable doorstop to hold the door open at the angles of num degrees num degrees and num degrees with the front of the enclosure .
provide gasketing on all door openings that is permanently bonded to the metal .
cover mating surface of the gasketing with a silicone lubricant to prevent sticking to the mating surface .
provide bonding on the door and a grounding stud in the enclosure .
provide shutoffs and panels with identification labels and appropriate warning labels .
place identification nameplate on the outside of the enclosure .
provide nameplate that does not deteriorate over time due to weather .
indelibly identify all devices components cables and wires on permanently attached labels for use in the intended environment using labels approved by the representative and inscribed in accordance with the approved schematic shop drawing showing the component layout .
label all internal connectors and wire terminations with sufficient information to locate its connection point .
insert a block diagram of all components illustrating all connectors and connections used to interconnect the components wiring diagrams and schematic drawings of all circuits in a resealable weatherresistant pocket that is permanently mounted on the inside of an accessible door in the controller enclosure .
inscribe the component name and model number using a permanent label or laminated name plate in a position adjacent to the location of each major or replaceable component on the inside of the enclosure .
provide racks and shelves to mount equipment as needed including communications power and ups equipment .
do not stack equipment on top of other equipment .
equipment may be set on shelves installed on num inch rack rails or attached to panels mounted to the rear or side walls of the enclosure .
provide a laptop shelf within the enclosure to accommodate for laptopsother devices during commission testing and maintenance .
for all enclosures utilizing leasedline communications connections provide for each leaseline connection mounting space for an additional num inches wide by num inches high by num inches thick channel service unit csu or other communication module supplied by the telephonecable company .
provide an additional fused or breaker protected upspowered receptacle for related power requirement .
furnish fluorescent lighting fixture complete with lens or shield and type tnum num watt fluorescent lamp with rapid start .
provide lighting fixture that activates upon opening enclosure door and deactivates upon closing enclosure door .
position lamp assembly to provide light to all of the equipment within the enclosure .
shield lamp assembly to prevent light from shining directly in the eyes of servicing personnel .
provide sufficient shelve space within the enclosures for shelfmounted equipment .
if plans indicate provide an enclosure with a transparent antigraffiti coating over the entire outer surface of the enclosure .
provide the statewide device identification number on the enclosure so it is visible to maintenance andor department personnel approaching the device .
provide fabricated plaques of aluminum plastic or fiberglass of sufficient thickness to provide the necessary stiffness and to resist vandalism or stencil directly onto the enclosure with weatherresistant paint .
indicate the complete statewide device identification number with num inch high letters with a contrasting color background .
caulking and weather proofing is required if attached by any hardware that will penetrate the enclosure .
num .
power distribution subsystem .
provide full power distribution subsystem to all electronic components within the enclosure and the related its device .
furnish power distribution panel to distribute power to all equipment within the enclosure and its devices served by the enclosure .
provide circuit breakers sized to meet or exceed the nec requirements for the loads supported with a minimum of num a trips .
size the circuit breaker based on the loads of the its devices utilizing the enclosure .
provide circuit breakers on an electrical panel in a nema num enclosure or din rail mounted with appropriately rated junction blocks and buses .
provide a power distribution panel that is fed directly by the main circuit breaker at the electrical point of service or solar installation where applicable .
provide interface and connection to ups .
provide connection to grounding system .
if din rail components are utilized provide black white and green din rail terminal blocks for numvac hot neutral and ground respectively .
provide differently colored terminal blocks for low voltage power and signals .
provide end stops dividers and appurtenances as required .
provide a neutral bus of solid metallic strip rigidly mounted on the power panel which is isolated from enclosure ground .
provide all neutral conductors terminated on the neutral bus .
bond the control enclosure the main disconnect the power distribution panel the service ground wire and the branch circuit ground wires to the ground bus .
bond the ground bus to the enclosure grounding system with awg no .
num ground wire .
num .
wiring and cabling .
section num .
provide layout to minimize the flexure of cabling .
where wire is required to flex often use high strand wire .
numb numd num num change no .
num num .
heating and ventilation subsystem .
provide insulation thermostatcontrolled heating heat dispersion andor ventilation to maintain internal temperature between numf and numf with all installed components operating continuously at full capacity .
provide for other measures to allow the enclosure and internal component as a single entity to operate reliably in the ambient temperature between numf and numf relative humidity between num to num noncondensing .
where ventilation fan is used provide thermostatically controlled enclosure ventilation fan that supplies a minimum airflow of num cubic feet per minute .
utilize enclosure openings to ensure continuous air circulation .
position the openings such that short circuiting of air circulation is avoided and that the effect of removal of heat from inside the enclosure is maximized .
utilize louvers or other means to limit openings to num inches or smaller .
screen the fan to prevent the entrance of dust small animals and foreign matter .
screen any enclosure openings and vents besides the door opening with a filter that prevents small foreign objects from entering through these openings .
num .
duplex outlet .
provide three duplex groundfault nema numr interrupting gfci receptacles with num vac power as convenience outlet inside the enclosure .
ground the outlet through the enclosure grounding system .
furnish a ullisted receptacle .
num .
transient voltage surge suppression tvss .
provide transient voltage surge suppressor tvss for each copper cable enteringleaving the cabinet .
the ac powerline tvss is to be ul num third edition listed as type num or type num .
low voltage and signal circuit tvss are to be ul num listed .
tvss protection is not required for fiber optic cables .
num .
ground rod .
section numj and as follows where the enclosure and a device are mounted on the same support structure provide a common grounding electrode system for both .
num .
enclosure foundation .
for groundmounted enclosures .
class a cement concrete .
section num caulking compound .
section numb num .
maintainer pad .
for pole or structuremounted enclosures .
class a cement concrete .
section num .
reinforcement bars .
galvanized or epoxy coated steel wire fabric section num .
no .
num coarse aggregate .
section num. c managed network switch .
provide a fieldhardened managed network switch with minimum num rjnum ports for local connections in addition to a port to accept the communication media to the enclosure used for wide area network connection .
configure it to limit the access for viewing issuing instruction and performing configuration to authorized users only .
provide cabling and connectors to connect network switch to all electronic devices in the enclosure which require lan connectivity .
d ups subsystems .
furnish ups subsystem inside the enclosure .
provide ups subsystem that maintains a continuous supply of electric power to connected equipment by supplying power from a batterybacked power source when electric power from the regular source is not available .
furnish ups of the doubleconversion type where the output to the connected load is only generated from the backup battery battery set and the power from external source is only used to charge the backup battery battery set .
furnish the battery subsystem to provide backup power to all critical enclosure equipment all operating at num capacity for minimum num hour duration .
critical enclosure components by default include power modulessubsystems required for operating all communication devices controllers lowpower radio broadcast of num w transmission power or lower all sensing its devices cameras vehicle detectors environmental detectors etc .
provide a true separately derived power source as defined by nec article numd with output neutral bonded to ground .
do not provide direct connection between input and output and less than num pf of effective input to output capacitance .
regulate ups output to within the cbema and ansi cnum point of utilization range of num to num vac over the full dynamic range from no load to full load low line vac to high line vac and low battery voltage to high battery voltage .
provide continuous no break power during a power outage or momentary interruption .
standby power subsystems numd numa num num change no .
num which have any measurable transfer time and interruption of the output wave form are unacceptable .
provide computergrade sinewave power with num percent or less total harmonic distortion capability .
meet or exceed csa standard num part num for harmonic distortion .
provide ups that passes lightning testing standard as per ansiieee cnum category a test num v spike and num a and cnum test procedures .
reduce the input spike to no less than num v on the output for num to num spike attenuation .
provide capacity in volt amperes va while loaded with typical computergrade switchmode power supplies having a power factor of num to num and crest factor of num to num .
install ups batteries or ups with integral battery at construction .
e electrical service .
furnish all conduit elbows and expansion fittings wire connections wooden poles service disconnects and related equipment to establish electrical service at the its device location in accordance with publication num .
include all materials necessary to establish electrical connection between the device location the device enclosure and the electrical point of service .
num .
electrical cable .
section num num .
conduit .
section num num .
junction boxes .
section num num .
power supply .
section num f documentation .
provide documentation pertaining to each its device subsystem .
at a minimum provide three hard copies and one electronic copy of the operations manuals for each device and all its subsystems to the tmcrtmc representative .
submit an electronic and a hard copy of the wiring diagrams that display the connections between each of the subsystems .
at a minimum provide the following diagrams communications subsystem .
all subsystems and components including port assignments and ip addresses device model numbers and serial numbers and network path to the tmc details .
provide detailed fiber documentation requirements such as strand assignments splicing details odtr results etc .
tmcrtmc .
including connections to and from the tmcrtmc its devices network servers and other related communications equipment .
include any new physical connections established within the tmc including to and from existing or new work stations .
its enclosure .
provide three copies of the enclosure wiring diagram for each its enclosure assembly .
place a clear protective envelope in the controller assembly cabinet that contains one copy of the manufacturers instruction manual for each component contained in the enclosure .
coordinate with the representative for relevant existing system information and desired formatting for the diagrams .
g certification .
section numbnum and as follows certify that all structural attachments satisfy the departments criteria and are adequate to support the loads indicated .
as required by the representative this certification may include the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in pennsylvania .
certify the structural adequacy of all sign and device mounting brackets .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings as indicated and as follows a its enclosure .
install an its enclosure to house its device communication power and other related equipment necessary for the operation of field its devices .
provide enclosure at each device location and as directed in the contract documents .
determine its enclosure mounting location and type per recommendations provided in publication num .
num .
component mounting .
fasten all internal components securely to the enclosure using explicit mechanical numa numb num num change no .
num means such as clamps boltnut sets and screws .
num .
enclosure height .
in accordance with publication num and as follows for groundmounted enclosure installation apply ultraviolet uvresistant caulking material along the joints with the enclosure .
for mounting under a camera lowering system position the enclosure away from the space directly below the camera .
for mounting on vertical support structure unless otherwise specified where practical install the enclosure with related center line at a nominal height of num inches above adjacent finished gradefloor .
num .
enclosure openings .
include sealing lock nuts on each side of the enclosure wall on all penetration arrangements through the enclosure walls to prevent ingress of water .
use a bushing on the end of the conduit inside the enclosures to prevent chaffing of the cables .
seal all penetrations to the enclosure with rubber silicone sealant to impede entry of water .
after installing all related cables seal all conduits connected to the enclosure including all spare conduits with selfexpanding insulation foam electrical putty or an approved sealant as recommended by the cable manufacturer and in a manner that does not damage the cable to a depth of minimum num inches .
provide measures to protect cables from any sharp edges at the end of the conduits .
insert steel wool before the sealant to prevent rodent infestation .
num .
wiring .
neatly bundle and label all wirescables within the enclosure .
terminate ground wire from all electric devices including surge suppressors directly to the dedicated grounding terminal in the enclosure .
provide a maximum separation possible between signal wiring and power wiring or control wiring to avoid inductive pickup .
the minimum separation between the signal wiring and power wiring or control wiring is num inches .
if power wiring has to cross the signal wiring orient crossing as close to a right angle as possible .
num .
video encoder .
where video encoder is required install encoder and all related wiring and connectors in compliance with section numc .
num .
grounding .
section numq and in accordance with publication num .
num .
tvss .
segregate tvss devices by type and position the tvss devices as close as practical to the main termination point for grounding .
num .
enclosure foundation .
for pad mounted enclosures construct the foundation in accordance with publication num and as specified in sections numa and b .
num .
maintainer pad .
provide a groundlevel concrete maintainer pad in front of each enclosure door and in front of the hand hole that provides a solid leveled standing platform in front of the enclosure opening .
furnish a pad with sufficient space for maintenance personnel to stand and perform maintenance at the enclosure .
provide pad in accordance with publication num .
the size of the maintainer pad may be reduced in tight geometric areas and on steep slopes as determined by the department .
num .
ups subsystem .
install ups and all required batteries into the its enclosure or separate ups cabinet as specified in contract documents .
ensure all electrical connections are terminated according to the manufacturers specifications .
b its device testing .
complete all testing for the following its devices cctv har subsystem dms and vehicle detector subsystem .
testing of the related its subsystems may involve additional itsrelated items including but not limited to video encoderdecoder portable dms and its enclosure .
testing procedures described in this section are intended to test each subsystem element to make certain that the elements are properly integrated to achieve a fully functioning subsystem .
make provisions for up to two department personnel or their representatives to attend all tests and demonstrations .
conduct the following tests in the order indicated on each its device and device subsystem factory demonstration tests documented factory testing may be used instead of having personnel on site for this at the discretion of the representative onsite standalone tests system tests numday testing numb numb num num change no .
num numday operational support period warranty period the length of the manufacturers standard warranty at the end of the numday test the acceptance of each stage of testing does not imply that testing is complete at that stage .
if problems are found at a later date or stage of testing it may be necessary to return to an earlier stage of testing after repairs have been made to the system .
if at a later stage of testing a piece of equipment is replaced repaired or significantly modified retest to the level necessary to isolate any problem and establish a course of action to remedy the situation .
provide test documentation including at a minimum test procedures checklist test forms and data summary sheets for each item .
tailor test documentation for each item being tested .
submit testing documentation before testing for the representatives acceptance .
after test documentation is approved provide the representative with advance notice as specified for each test so the representative can observe each test .
failure to conform to the indicated requirements of any test will be considered defective and equipment will be subject to rejection by the representative .
in the event a defect is determined identify whether it is limited to a specific unit or could be potential problems in all such units .
equipment rejected because of problems limited to the specific unit may be offered again for retest provided all issues of noncompliance have been corrected and retested and evidence is submitted to the representative .
in the event that equipment malfunctions during the test period the representative may declare a subsystem defect and require replacement of all equipment at no additional cost to the department .
when a subsystem defect is declared restart the test for that specific subsystem .
begin the test period when all similar equipment is replaced and retest has been successfully completed .
if a unit has been modified as a result of the equipment replacement prepare a report and deliver it to the representative for acceptance .
describe in the report the nature of the failure and the corrective action taken .
if a failure pattern as defined by the representative develops the representative may direct that design and construction modifications be made to all similar units without additional cost to the department .
in the case of problems common to many units modify all units without additional cost to the department .
num .
general .
test the equipment in accordance with approved test procedures only .
record test results on data summary sheets for each piece of equipment tested .
provide certification of test results by a qualified representative .
submit all test records including photocopied duplicates as required to the representative within one day of the test .
complete testing for each equipment unit in as few consecutive days as possible as determined by the representative .
schedule testing with additional time allotted for the representative to request that certain portions of a test be repeated .
the representative has the right to witness andor assign their designee to witness any test .
at a minimum all testing procedures must be signed by the following the representative or the representatives designee and the contractors designee .
the acceptance of test procedures and witness of such tests does not relieve the responsibility to provide a completely acceptable and operating subsystem that meets the indicated requirements .
num .
factory demonstration test .
conduct factory demonstration tests at manufacturers facility before shipping the equipment to verify that each subsystem meets the contract requirements .
if required by the representative provide personnel to observe the factory demonstration test in person before shipping the equipment .
include ntcip testing as part of factory demonstration test .
utilize testing procedures to validate the latest version of ntcip requirements .
prepare factory demonstration test documentation .
conduct factory demonstration tests at the manufacturers facility for every its device provided for this project .
num .
onsite standalone tests .
conduct onsite standalone tests at each field location to verify that each individual field device satisfies the indicated requirements .
conduct these tests before interconnection to the tmcrtmc .
following the installation of equipment in the field conduct field tests on each piece of equipment at each installation site to verify that components modules or subsystem of equipment operate properly in their intended application to the extent possible before connection to the tmcrtmc and to other devices .
provide the required testing equipment including a portable computer and test software to perform local subsystem operations and diagnostic test procedures .
submit test procedures checklist and summary sheets for the representatives acceptance before performing tests .
provide representative with a testing schedule indicating the date time and location of each test .
provide at least num working days notice before all tests so the representative can observe each test .
if a device fails to meet the requirements specified rectify the device as required and repeat the tests until numb numb num num change no .
num successful at no additional cost to the department .
if a subsystem component has been modified as a result of the test failure prepare a detailed report on the modifications to subsystem or software and submit it to the representative .
describe in the report the nature of the failure and corrective actions taken .
num .
system tests .
conduct system tests from the tmcrtmc and field locations as required to verify that the overall subsystem meets the indicated requirements .
conduct system tests following completion and acceptance of all onsite standalone tests .
provide at least num working days notice before all tests so the representative can observe each test .
where central control software hardware and network switches exist utilize the existing equipment and control software to manage and control the its devices .
exercise all functions for the device subsystems to test control and monitoring functions of the devices remotely .
where new software switching systems or hardware are installed in the project utilize this new equipment to test control and monitoring functions of the devices remotely .
demonstrate that the communications subsystem is fully functional .
in the event of test failure perform a partial or total retest to demonstrate the subsystem is functioning as a whole .
conduct system tests on all subsystems and components that are being furnished under this contract .
conduct tests from the tmcrtmc as indicated exercising functional and interface requirements as required .
num .
numday test .
conduct a continuous num hour operating test for no less than num consecutive calendar days beginning the day after the subsystem completes the system tests and is accepted .
conduct the numday test simultaneously for each subsystem installed in this project for example cctv dms and har subsystems .
provide operational and maintenance support for all installed equipment including troubleshooting and diagnostics in the event a malfunction occurs .
in the case where equipment malfunctions during the numday test period the representative may declare a subsystem defect .
correct failures during the test period by repairing or replacing malfunctioning parts or equipment or faulty work regardless of the cause in less than num hours .
restart at daynum of the numday test for that specific subsystem .
the numday test period is to begin when all similar equipment is replaced and a system retest has been successfully completed .
if over num of subsystems fail their numday test period that is considered a large failure of the system and the numday test will be restarted for all subsystems following replacement of the malfunctioning parts or equipment or faulty work .
if less than num of the subsystems fail their numday test period that is considered a small failure and only the subsystem test needs to be restarted .
make available a systems technician who is fully knowledgeable and capable of operating all functions of the specified subsystem for technical support during the numday test period .
provide this systems technician onsite from num a.m. to num p.m. on the first day of the numday test and oncall basis thereafter .
the systems technician must specialize in communications .
provide technician having a minimum of num years experience in the installation testing troubleshooting and fine tuning of communication subsystems .
submit the systems technician qualifications for acceptance at least num working days before the start of the numday test .
notification of a malfunction will be provided by the department personnel immediately following the occurrence of the equipment malfunction .
receipt of notification is defined as when the systems technician or the answering service receives the call .
maintain records of stoppages and resumptions of the numday test .
verify against the records maintained by the representative for accuracy .
submit documentation for all activities performed during this support period .
provide complete operations support as required during the numday test period to the department personnel who will be using the subsystem and performing operational tests on the complete subsystem on a daytoday basis .
the means of communications during this test period will be through a local telephone number or an answering service .
provide at least one local telephone number at which the contractor can be reached .
provide a response to each call within an hour of the call being placed .
provide a turnaround time of num hours for each call .
if one of the subsystems fails during the numday test the completion of the test for the other subsystems will not be delayed .
during the testing period provide department personnel training in order to operate all normal functions of the subsystem .
after the completion of numday test conduct complete subsystem diagnostics for field and tmcrtmc equipment as follows equipment testing and adjustment of settings and parameters check component operations with respect to these specifications .
following the completion of numday test clear the inside of all its enclosures using brushes and vacuums as appropriate perform component cleaning and filter replacements at all enclosures installed in the project .
during the numday test power and communication costs associated with maintaining the operation of the its devices will be the responsibility of the contractor .
ownership of the subsystem will be transferred to the department upon successful numb numc num num change no .
num completion of the numday test .
num .
numday operational support period .
conduct a numday operational support period .
furnish a detailed operational support plan covering preventive and remedial maintenance of all equipment .
furnish all necessary labor materials equipment tools transportation supplies maintenance and protection of traffic and incidental items .
the plan must include qualifications of the personnel assigned by the contractor for each activity included .
the plan must be approved by the representative before the completion of the numday test .
the representatives review period will not exceed num calendar days from receipt of the operational plan .
provide operational support for a period of num days .
the operational support period will start on the calendar day after the numday test is completed .
the department will operate and own the subsystem during this period .
if any adjustments are made to software wiring or equipment settings during the operational support period provide this upgraded software at no additional cost to the department .
if any adjustments are made to wiring or equipment settings during the operational support period reflect the adjustments in the documentation .
coordinate with the departments traffic and maintenance units for all field activities .
except for emergency service requested by the department or when responding to a malfunction repair request by penndot notify the department num calendar days before scheduling any activities .
furnish maintenance and protection of traffic plans as required by the representative .
conduct preventative and remedial maintenance activities during the num operational support period .
num.a preventive maintenance .
as specified in section numa section numa section numa section numa section numa section numa and section numa .
num.b oncall maintenance .
as specified in section numb section numb section numb section numb section numb section numb and section numb .
num .
warranty period .
provide a manufacturers warranty for each its device component subsystem hardware software and piece of equipment furnished in the project .
provide manufacturer warrantees of durations equivalent to industry standards .
provide warrantees of a one year minimum duration .
provide a warranty that will enable the full replacement of a piece of equipment in the event of equipment failure at no additional cost to the department .
num .
its grounding testing .
section numq .
num .
camera lowering device cld testing .
standalone testing is required for all cld systems .
at a minimum the cld must meet the following criteria raise or lower the camera within num minutes when utilizing the motorized drill component of the lowering device .
lock and unlock the camera into position at the top of the structure at least num times to demonstrate functionality of the locking mechanism .
verify that the camera fully restarts without manual initiation .
c its device integration .
integrate its equipment into the existing its system at the related tmcrtmc or remote control location as indicated or directed by the representative .
provide atms integration as specified in section num provide all connectors cables software configuration and labor necessary to furnish a fully functional its device subsystem .
this includes all work cable data connections and installation that allows for data transmission and control from the tmcrtmc .
coordinate with the representative to obtain all relevant network information to configure the devices to successfully operate .
integrate to ensure additional device capabilities as follows install all cables and connections to enable bidirectional pantiltzoom control to the tmcrtmc and other locations as specified in contract documents .
configure camera parameters at tmcrtmc including setting home positioning labeling the camera images and setting up tours as directed by the representative .
perform all coordination and work with penndots it bureau of infrastructure and operations bio to enable the cctv feeds to be available through penndots num system and any other systems deemed appropriate by the department .
provide the necessary device information and coordinate with district and district it staff in contacting bio for system testing and integration into penndots num system and other systems .
coordinate with bio and provide and numc numb num num change no .
num configure encoders and cabling to enable the cctv feeds to be available through the num system .
num .
video encoderdecoder .
install the encoderdecoder units and configure them to enable a fully functional system .
obtain network information such as ip addresses and relevant settings from the representative and configure the encoderdecoder to transmitreceive videodata using the specified network information .
coordinate with the representative to establish the final installation location .
num .
har transmitter .
obtain network information as necessary from the representative to configure into the har platinum software and tmcrtmc atms software .
num .
har beacon .
configure communications between the har sign and control point to ensure successful communications between the har sign and control point and configure into the har platinum software and tmcrtmc atms software .
num .
vehicle detector .
integrate the detector subsystems into the existing transportation sensor system tss in the tmcrtmc atms software using the related fieldtocenter fnumc communications subsystem as indicated .
d its device training .
provide device training to department personnel as identified by the representative .
submit training plan for approval .
at a minimum provide training for the maintenance of the installed devices .
if a standard device is integrated into atms or a currently used makemodel device is provided operational training is not required .
train personnel to use all major functionalities of the subsystem prior to the beginning of the numday test .
provide training manuals and handouts for future reference .
training includes a minimum of num personnel present at the tmcrtmc or control facility for a minimum of num hours per subsystem unless otherwise specified .
e electrical service .
section num and as follows install all conduit service poles conduit junction boxes and related equipment to establish electrical service for the its device in accordance with publication .
where electrical and communications service are collocated at the electrical point of service install complete separate communications connection between the communications point of service the device enclosure and the its device .
establish connection independent of power connection .
utilize separate conduit and junction boxes for any underground connection .
num .
trench and backfill .
section numc num .
rgs and pvc conduit .
section numg num .
cable installation .
section numh num .
power supply system .
section nums num .
power supply service pole .
section numk num .
junction box power and communications .
section nump num measurement and payment a its enclosure .
each includes all cables connectors mounting mounting hardware heating ventilation subsystem tvss managed network switch ups equipment racks maintainer pad grounding rod and conductor installation documentation and configuration .
b its testing .
lump sum factory demonstration test .
onsite standalone test .
numb numd num num change no .
num system test .
numday test .
num day support period .
includes all maintenance repairs oncall responses and documentation .
warranty period .
c ups subsystem .
each includes ups controller all necessary batteries and enclosure if specified as well as all cabling to ensure a fully functional supply .
d electrical service .
as follows trench and backfill .
section numn rigid galvanized steel rgs and pvc conduit .
section numk cable installation .
section numm complete power supply system .
section numo junction box power and communications .
section numa num numb num num initial edition section numatms its device integration num descriptionthis work is the coordination and documentation activities required to facilitate integration of its devices into the next generation atms next gen atms and to furnish information regarding the characteristics of all relevant its devices installed within the project .
next gen atms is the common platform used by the department to monitor control and utilize all functionalities of its devices installed within the commonwealth .
work to integrate the its devices must be a collaborative effort between the contractor responsible for installation of the its devices and the department integrator .
the department integrator at no cost to the contractor will be responsible for performing the work to integrate the its devices into next gen atms .
the contractor is responsible for furnishing all information pertaining to the its devices relevant to integration as described herein and as required by the department integrator .
num material a protocol documentation .
furnish protocol documentation for all communication protocols used by the its devices .
b integration kit .
furnish integration kit sdk api software if applicable that the atms vendor will need to integrate devices .
furnish documentation for integration kit .
c licenses .
furnish licenses if applicable to support the integration of the devices by the atms .
d its device configuration information .
furnish all information required herein for the respective devices being installed .
information must be provided for each device being installed as part of the its project .
omission of any information required for integration will be considered incomplete .
if information is incomplete at the time of integration activities as identified by the project schedule or plan it will be considered a delay of the project .
all information must be provided in the format described herein or as directed by the representative .
provide information in matrices in microsoft excel or comparable format subject to approval by the representative .
furnish one matrix per type of device being installed as part of the project .
transmit information to the department through the representative via electronic communications such as email cdrom or as directed by the representative .
e device vendor point of contact .
furnish point of contact for each device vendor .
num construction a general .
prior to the integration activities identified in the project schedule or plan furnish the information contained herein to ensure the successful integration of the its devices .
a template matrix identifying the integration information fields may be available from the representative .
this information is required to be provided to the department integrator as soon as it is available .
systems acceptance testing will not commence until all information contained herein has been provided .
failure to provide the information required herein will be considered a delay to the project and be subject to liquidated damages .
b its devices .
supply all information as indicated .
where information is not readily available it is the contractors responsibility to seek out and obtain the missing information including performing any necessary coordination with the devices manufacturers and performing coordination with the representative .
for fields that are not applicable to the project clearly indicate within the matrix that the particular cell is not applicable by filling the field with the text na .
provide all latitude and longitude information with accuracy to the nearest num feet .
numb numb num num initial edition num .
cctv cameras .
furnish the following information location information general characteristics communications statewide device id manufacturer ptz communication type type permanent vs. portable model camera address district location serial number manufacturer id ptz communications protocol district owner power type ptz connection type descriptive location encoder manufacturer where applicable ptz connection parameters serial only roadway roadway direction camera firmware mile marker where applicable ptz ip address state route number ptz ip port name latitude ntcip protocols supported longitude ntcip community string if ntcip encoder ip address where applicable exit number nearest encoder ip port where applicable county encoder firmware multicast or unicast username password where applicable video format video transport num .
dms .
furnish the following information location information general characteristics communications statewide device id manufacturer communication type type permanent vs. portable vs. semipermanent model communications protocol include version if applicable structure type serial number manufacturer id connection type district location power type connection parameters serial only district owner number of display lines controller address descriptive location matrix type line or full controller firmware roadway number of pages possible ip address roadway direction sign height by number of pixels ip port name mile marker where applicable sign width by number of pixels ntcip protocols supported next downstream exit number for all available fonts font dimensions font height font width font character spacing font line spacing ntcip community string if ntcip protocol state route number phone number if dialup communications latitude longitude exit number nearest county numb numb num num initial edition num .
har transmitter .
furnish the following information location information general characteristics communications statewide device id manufacturer communication type type permanent vs. portable vs. semipermanent model communications protocol include version district location serial number manufacturer id connection type district owner power type connection parameters serial only descriptive location broadcast radius controller address roadway vendor control software type and version controller firmware roadway direction ip address mile marker where applicable ip port name exit number nearest ntcip protocols supported county ntcip community string if ntcip state route number phone number if dialup latitude longitude num .
har beacon .
furnish the following information location information general characteristics communications statewide device id manufacturer communication type type permanent vs. portable vs. semipermanent model communications protocol include version district location serial number manufacturer id connection type district owner power type connection parameters serial only descriptive location associated har transmitter statewide id controller address roadway controller firmware roadway direction ip address mile marker where applicable ip port name exit number nearest ntcip protocols supported county ntcip community string if ntcip state route number phone number if dialup latitude on code where applicable longitude off code where applicable numb numb num num initial edition num .
vehicle detectors .
furnish the following information for the respective detector types num.a microwaveradar detectors inductive loops and video detection units .
location information general characteristics communications statewide device id detector type communication type type permanent vs. portable vs. semipermanent manufacturer communications protocol include version district location model connection type district owner serial number manufacturer id connection parameters serial only roadway descriptive location power type controller address roadway direction vehicle classification capable and of classification bins to be configured and value controller firmware mile marker where applicable number of zoneslanes ip address exit number nearest for each zonelane lane number lane type direction ip port name county ntcip protocols supported state route number ntcip community string if ntcip latitude phone number if dialup longitude num.b rfid tag readers .
applicable only for iagmark num manufactured rfid tag readers based upon the e zpass electronic toll collection system .
location information general characteristics communications statewide device id detector type communication type type permanent vs. portable vs. semipermanent manufacturer communications protocol include version district location model connection type district owner serial number manufacturer id connection parameters serial only descriptive location power type controller address roadway controller firmware roadway direction ip address mile marker where applicable ip port name exit number nearest ntcip protocols supported county ntcip community string where applicable state route number latitude longitude numb numa num num initial edition num.c bluetooth readers .
location information general characteristics communications statewide device id detector type communication type type permanent vs. portable vs. semipermanent manufacturer communications protocol include version district location model connection type district owner serial number manufacturer id connection parameters serial only roadway power type controller address descriptive location controller firmware roadway direction ip address mile marker where applicable ip port name exit number nearest ntcip protocols supported county ntcip community string where applicable state route number latitude longitude c testing .
section numb and as follows num .
general .
conduct the system tests in conjunction with the department integrator .
coordinate with the department integrator to ensure that the its devices installed within the project isare integrated into next gen atms .
furnish all information prescribed herein in addition to any additional information required by the department integrator to perform the integration .
the system test will be considered complete upon completion of the following two tests num .
independent system test .
complete comprehensive test of the subsystem to demonstrate full functionality of the its devices and subsystem and compliance with the project specifications .
conduct the test using vendor provided device control software or other equivalent software that is installed on a commonwealthprovided computer or workstation in the tmc with access to next gen atms and the penndot wan .
the objective of this test is to demonstrate full functionality of the subsystem including all components such as the workstation and all communications to and from the field .
the contractor is responsible for demonstrating full compliance with project documents and full functionality of the its device and subsystem from the tmc to the field during the independent system test .
num .
next gen atms system test .
coordinate with the department integrator to demonstrate full its device control and functionality using the next gen atms platform .
the department integrator is responsible for physical integration of the its devices into next gen atms .
the contractor is responsible for ensuring that integration occurs within the project schedule and in accordance with project documents .
provide a minimum of num weeks advanced notice to the department integrator prior to integration of its devices or subsystems .
coordinate integration such that as many devices as practical are integrated simultaneously .
num measurement and payment a integration .
lump sum num paid upon completion of independent system test num paid upon completion of next gen atms system test num numb num num initial edition section numits communications num descriptionthis work is the furnishing and installation of the system equipment for the control of its and the furnishing and installation of equipment necessary to provide communication between device andor controller and assemblies and other components in the field andor rtmctmc that form a system as indicated on the approved plans .
num material a microfiber optic cable .
provide a fiber optic cable meeting the following num .
fiber optic distribution cable .
singlemode fiber .
mini loose tubes .
dielectric central member .
outer jacket hdpe .
meets bellcore trtsynum rea penum and ansiicea snum in accordance with requirements of ansitiaeianuma commercial building telecommunications cabling standard .
reverse oscillation buffer tube stranding .
footage markings printed every num feet along outer jacket .
attenuation at num nm num dbkm maximum attenuation for every fiber in cable across entire operating temperature range .
operating temperature range num c to num c. maximum nominal outside diameter num mm .
num .
fiber optic termination cable .
singlemode fiber .
loose tube cable .
dielectric central member .
medium density polyethylene cable jacket .
meets bellcore trtsynum rea penum and ansiicea snum in accordance with requirements of ansitiaeianuma commercial building telecommunications cabling standard .
reverse oscillation buffer tube stranding .
footage markings printed every num feet along outer jacket .
attenuation at num nm num dbkm maximum attenuation for every fiber in cable across entire operating temperature range .
operating temperature range num c to num c. maximum nominal outside diameter num mm .
b standard fiber optic cable .
provide a fiber optic cable meeting the following num .
fiber optic cable .
singlemode fiber .
loose tube cable .
dielectric central member .
medium density polyethylene cable jacket .
meets bellcore trtsy num rea penum and ansiicea snum in accordance with requirements of ansitiaeia numa commercial building telecommunications cabling standard .
reverse oscillation buffer tube stranding .
footage markings printed every num feet along outer jacket .
numb numc num num initial edition attenuation at num nm num dbkm maximum attenuation for every fiber in cable across entire operating temperature range .
operating temperature range num c to num c. num .
tracer wire .
provide a single num awg minimum thhn copper cable .
the tracer wire is only required for underground installations .
c outdoor wireless radio .
provide an outdoor type dual radio meeting the following num .
security and encryption .
num bit num bit aes keys .
num .
traffic prioritization .
quality of service qos nump .
num .
wireless interface .
ieee numabgh ad hoc .
transmit power up to num mw .
frequency ranges num num .
receive sensitivity typical .
num ghz num mbps num dbm dynamic frequency selection dfs .
transmit power control tpc .
num .
network ports .
three num mbps ethernet ports with weatherproof connectors led activity indicator .
ieee num numu compliant .
csmacd num autosense .
ports num num pse power over ethernet per numaf .
num .
enclosure .
cast aluminum nemanumxipnum enclosure .
two ntype antenna connectors .
one weatherproof power connector .
three weatherproof ethernet connectors .
system leds power status mesh .
weight num pounds num kg with bracket and sunshield .
dimensions no larger than num inch by num inch by num inch including sunshield .
num .
power .
ac input num vac num hz num a maximum .
dc input num vdc num num a maximum .
ports num and num ieee numaf compliant poe pse num w maximum .
num .
environmental specifications .
operating temperature num c to num c .
numc numd num num initial edition storage temperature num c to num c .
humidity noncondensing num to num .
storage humidity noncondensing num to num .
maximum altitude num feet .
d radio communication antennas .
provide antennas for the radio communication nodes according to the contract documents and as follows num .
panel antenna .
provide a triple polarized mimo subscriber panel antenna or antennas as indicated for each wireless mesh node meeting the following requirements specification value frequency range num ghz gain num dbi nominal impedance num ohms vswr num num db beam width azimuth dual slant num degrees num db beam width elevation dual slant num degrees frontback ratio num db polarization dual slant num degrees and vertical connector num x n type operating temperature num c to num c size num x numx xnum mm mounting base mntnum weight num kg num .
num dbi dish antenna .
provide a num dbi parabolic dish antenna as indicated operating at num to num ghz and meeting the following requirements specification value frequency range num ghz gain num dbi nominal impedance num ohms vswr num radiation pattern directional beam width numdbi num degrees polarization dual polarity fb ration db num connector n type size num ft .
diameter radome abs mounting base bracket weight num lbs .
num .
num dbi dish antenna .
provide a num dbi parabolic dish antenna as indicated operating at num to num ghz and meeting the following requirements specification value frequency range num ghz gain num dbi nominal impedance num ohms vswr num numd numa num num initial edition radiation pattern directional beam width numdbi num degrees polarization dual polarity fb ration db num connector n type size num ft .
diameter radome abs mounting base bracket weight num lbs .
num .
antenna mounting .
provide aluminum extruded bracket for mast mounting .
provide cathodic protection when mounting to steel pole tower or building .
num .
antenna cable .
provide heliax low density foam coaxial antenna cables from the radio within the cabinet to the dish antenna meeting the following requirements specification value jacket material pe outer conductor corrugated copper dielectric material foam pe inner conductor material copperclad aluminum wire nominal size num in .
cable impedance num ohms num ohm capacitance num pfft .
dc resistance inner conductor num ohmskft .
dc resistance outer conductor num ohmskft .
dc test voltage numv inductance num hm operating temperature num c to num c max attenuation nummhz num dbnum ft. num .
antenna surge suppression .
provide a highperformance gasdischarge lightning suppressor designed for use at frequencies up to num ghz .
num constructionas directed by the representative as follows a microfiber optic cable .
install fiber optic cable in new conduit as indicated .
use appropriate installation techniques such that the optical and mechanical characteristics of the cable are not degraded .
unless otherwise approved by the representative use only the equipment and procedures specified by the manufacturer of the fiber optic cable .
install the cable in such a way that neither the minimum bending radius nor the maximum pulling tension are violated before during or after installation .
before any fiber optic cable installation is performed provide the representative with four copies of the cable manufacturers recommended and maximum pulling tensions for each cable size and type .
these pulling tensions are to be specified for pulling from the cables outer jacket .
also provide a list of the minimum allowable cable bending radius and the cable manufacturers approved pulling lubricants and guidelines for their application .
only these lubricants are allowed .
the installation system to be used is to be inspected and approved by the representative .
establish adequate voice communications between the cable feeding location and the cable pulling equipment before starting any pulling operations .
set up the cable reels on the same side of the junction box as the conduit section in which the cable is to be placed .
make the reel level and bring it into proper alignment with the conduit section such that the cable will pass from the top of the reel in a long smooth bend into the duct without twisting .
do not pull the cable from the bottom of the reel .
feed the cable by manually rotating the wheel .
pull the cable in the conduit with a cable grip designed to provide a firm hold on the exterior covering of the numa numa num num initial edition cable .
use an approved cable feeder guide between the cable reel or storage stack and the face of the duct to protect the cable and to guide the cable into the duct as it is payed off the reel or from the storage stack .
the dimensions and setup of the feeder guide are to be such that the cable does not bend at any location to a radius less than the cables minimum allowable bending radius .
do not exceed this minimumbending radius at any time during cable installation .
keep cable ends sealed at all times during installation using an approved cable end cap .
do not use tape to seal the cable end .
keep the cable end sealed until termination takes place .
provide a minimum of num feet of slack for cables that are not immediately terminated .
at any time the allowable pulling tension is to be num of the manufacturers maximum pulling tension for pulling by the outer jacket .
ensure that the allowable pulling tension is not exceeded at any time during cable installation by using one of the following methods as approved by the representative pulling the cable by hand .
approved mechanical means .
if the cable is pulled by mechanical means use a clutch device to ensure the allowable pulling tension is not exceeded .
also attach a strain gauge to the pulling line at the cable exit location and at a sufficient distance from the takeup device such that the strain gauge can be read throughout the entire cable pulling operation .
use an approved lubricant if needed in the amount recommended by the cable manufacturer to facilitate pulling the cable .
lubricate the cable as it is payed off the cable reel or storage stack into the cable feeder .
place an approved cable lubricator funnel around the cable just ahead of the cable feeder to facilitate proper lubrication of the cable .
after the cable has been installed wipe the exposed cable in a junction box or cabinet clean of cable lubricant with a cloth before leaving the junction box or cabinet .
take every precaution to ensure that the cable is not damaged during storage and installation .
do not allow workers to step on the cable or run it over with any vehicle or equipment .
do not pull the cable along the ground over edges or corners over or around obstructions or through unnecessary curves or bends .
use approved cable guides feeders shoes and bushings to prevent damage to the cable during installation .
replace and reinstall any cables that are damaged at no additional cost to the department .
cable runs are to be continuous between allowable termination points in equipment cabinets and multiplexer nodes .
carefully determine the length of cable necessary to reach from termination point to termination point .
do not splice fiber optic cable in conduit or junction boxes .
the contractor may at his own option and with the representatives approval furnish install and pull cable through an intermediate junction box .
intermediate junction boxes will be considered part of cable installation and no separate payment will be made for this work pull the necessary length of cable to be installed from one equipment cabinet or multiplexing node to the immediate next downstream equipment cabinet or multiplexing node .
carefully store the remaining length of cable to be installed in the next conduit in a manner that is not hazardous to pedestrian or vehicular traffic yet ensures that no damage to the cable occurs .
store the cable in a manner that allows that length of cable to be safely pulled into the next conduit and is approved by the representative .
in junction boxes store num feet of slack fiber optic cable for the distribution fiber and num feet of slack fiber for the termination fiber spur that passes through the junction box .
in addition provide num feet of slack fiber for all fiber types at a junction box adjacent to an equipment field device cabinet .
neatly store slack cable on the side walls of the junction box using racking hardware approved by the representative .
no separate payment will be made for equipment used to install terminate and test the fiber optic cable .
the unit price for fiber optic cable includes all cable ties clamps associated material and labor required to install the cable .
the firm or subcontractor involved in the installation of the fiber optic cable is to meet the requirements of section num .
num .
termination .
terminate fiber optic cable only in equipment cabinets multiplexer nodes splice cabinets and at the tmc shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the representative .
splice through all fibers that are not used at a particular cabinet and cap unused fibers that end in a cabinet .
provide and install patch cables at the tmc or multiplexers where connection is to be made from an existing patch panel to a communications device .
at fiber optic termination points provide a fiber optic splice enclosure .
make all fiber terminations by splicing the fiber to factory connected pigtails using fusion splicing only .
the pigtails are to be buffered strengthened with aramid and meet the requirements for fiber optic cable .
all pigtail connectors are to be the ceramic st type .
use the pigtails to connect the fiber optic cable to the equipment in the cabinet or at the multiplexers .
permanently label all fiber optic connectors whether on pigtails or equipment to preclude improper connection .
the representative will numa numd num num initial edition approve the labeling methods before use .
the cost of terminating including the cost of splicing kits pigtails connectors fiber optic cable caps moisture sealants and mounting hardware is considered incidental to furnishing and installing fiber optic cable and will not be paid separately .
b standard fiber optic cable .
as specified in section numa .
c outdoor wireless radio .
conduct a wireless line of sight analysis measuring existing radio spectrum received signal strength indicator rssi link quality and performance for each wireless node as shown on the communications plan sheet .
submit results of the analysis to the department for approval prior to any repeater pole installation .
any location not meeting the minimum rssi level will require lateral adjustment to the location in order to achieve a minimum rssi receive threshold reading as recommended by the manufacturer .
install the radios and panel antennas cable according to the manufacturers guidelines .
adjust antenna alignment to achieve the maximum rssi level reading .
configure wireless mesh radio in accordance with manufacturers guidelines prior to deploying in the field .
d radio communications antenna .
install antennas as indicated in the contract documents and according to the manufacturers guidelines .
align each panel antenna in order to maximize the radios rssi .
provide and connect three antenna cables from the wireless radio to the antenna .
follow manufacturer guidelines on creating a weatherproof seal around all connections to the antenna .
at minimum wrap two layers of butyl mastic or a marine grade waterproof heat shrink on all outdoor cable connections .
all termination of antenna cables will be made with compression style connectors .
a layer of electrical tape can be used underneath to keep the connection clean and make disassembly easier .
provide all mounting material for mounting heliax coax cable to steel or wood pole .
for larger cable installations provide a smaller whip type coaxial antenna minimum size of lmrnum not to exceed num feet to connect the antenna to the larger cable .
install the antenna surge suppressor at the appropriate location as directed and according to the manufacturer recommendations .
num measurement and payment a microfiber optic cable .
linear foot measured from junction box to junction box plus the slack cable required .
includes field splices and connectors necessary for the splices made at equipment locations .
tracer wire installation is incidental to the installation of the fiber optic cable b standard fiber optic cable .
linear foot measured from junction box to junction box plus the slack cable required .
includes field splices and connectors necessary for the splices made at equipment locations tracer wire installation is incidental to the installation of the fiber optic cable c outdoor wireless radio .
each includes all material costs wireless line of sight costs as well as construction costs associated with the installation of a fully functional wireless radio site .
num of payment will be made upon installation of the radio num of payment will be made upon integration into new or existing mesh num of payment will be made upon successful system acceptance d radio communications antenna .
each num numa num num initial edition section nummaintenace its devices general num descriptionthis work is to furnish install modify repair replace and remove nondevice specific general intelligent transportation system its components and equipment that are essential to a fully functional and operational system .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a preventive maintenance .
num .
general .
perform preventive maintenance pm in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations publication num and the following submit to the department for approval within num weeks of receiving notice to proceed an annual schedule of all pm activities .
comply with the following submission schedule preventative maintenance monthly status report submission schedule complete field inspection date pm report submission date january num february num february num march num march num april num april num may num may num june num june num july num july num august num august num september num september num october num october num november num november num december num december num january num of the following year preventive maintenance is required prior to and after the winter season annually .
report all deficiencies on the pm checklist and report any critical deficiencies directly to the department within num hours .
submit one typed hard copy or an electronic copy of the monthly status report showing all pm completed during each month .
include in the report the following detailed description of the pm performed .
copies of payroll records and work reports .
pm checklists including test results .
num .
site .
check for proper clearance of tree branches or brush around power and communication lines associated with any its devices .
provide required tree trimming and brush clearing work .
spray and place weed control measures around each device .
remove snow and ice buildup around the enclosures maintenance areas and the devices .
this also includes removing snow and ice from solar panels camera housings beacons transmitters detectors and wireless communication devices .
numa nume num num initial edition num .
enclosures .
inspect all field enclosures including camera control enclosures backup or battery powered supply enclosures hub enclosures and junction and pull boxes for damage corrosion water damage and leaks .
verify absence of water from the inside bottom of enclosure .
if water is present ensure that the means for drainage has not become obstructed .
if it has remove obstruction .
apply caulking if required to prevent water from entering enclosure .
remove any objects or debris that is not consistent with control enclosure materials such as nests made by rodents birds or flying insects etc .
spray for insect prevention .
install or replace rodent control measures as necessary .
ensure that conduit openings into the enclosure are sealed with metal meshing material to prevent animals from entering the enclosure .
check gaskets ground rod clamps heaters and all connections .
check anchor bolts for rust and tightness .
repair as necessary .
clean filters .
replace filters twice annually lubricate hinges locks latches and clean accumulated dust .
replace light bulbs every num months or if burned out .
inspect all connections cabling and physical appearance of the equipment within the enclosures .
perform local diagnostics on all applicable equipment .
tighten loose connections .
service air conditioner fans and heater controls .
test ground rods for num ohms or less resistance utilizing fall of potential test .
test power including battery backups and communications line surge suppressors and replace as necessary .
inspect and test communications systems including transmission devices modems pagers and cables .
if the devices statewide device identification number is not displayed on the enclosure or it is faded missing or vandalized provide the statewide device identification number as specified in section numbnum .
b oncall maintenance .
num .
general .
perform oncall maintenance om in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and publication num .
num .
responsiveness .
perform om activities within the following timelines notification the department andor the tmc notifies the oncall responder of an issue .
acknowledgment the oncall responder is to acknowledge the notification within num minutes .
phone and email verification by the oncall responder will be provided to the issuing tmc .
diagnose the oncall responder must arrive at the site and diagnose the issue within num hours from the notification by the department or the tmc .
performance the tmc issues a work directive to the oncall responder either written or verbal and the oncall responder is to complete the repairs within num hours from the issuance of work directive .
log the oncall responder is to log the activity within num business days after the completion of repairs .
num measurement and payment a preventive maintenance other .
each all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
b oncall other mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
c oncall other repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
d oncall other parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks grounding rods conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration .
e maintenance and protection of traffic .
section numa num numc num initial edition section numclosed circuit television camera num descriptionthis work is to furnish and install a complete fully functional closed circuit television cctv camera subsystem .
num material a general .
furnish a cctv subsystem including camera encoder decoder integration camera housing and mounts wires connections and grounding system .
utilize the newest and most current electronics .
b cctv camera .
in accordance with publication num ntcip aashto standards specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals mutcd nema and nec .
manufactured from an isonum certified facility .
c cctv .
provide cctv meeting the following requirements num .
optical .
fullcolor .
ntsc format .
optical zoom power of minimum numxnumx hdsd .
digital zoom power of minimum numx .
electronic image stabilization technology integral to the cctv .
automatic daynight imaging .
minimum shutter speed range num to num second .
maximum signaltonoise ratio of numdb unweighted .
generate video images that exhibit no geometric distortion and are free of blemishes as defined by eia num .
equip camera with functionalities that limit bright light exposure and reduces image blooming .
throughthelens white balancing fixed white balancing and automatic gain control .
on screen display for tilting at minimum .
num .
environmental .
dome style environmentally sealed camera housing which provides an ingress protection of ipnum or better .
fieldhardened for longterm freeway deployment where it is typically subject to wide daily and seasonal temperature swings wind gusts typical road vibrations .
operate without degradation in performance under temperature range of numf to numf and relative humidity of lower than num condensing and a storage temperature range of numf to numf .
num .
mechanical .
capable of attachment to a camera lowering device .
maximum weight of num pounds num .
electrical .
input voltage of high poe or numvac power consumption without heaters numw maximum total power consumption numw maximum numc nume num initial edition num .
pantiltzoom ptz subsystem .
provide an integral ptz subsystem that is capable of pan movement between num and num degrees at speeds between num and num degrees per second .
also provide a camera which provides a tilt range between num and num degrees at tilt speeds between num and num degrees per second .
provide a ptz subsystem capable of at least num preset positions with a positioning accuracy of num degree .
include auto focus auto iris pan tilt and zoom functions in each preset position .
d standard definition video encoder .
provide a video encoder where indicated that will digitize analog national television system committee ntsc video signal perform video signal compression and convert it to a format suitable for transmission via ethernet computer network .
provide a unit that is identifiable with an ip address in the ethernet communications network .
equip the encoder with a minimum of one bidirectional data interface for transmission of camera ptz control data for peripheral components .
configure the encoder to enforce user authentication and encryption schemes .
provide an onboard graphic user interface gui webbased for viewing live video images and controlling the camera ptz functions on a computer with current windows operating systemweb browsing platform .
provide remote configuration capabilities and local configuration capabilities using a laptop computer .
provide encoding subsystem that meets the following requirements image sensor numinch chargecoupled device ccd minimum aperture range fnum fnum support and comply with the following network protocol and standards internet ipvnum with adjustable device ip address transmission control protocol tcp user datagram protocol udp internet control message protocol icmp internet group management protocol igmp address resolution protocol arp realtime transportation protocol rtp realtime streaming protocol rtsp dynamic host configuration protocol dhcp hypertext transfer protocol http simple network time protocol sntp and simple network management protocol snmpvnum .
at least two simultaneous streams h.num compression and the option of configuring one stream as mjpeg support ntsc nump nump dnum numcif and cif frame size and at a frame rate of up to num frames per second fps and provides adjustable frame size and frame rate .
h.num mpegnum part num format baseline profile or higher .
mjpeg cif frame size and at a frame rate of up to num fps .
support real time streaming protocol rtsp rfc num .
support the transmission of video via unicast or multicast employ ip protocol such that the device ip address is user adjustable .
provide an rjnum output interface for video local area network lan .
equip the camera with password protection against unauthorized access .
e high definition video encoder .
provide a video encoder where indicated that will digitize analog ntsc video signal perform video signal compression and convert it to a format suitable for transmission via ethernet computer network .
provide a unit that is identifiable with an ip address in the ethernet communications network .
equip the encoder with a minimum of one bidirectional data interface for transmission of camera ptz control data for peripheral components .
configure the encoder to enforce user authentication and encryption schemes .
provide an onboard gui webbased for viewing live video images and controlling the camera ptz functions on a computer with current windows operating systemweb browsing platform .
provide remote configuration capabilities and local configuration capabilities using a laptop computer .
provide encoding subsystem that meets the following requirements image sensor numinch cmos minimum aperture range fnum fnum support and comply with the following network protocol and standards internet ipvnum with adjustable device ip address tcp udp icmp igmp arp rtp rtsp dhcp http sntp and snmpvnum .
at least two simultaneous streams with h.num compression and the option of configuring one stream as mjpeg support ntsc nump nump dnum numcif and cif frame size and at a frame rate of up to num fps and provides adjustable frame size and frame rate .
h.num mpegnum part num format baseline profile or higher .
mjpeg cif frame size and at a frame rate of up to num fps .
nume numh num initial edition support real time streaming protocol rtsp rfc num .
support the transmission of video via unicast or multicast .
employ ip protocol such that the device ip address is user adjustable .
provide an rjnum output interface for video lan .
equip the encoder with password protection against unauthorized access .
f camera housings and mounts .
provide an environmentally sealed camera housing .
construct housing to be dust and water tight and fully operational in num condensing humidity .
furnish housing to provide the environment needed for camera operation and keep the viewing window free of fog snow and ice .
construct housing of aluminum stainless steel or steel with a corrosionresistant finish .
provide housing that can withstand winds in accordance with requirements contained in publication num and to withstand vibration of up to num inch total excursion from num hz to num hz and peak random vibrations of numgs from num hz to num hz .
if camera is pole mounted mount camera on support arm that is securely attached to the steel pole in accordance with publication num. g video decoder .
provide a decoder subsystem where indicated .
the video decoder subsystem includes a video decoder installed at the tmcrtmc or other remote viewing locations as specified in the contract .
the video decoder subsystem is used to interface a cctv with related communications facilities for integrating the cctv with the video subsystem at the tmcrtmc or other remote viewing locations as specified on contract plans .
provide a decoder subsystem that includes all units components software wiring connectors and mounting equipment that will enable communication between the its device and tmcrtmc and that is fully compatible with the existing subsystems at the tmcrtmc .
provide video decoder to decode analog video and bidirectional ptz control signals received from an ipbased network for a video monitoring and camera control system .
provide decoder to decompress the received video signal generated by related video encoder .
provide decoder subsystem that meets the following requirements num .
support and comply with the following network protocol and standards internet ipvnum with adjustable device ip address tcp udp icmp igmp arp rtp rtsp dhcp http sntp and snmpvnum .
num .
support video compression protocols mjpeg h.num baseline profile baseline profile or higher .
num .
equip with passwordprotection measures .
num .
lan interface rjnum .
num .
connector input for analog video signal bnc female connector .
num .
operating temperature range of field hardened equipment of numf to numf .
operating humidity range of up to minimum num noncondensing .
num .
operating temperature of nonfield hardened equipment of numf to numf .
operating humidity range of up to num noncondensing .
h cctv camera lowering device cld .
provide all pulleys cabling suspension contact unit cable guides mounting fixtures mounting arms weights cranks connections and appurtenances necessary to provide a fully functional camera lowering system for a cctv location .
provide cld to enable a single maintenance personnel to access a cctv by lowering the camera to the ground or enclosurelevel without the need for a bucket truck or other lifting apparatus .
provide cld as an integral component of the camera pole structure where camera is polemounted .
provide cld capable of locking in place at any desired height including at the ground level and locked in position at the top of the pole or structure .
when locked at the top of the pole or structure release all weight from the cld cables .
equip cld with a manual crank that facilitates incremental lowering of the camera lens housing ptz mechanism any heatingcoolingtemperature devices camera wiring and connections without causing damage or degradation of the camera functions and operations .
comprise all components of corrosion resistant materials .
powdercoat galvanize or otherwise protect all external components from the environment by industry standard coatings to withstand exposure to a corrosive environment .
provide cld that allows maximum play of num degrees when locked in raised position under sustained wind speeds of up to num miles per hour with a num gust factor with camera housing presenting an effective wind loading surface of maximum num square foot .
provide cld assembly and connections in accordance with publication num aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals num including num num and num interims fatigue design per section num fatigue design aashto standard specifications for highway bridges numh numh num initial edition numth edition including interims and design manual part num structures september num edition including change numbers .
provide a heavyduty suspension contact unit between the pole or structure and the camera apparatus that facilitates physical and electrical connections to the camera .
furnish contact unit that utilizes dual latching arms to connect the cctv to the cld .
provide unit with a load capacity of the dual latching arm apparatus of at least num pounds including safety factor and a locking mechanism between the fixed and moveable components of the cld .
provide a locking mechanism which operates by alternately raising and lowering the assembly using the crank and lowering cable such that when latched all weight is removed from the cld cable .
provide the fixed unit with a heavy duty cast tracking guide and means to allow latching in the same position each time .
provide selfaligning contact units and receiver brackets that automatically align the centerline of the camera apparatus with the centerline of the camera pole or structure upon raising and locking into position .
protect all electrical video coaxial and other connections between the fixed and moveable portions of the contact block from weather by waterproof seal to prevent degradation of the electrical contacts .
fabricate electrical contacts of corrosion resistant material to prevent degradation of the connections .
provide a weatherproof cld system housing with at replaceable neoprene gasket provided to seal the interior from dust and moisture without the use of pressurization .
furnish contact block of hypalon or other similar synthetic polymer in order to seal the internal contacts from weather water dust and degradation of the electrical contacts while in the raised and locked position .
provide a connector block with the female and male socket contact halves modular and selfaligning .
provide internal and locking components that are made of stainless steel andor aluminum .
provide internal connectors capable of supplying electric power of up to num a at up to num vac through the connector without damage to the connector while supplying full amperage draw of the camera assembly and operating with the heater and all electronics powered on .
provide electrical connections between the fixed and movable components to facilitate connection for the conductors typically required for the following signals serial data signal involving up to eight conductors for camera ptz control and response numvolt peak to peak analog video signal and eightconductor catnum signal for num mbps ethernet communication .
num .
equipment connection box .
provide a heavyduty equipment connection box for connecting the cctv or other its device to the lowering device .
furnish a num inch national pipe thread npt pipe connection point in the equipment connection box for attaching a camera .
provide equipment connection box that has an ingress protection rating of no less than ipnum .
provide cld that includes a disconnect unit for electrically connecting the equipment installed on the clds equipment connection box to the power data and video cables as applicable .
num .
lowering tool .
provide a cld that utilizes a portable detachable lowering tool .
provide a tool consisting of a lightweight metal frame and a crank assembly with a cable as described herein a quick release cable connector an adjustable safety clutch and a variable speed reversible industrial duty electric drill motor with maximum rotations per minute per the manufacturers recommendations .
provide a tool that is operable using numv electric power compatible with accessing the support cable through the hand hole of the pole and which will attach to the pole with one single bolt .
when attached to the hand hole the tool must support itself and the load assuring lowering operations and providing a means to prevent freewheeling .
equip lowering tool with a positive breaking mechanism to secure the cable reel during raising and lowering operations and to prevent freewheeling .
furnish a lowering tool which has a reduction gear to reduce the manual effort required to operate the lifting handle to raise and lower a capacity load .
provide the lowering tool with an adapter for operating the cld by a portable drill with a clutch mechanism .
fabricate lowering tool made of durable and corrosionresistant materials that are powder coated galvanized or otherwise protected from the environment by industry accepted coatings to withstand exposure to corrosive environment .
deliver lowering tool plus any additional tools required to the representative upon project completion .
provide all pulleys for the cld and portable lowering tool with sealed selflubricated bearings oil tight bronze bearings or sintered bronze brushings .
provide weights andor counterweights as necessary to assure that the alignment of pins and connectors are proper for the camera support to be raised into position without binding .
provide the cld with sufficient weight to disengage the camera and its control components in order that it can be lowered properly .
num .
cabling .
provide lowering cable with a minimum of num inch diameter stainless steel type num aircraft cable with a minimum breaking strength of num pounds with seven strands of numgauge wire each .
provide lift unit support subsystem with prefabricated components that preclude the lifting cable from contacting the power or video cabling .
numh nume num initial edition provide a cld with only the stainless steel lowering cable permitted to move within the pole or externally mounted conduit during lowering and raising operations .
all other cables must remain stable and secure during lowering and raising operations .
if the camera is mounted on a steel pole contain the camera lowering cable on the inside of the pole .
install pulleys for the lowering device and portable lowering tool that have sealed selflubricated bearings oiltight bronze bearings or sintered bronze bushings .
when cabling is contained inside a hollow pole separate the cabling to prevent it from touching or interfering with other electrical and mechanical cabling within the pole .
make provisions to completely separate any cld cables from electrical communications and other cables .
i grounding rod .
section numj and publication num j cctv pole .
section num num num num and as follows .
furnish cctv pole in accordance with publication num .
aluminum poles are not allowed .
furnish poles of heights less than num feet in accordance with the conventional lighting portion of section num .
furnish poles of heights greater than num feet in accordance with the high mast lighting portion of section num .
furnish baseplate of a minimum thickness of num inches unless otherwise specified .
provide bottom shaft sections with an num inch minimum thickness .
use joint penetration weld to connect the shaft to the baseplate as specified in the aashto num sign specifications in table num detail num .
provide hand holes in accordance with bcnumm of height to accommodate cld .
k cctv pole foundation .
num .
class a cement concrete .
section num .
num .
grade num reinforcement bars .
section num .
num .
conduit .
section num .
num constructionas indicated as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a cctv .
configure camera with ptz functions to return automatically to related home viewing position .
configure the subtitle or sector for each camera view position and preset .
display subtitles with the associated video image .
include the road the camera is on camera number and any other information as directed by the representative .
b cld .
install cld system as recommended by manufacturer .
install device in conjunction with the cctv and camera pole structure .
num .
camera support arm orientation .
where camera is pole mounted orient support arm perpendicular to the adjacent roadway with the camera positioned closer to the related roadway than the pole unless otherwise specified .
c video cables .
use only compressiontype bnc connectors on coaxial video cable .
use only outdoor related catnumecatnum cable for network cable .
utilize only outdoor rated cables for all communications cable .
supply all signal and control cables between a camera assembly and related communications enclosure that are comprised of single continuous runs without splices .
for installation of camera cables through a hollow pole make provisions to keep some slack in the vertical cable run within the pole .
provide strainrelief mechanism to the cable in vertical runs exceeding num feet at minimum numfoot interval .
d its enclosure .
section numa e video encoderdecoder .
install the encoder unit asneeded in the cctv field enclosure as directed by the representative and per manufacturers recommendation .
install encoder in such a manner that it does not interfere with the operation of other equipment in the enclosure .
provide all wiring and cabling to connect the encoder to the cctv communications subsystem .
clearly label neatly bundle and attach all wiring to the enclosure .
nume numf num initial edition install the decoder unit in the tmcrtmc or location identified by the representative .
coordinate the decoder unit location with the representative to make certain to optimize the use of existing or new rack or enclosure space .
clearly label neatly bundle and attach all wiring to the rack enclosure and chassis .
f integration .
section numc g grounding .
section numq h testing .
section numb i training .
section numd j documentation .
section numf k cctv pole .
section num l cctv pole foundation .
section num num measurement and payment a closed circuit television cctv camera subsystem .
each includes camera lens encoders and decoders as required wires connectors grounding rod and conductor mounting installation training integration work and documentation for a complete subsystem .
num of payment will be made upon complete installation of cctv num of payment will be made upon completion of the standalone acceptance tests as specified in section numb .
num of payment will be made upon completion of the numday test as specified in section numb .
completion of tests includes completion of training submission of all manuals and documentation as required and completion of all final inspections as required by the representative .
b encoder .
each includes encoders wires connectors installation and integration work for a complete subsystem .
c decoder .
each includes decoders wires connectors installation and integration work for a complete subsystem .
d cld .
each includes cabling connectors installation training pulleys and all equipment .
num to be paid upon complete installation of lowering device num to be paid upon completion of the standalone acceptance test as specified in section numb .
num to be paid upon completion of the numday test as specified in section numb .
completion of tests includes completion of training submission of all manuals and documentation as required herein and in the contract and completion of all final inspections as required by the representative .
e camera lowering tool .
each includes winch and drill attachment mechanism .
f cctv pole .
each for the height indicated .
includes pole baseplate anchor bolts installation and all work to level the pole .
numg numg num initial edition g cctv pole foundation .
each for the type indicated .
the price includes excavation concrete anchor bolt assemblies reinforcement bars conduit ground rod ground rod clamp grounding conductor backfill and satisfactory disposal of surplus material .
num numh num num initial edition section numportable closed circuit television camera num descriptionthis work is to furnish and install a complete fully functional portable closed circuit television pcctv camera subsystem .
num material a general .
furnish a pcctv subsystem including camera integration camera housing and mounts wires connections grounding system and trailer .
utilize the newest and most current electronics .
b cctv .
numc c standard definition video encoder .
numd d high definition video encoder .
nume e camera housings and mounts .
numf f camera communications .
provide remote control operation of the camera via any communication medium that utilizes the ports specified or locally via a laptop computer .
local connections to a laptop computer must facilitate routine repairs diagnostics and all other operational functions .
provide at a minimum the following interfaces to the sign controller ethernet port and serial port .
g power supply .
provide photovoltaic single crystal silicon solar panel modules and battery bank subsystem to operate the flashing beacons continuously at full power for a minimum of num consecutive hours without solar array exposure to sunlight .
provide solar panel array that is compliant with iec num standard .
provide subsystem with dc output power is nominal num v direct current at num a with maximum num vdc and maximum num a .
provide maintenancefree num volt gel batteries that are rated at a minimum of num ahours and are deep cycle .
furnish trickle charger to charge batteries for use .
h trailer .
provide a wheeled trailer fabricated of steel .
deburr and finish all metal with a corrosion resistant coating .
equip trailer with tiedown points to facilitate storage and transport by securing the trailer to a utility trailer or flatbed truck .
equip trailer with classa tail lights using a plug adaptor .
furnish trailer that can be set up at the site with its own chassis and outriggers without being hitched to a vehicle .
equip trailer with fenders over the tires that are made from heavyduty material sufficient to allow a person to stand and operate or perform maintenance on the unit .
delineate the trailers on a permanent basis by affixing retroreflective material in a continuous line on the face of the trailer as seen by oncoming road users .
finish trailer with a glossy federal safety aliphatic acrylic urethane finish .
provide orange color to conform to the mutcd requirements for portable changeable message signs pcms .
provide a trailer mounting structure for the camera housing mounting bracket and peripherals camera assembly .
provide accessible mechanism to easily raise and lower the assembly .
provide a locking device to lock the camera assembly in the raised or lowered position .
provide a single metal telescoping mast pole to mount the camera assembly that is an integral piece of the body of the trailer .
provide support capable of adjusting the height of the camera assembly and allows the camera assembly to rotate num degrees around the vertical axis of the support beam without requiring more than a single operator to perform height or angle adjustments .
provide capability to elevate the center point of the camera assembly to a minimum height of num feet .
the locking mechanisms must prevent the camera assembly from changing angles during windy conditions or vibrations .
equip trailer with a hitch for connection to a towing vehicle .
provide hitch with a towing capacity of num pounds .
all trailer hitch components must conform to sae jnum standards for class ii trailers .
equip hitch with a num inch safety chain for secure attachment to towing vehicle .
provide trailer with sealed flushmounted combination stop tail and turn lights and front and rear sided marker lights .
provide a rear license plate display holder and a rear center identification light bar for illuminating the trailer license plate .
provide a rear fender .
provide four hydraulically or mechanically adjustable outrigger leveling pads permanently installed at each of the four corners of the sign trailer for leveling and support functions .
provide leveling pads with a minimum capacity of numh numa num num initial edition num pounds each .
provide leveling pads that are adjustable using a single operator and without any special tools .
the leveling pads must be capable of lifting the trailer such that the tires do not touch the ground .
equip trailer with tires that meet stnumrnum load range c. provide numlug pattern wheel configuration .
affix the manufacturers name and the trailer make and model to trailer .
provide an operators manual within the control enclosure of each unit .
num constructionas shown on the standard drawings and as follows a pcctv .
section numa num .
camera support arm orientation .
section numbnum num .
video cables .
use only outdoor rated catnumecatnum cable for network cable .
supply all cable between a camera assembly and related communications enclosure that are comprised of single continuous runs without splices .
make provisions to keep some slack in the vertical cable run within or around the telescoping pole .
provide strainrelief mechanism to the cable .
num .
integration .
section numc num .
grounding .
section numq num .
testing .
section numb num .
training .
section numd num .
documentation .
section numf b trailer unit .
install trailer unit as specified in contract documents .
ensure the trailer is located in an area that is free of debris where a maintainer can access the unit and where applicable protected from most vehicular traffic .
configure all outriggers to equally support the weight of the trailer and that the unit is completely level .
num measurement and payment a portable closed circuit television pcctv camera subsystem .
each includes camera lens encoder decoder wires connectors grounding rod and conductor trailer mounting and installation training integration work and documentation for a complete subsystem .
num of payment will be made upon complete installation of pcctv num of payment will be made upon completion of the standalone acceptance tests as specified in section numb .
num of payment will be made upon completion of the numday test as specified in section numb .
completion of tests includes completion of training submission of all manuals and documentation as required and completion of all final inspections as required by the representative .
num numc num num initial edition section nummaintenance closed circuit television cctv camera num descriptionthis work is to furnish install modify repair replace and remove components of a closed circuit television cctv camera subsystem .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a preventive maintenance .
num .
general .
section numanum num .
site .
section numanum num .
enclosures .
section numanum num .
camera poles and structures .
inspect camera poles for wear rust cracks and missing damaged or bent sections .
inspect and test lowering device .
check bolts for rust and tightness .
install or replace screening at the base plate as necessary .
num .
pantilt drives and housings .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables lowering device and general condition .
ensure proper ventilation .
check attachment hardware .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
thoroughly clean solar panels that power the battery packs .
test communications system .
test power and communications line surge suppressors and replace as necessary .
b oncall maintenance .
num .
general .
section numbnum after oncall maintenance om has been completed perform preventive maintenance pm as specified in section numa .
num .
responsiveness .
section numbnum num measurement and payment a preventive maintenance closed circuit television cctv camera subsystem .
each all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
b oncall closed circuit television cctv camera subsystem mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
c oncall closed circuit television cctv camera subsystem repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
numd nume num num initial edition d oncall closed circuit television cctv camera subsystem parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration of a cctv camera subsystem .
e maintenance and protection of traffic .
section numa .
num numc num num initial edition section nummaintenance portable closed circuit television pcctv camera num descriptionthis work is to furnish install modify repair replace and remove components of a portable closed circuit television pcctv camera subsystem .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a preventive maintenance .
num .
general .
section numanum num .
site .
section numanum num .
enclosures .
section numanum num .
trailer and mount structure .
lubricate all hinges jacks stands mast and trailer hitches .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables and general condition .
check attachment hardware and tighten if necessary to the appropriate parameters .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
num .
pantilt drives and housings .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables lowering device and general condition .
ensure proper ventilation .
check attachment hardware .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
thoroughly clean solar panels that power the battery packs .
test communications system .
test power and communications line surge suppressors and replace as necessary .
b oncall maintenance .
num .
general .
section numbnum .
after oncall maintenance om has been completed perform preventive maintenance pm as specified in section numa .
num .
responsiveness .
section numbnum num measurement and payment a preventive maintenance portable closed circuit television pcctv camera subsystem .
each all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
b oncall portable closed circuit television pcctv camera subsystem mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
c oncall portable closed circuit television pcctv camera subsystem repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
numd nume num num initial edition d oncall portable closed circuit television pcctv camera subsystem parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration of a pcctv camera subsystem .
e maintenance and protection of traffic .
section numa .
num numb num initial edition section numhighway advisory radio subsystem num descriptionthis work is to furnish and install a highway advisory radio har subsystem with the capability to locally store and broadcast audio messages to traveling motorists from the transmitter over a programmable amplitude modulated am frequency and to alert motorists of the message using flashing beacons and advisory sign .
num material a general .
provide transmitter subsystem that includes am transmitter field enclosure digital recorderplayer national oceanic and atmospheric administrations noaa weather receiver digital recorderplayback module digital communications controller global positioning system gps synchronization unit an integrated acdc power supply wood pole mounting apparatuses and all necessary cables connectors and wiring to provide a fully functional har subsystem .
provide har transmitter subsystem with the capability to communicate with flashing beacon sign subsystems that alert motorists to a message being broadcast .
transmitter must be fully compatible with har beacon subsystem specified in section numh .
provide har subsystem that includes software and hardware to configure operate and monitor the har transmitter locally in the field using a portable laptop computer and remotely using a personal computer .
furnish har transmitter subsystem compliant with cfr title num section num part num subpart j section num connection of terminal equipment to the telephone network and section num travelers information stations .
b transmitter .
furnish fieldhardened highefficiency class d am broadcast band to meet the rigorous demands of har use .
provide an fcc approved and certified traveler information station transmitter that meets the following requirements operating frequency in accordance with the fcc license application and research num numkhz inclusive class d common source amplifier adjustable radio frequency rf output power up to num watts nominal using a numvolt power supply remotely adjustable output power level frequency tolerance num hz or better harmonic attenuation greater than fcc specification of num db with approved antenna subsystem operating voltage standing wave ratio vswr num to num or less modulator num watt bridge amplifier with transformer coupling capable of num modulation up to num watts rf output audio distortion less than num from num hz to num khz noise level at least num db below num modulation level automatic modulation limiter on modulation peaks above num including a maximum limit of num modulation num db overload range builtin fcc compliance audio filter numdb at numkhz num dboctave roll off audio inputs line input adjustable from numdbm to numdbm telephone input adjustable from numdbm to numdbm selector switch power consumption num a at num vdc power operating range num vdc to num vdc temperature operating range numf to numf humidity operating range num noncondensing unbalanced rf output impedance of num ohms transmitter power efficiency of num or greater numb numc num initial edition integrated light emitting diode led indicators on the front panel of the transmitter that displays power onoff transmit onoff and vswr statuses selfsupporting and capable of withstanding wind gusts of up to num miles per hour and num inch of radial ice buffered from transmitter through lightning protection circuitry transmission control protocol tcpip capable c digital recorderplayback module .
provide a digital recorderplayer meeting the following requirements fcc certified under part num for dialup operations local and remote control of all functions multiple modes of operation including playlist emergency auxiliary weather radio go live and off userdefinable time period up to num minutes num day for the auxiliary mode after which it must revert to the previous har mode .
provide module with the capability to operate in auxiliary mode for an indefinite period userdefinable time period for the go live mode up to num minutes num day after which the subsystem must revert to the previous har mode .
provide module with the capability to operate in go live mode for an indefinite period simultaneous recordplayback of messages num distinct variable length messages num playlists each with up to num messages and master schedule with up to num events message retention subsystem that does not require a battery to retain messages in the event of main power loss .
stores messages indefinitely use of an external time source with an accuracy of at least num nanoseconds capability to simultaneously launch the audio broadcast such that the audio is synchronized to other adjacent har transmitters .
use of master and slave har transmitters where one transmitter disseminates a message to adjacent transmitters is not acceptable programmable by day of the week date and time security code access num mip numbit digital signal processor dsp microprocessor firmware programmable in the event new features are later added memory to support num minutes of messaging at num khz audio bandwidth builtin voice prompts for ease of use switch selectable inputs for telephone local handset line and microphone automatic reset to telephone after period of inactivity from other inputs num expansion audio input channels rsnum and parallel digital interfaces broadcast of messages from the noaa weather receiver at programmable times and intervals or on command from the control software builtin local microphone for field recording of messages tcpip capable control methods .
provide two methods of har control o dual tone multifrequency dtmf tones via standard analog telephone line or digital cellular telephone o digital commands download methods .
provide two methods of downloading messages to the har transmitter o real time audio e.g .
voice or playing recorded audio o transfer of digitized audio files .wav files closed loop control systemhealth monitoring .
provide the following capabilities o verification that commands entered by the user have been successfully or unsuccessfully processed o verification that the har mode and playlist have not changed since the last connection with the har numc nume num initial edition o verification of the current har mode off playlist emergency live auxiliary weather o when updated the har subsystem records a time stamp indicating the last time the har was updated .
each time the har is accessed the har subsystem verifies that this recorded time stamp has not changed unexpectedly to assure the user that the subsystem has remained intact and has not been accessed by an unknown user o seven analog instrument inputs for expansion options o audio quality num khz bandwidth less than num distortion greater than num db dynamic range o manual and automatic level control o audio outputs transmitter telephone headphones line local o programming controls local handset remote touchtone keypad o instrumentation input lines with transistortransistor logic ttl interfaces num ad channels numbits num volt levels num digital o power consumption num a at num vdc o temperature numf to numf o humidity num noncondensing .
o the following operational statuses status of battery voltage if battery backup system is used or if it is solarpowered system status of ac power vs. dc power operation current har mode off playlist emergency live auxiliary absence of broadcast from a silence sensor audio broadcast demodulated broadcast available when remotely accessed by an operator or computer through an analog telephone line o upon detection of a fault condition for any of the above parameters the har must send notifications to the tmcrtmc using the following methods to the central software subsystem by email notification by pager notification by telephone notification to landline or digital cellular telephones d weather receiver module .
provide a weather receiver module that receives uptotheminute information directly from the national weather service nws .
include all seven selectable frequency bands including split channels .
include a builtin speaker and headphone jack for monitoring weather information on site .
provide unit that works in conjunction with the digital recorderplayer to automatically interrupt the current message being broadcast upon receipt of an emergency alert from the nws .
provide alert feature onoff as well as the feature to set the duration for broadcasting the alert that is selectable from within the digital recorderplayers voice prompts .
provide weather receiver with the following characteristics frequency seven selectable frequencies selectable through a series of dip switches internal speaker and headphone jack .
sensitivity better than numv sn better than num db selectivity num khz at numdb num khz at num db weather alert detects num hz tone led ttl outputs antenna external num bnc connector power input less than num a at num vdc operating temperature numf to numf humidity num noncondensing tcpip capable e global positioning system gps synchronization unit .
furnish gps synchronization unit to synchronize radio frequency signals broadcast by multiple har transmitter units .
provide unit to tune the operating frequency of the transmitter to a high precision using phase locking to timing signals received from gps satellites .
nume numh num initial edition display power gps reception quality satellite lock and har transmitter frequency lock indicators on the front panel display of the unit .
size gps unit to fit in the rack or chassis included in the its enclosure specified in section numb .
provide field hardened unit with ambient operating temperature range of numf to numf .
f grounding rod .
utilize manufacturer recommended grounding system at the transmitter location .
where no manufacturer recommendations exist utilize section numj .
obtain representative approval before installing grounding system .
g transmitter pole .
section numa and as follows size pole in accordance with har subsystem manufacturers recommendations .
furnish minimum num foot pole height .
h har flashing beacon and sign .
provide an har beacon subsystem consisting of har advisory sign equipped with dual flashing beacons that are activated upon the broadcast of a radio message from nearby har transmitters .
a har beacon subsystem is comprised flashing beacon unit reflective advisory sign foundation structure breakaway system complete power subsystem via solar power or power point of service flashing beacons field enclosures an integrated acdc power supply battery backup subsystem and all necessary cables connectors and wiring to provide a fully functional har beacon subsystem .
provide har beacon subsystem with flashing beacons that activate at preset flashing intervals when a message is broadcast from a nearby transmitter .
provide compatibility to fully control beacons with existing central control software used to control har transmitter .
where no software exists at the tmcrtmc provide software as specified herein .
num .
beacons .
furnish two numinch amber led single section heads with maximum power consumption per each signal head not exceeding num watts .
provide led rated for num hours of continuous operation in the operating temperature range of numf to numf .
wire individual leds in at least six parallel groupings of equal quantity such that the failure of a single led will at most deactivate only its grouping .
arrange individual leds in concentric circles with denser packing towards the center to more closely represent a typical incandescent signal .
provide ultraviolet uv stabilized polycarbonate signal heads to withstand direct sunlight exposure for a minimum of num years without exhibiting evidence of deterioration .
coordinate with the led signal head manufacturer to select the wavelengths of the led in order to maximize visibility of the led signal heads .
furnish one nemarated dual circuit flasher along with an additional seven position terminal strip barrier type rated at num a num v rms minimum to support wire connections to second signal head and to flasher control circuitry .
provide a similar three position terminal strip in the signal head .
provide interface to enable capability to activate control and monitor the har beacons via a communication method specified .
furnish beacon mounting hardware constructed of stainless steel .
fabricate brackets of aluminum alloy astm bnum alloy numtnum or equal with a load concentrating boss of stainless steel astm anum type num or equal .
fabricate coupling bolt of astm anum galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
fabricate couplings of alloy steel aisinumh or numh and capable of withstanding a minimum tensile force of num kips .
provide adequate insulation between dissimilar metals to minimize the possibility of galvanic reactions .
provide secure connections between the led beacons and sign supports in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
type a advisory sign .
section num num .
type e advisory sign .
section num num .
advisory sign legend .
section num and as follows provide sign with twosections a top and a bottom section each with border and legend .
color background of top section highintensity reflectorized yellow and color legend and border of nonreflectorized black .
provide the top section with legend that reads traffic advisory when flashing .
color background of bottom section reflectorized blue and legend and border of reflectorized white .
provide the bottom section advisory sign frequency panel with legend of highway info tune radio to xxxx am .
utilize am frequency identified by representative and as approved by the fcc permit .
verify the station frequency and sign text before finalizing sign .
provide sign with num num inch border with num inch corner radii .
use series e letters and numbers for all legends .
provide separate frequency panel sized only to display the licensed am radio frequency .
fabricate frequency panel of the same material as the advisory sign .
numh numb num initial edition num .
power supply .
provide complete solar power supply to the har beacon sign if indicated .
provide complete power management subsystem for the har flashing beacons in accordance with section nume .
num.a solar installations .
for solar panel powered installations provide photovoltaic single crystal silicon solar panel modules and battery bank subsystem to operate the flashing beacons continuously at full power for a minimum of num consecutive hours without solar array exposure to sunlight .
provide solar panel array that is compliant with international electrotechnical commissions iec num standard .
provide subsystem with dc output power is nominal num v direct current at num a with maximum num vdc and maximum num a .
provide maintenancefree num volt gel batteries that are rated at a minimum of num ahours and are deep cycle .
furnish trickle charger to charge batteries for use .
furnish beacon and solar panel mounting hardware constructed of stainless steel .
fabricate brackets of aluminum alloy astm bnum alloy numtnum or equal with a load concentrating boss of stainless steel astm anum type num or equal .
fabricate coupling bolt of astm anum galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
fabricate couplings of alloy steel aisinumh or numh and capable of withstanding a minimum tensile force of num kips .
provide adequate insulation between dissimilar metals to minimize the possibility of galvanic reactions .
provide nema numr rated enclosure to house battery bank .
provide nema rated enclosure that prevents water ingress during operation .
utilize rigid galvanized steel conduit to house all wires between the solar array battery bank and its enclosure .
furnish a nema enclosure that completely contains any spills from damaged or malfunctioning batteries .
num.b hardwire installations .
section numf num .
control software .
section numj num .
grounding rod .
section numj i its enclosure .
section numb j control software .
provide har transmitter and flashing beacon subsystem that is fully compatible with existing software utilized to remotely control the har subsystem .
provide integration of har subsystem and all components into existing software .
provide full remote monitoring capabilities of har transmitters including the operational status of all equipment as defined in sections numa numb and numc .
provide synchronization of broadcasted messages among multiple har transmitter stations as needed based on proximity to other har transmitters .
provide control operation and monitoring of all har beacons specified in section numh .
provide capability to associate individual har beacons with the har transmitter location within the software .
num construction a general .
install har subsystem field equipment including the field enclosure and har beacons per the manufacturers recommendations .
install control software or integrate into existing software on pcs laptop computers and network servers as identified by the representative .
install software and hardware in the tmcrtmc without disturbing tmcrtmc operations .
no down time will be allowed of any tmcrtmc workstation unless otherwise indicated by the representative .
b har flashing beacon .
install har beacon sign assembly and all field equipment per the manufacturers recommendations .
integrate beacons into control software at the tmcrtmc .
integrate into software on all pcs laptop computers and network servers that already contain the central control software .
integrate beacons at the tmcrtmc without disturbing tmcrtmc operations .
configure the two circuits in the dual circuit flasher to flash alternately at intervals between num flashes per minute and num flashes per minute upon activation .
num .
solar panels .
mount solar panels at the top of the sign structure at the proper angle for optimum performance in accordance with the recommendation of the solar panel manufacturer .
mount solar panels on steel numb numa num initial edition post that is farthest from trees and trimremove trees in order to subject solar array direct sunlight for num of the day .
provide mounting capable of swiveling tilting and reangling the cells in order to optimize exposure to solar rays .
include capability to lock the solar panels at any angle necessary to optimize solar exposure .
num .
its enclosure .
section numa and as follows mount its enclosure on har sign structure on the support that is farthest from the roadway .
num .
conduit .
install conduit supports in accordance with nec num and table num. c type a advisory sign .
section num d type e advisory sign .
section num e advisory sign frequency panel .
mount frequency panel to the advisory sign in the location that indicates the am radio frequency .
fasten frequency panel to advisory sign in a manner such that it is easily removable and changeable .
f transmitter pole .
install har antenna and control enclosure on a minimum num foot wooden utility pole using secure connections .
g permits and licenses .
acquire fcc license or adjust existing fcc license for the use of the har transmitter at each deployment site at the frequency band specified or as directed by the representative .
these services include all preparations necessary to complete all required application forms and coordination to make certain that all parts of the har subsystem comply with existing fcc rules .
all related fcc fees are incidental to the cost of this item .
h submissions .
section numf i its enclosure .
section numa j grounding .
install manufacturer recommended grounding system at the transmitter location .
where no manufacturer recommendations exist utilize section numq .
obtain representative approval of grounding system before installation .
terminate the core conductor of the antenna cable at a transient voltage surge suppressor in the related enclosure before further connections to the transmitter or any electronic device in the enclosure .
ground the surge suppressor to the adjacent grounding electrode system .
terminate the shield metallic armor of the antenna cable to the grounding electrode system of the antenna pole .
provide this grounding to the part of the antenna cable near the base of the related pole outside the related transmitter enclosure .
k testing .
section numb l integration .
section numc m training .
section numd num measurement and payment a har transmitter subsystem .
each includes transmitter weather receiver digital recorderplayback module wires connectors permit acquisition grounding installation mounting documentation fcc permits and licenses integration training and work for a complete har transmitter subsystem .
num of payment will be made upon complete installation of har pole and transmitter equipment .
num of payment will be made upon completion of the standalone acceptance tests as specified in section numb .
num of payment will be made upon completion of the numday test as specified in section numb .
numa numf num initial edition completion of tests includes completion of training submission of all manuals and documentation as required herein and in the contract and completion of all final inspections as required by the representative .
b har flashing beacon subsystem .
each includes beacons connections wiring cabling grounding mounting installation integration training and related equipment to provide a fully functional subsystem .
num of payment will be made upon complete installation of har beacon equipment num of payment will be made upon completion of the standalone acceptance tests as described in section numb .
num of payment will be made upon completion of the numday test as specified in section numb .
completion of tests includes completion of training submission of all manuals and documentation as required herein and in the contract and final inspections as required by the representative .
c gps synchronization unit .
each includes wiring cabling installation and integration .
d type a advisory sign .
section num e type e advisory sign .
section num f transmitter pole .
each for the type indicated .
includes mounting equipment used to mount transmitter and related transmitter cables and equipment .
num numb num num initial edition section nummaintenance highway advisory radio har subsystem num descriptionthis work is to furnish install modify repair replace and remove components of a highway advisory radio har subsystem .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a preventive maintenance .
num .
general .
section numanum num .
site .
section numanum num .
enclosures .
section numanum num .
transmitters .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables damage caused by lightning leaning car impacts or vandalism and general condition .
check batteries .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
verify the broadcast signal strength of the har transmitter via the dials located on the front panel .
verify that the har transmitter is clearly transmitting a signal by utilizing a car radio and turning the dial to the appropriate channel .
test communication system including pager systems .
test power and communications line surge suppressors and replace as necessary .
test all static signing flashing warning devices associated with the har systems check batteries clean controller enclosure and solar panels that power the battery packs .
num .
flashing warning beacons .
.verify the operation and inspect clean and repair the components of the system including but not limited to flashing led yellow lights supports signage legend aluminum sheet foundation connections field enclosure dual circuit flasher controller modems communications programming services conduit junction boxes wiring sign luminaries solar panels and battery backup if applicable along with any other related system equipment .
b oncall maintenance .
num .
general .
section numbnum .
after oncall maintenance om has been completed perform preventive maintenance pm as described in section numa .
num .
responsiveness .
section numbnum num measurement and payment a preventive maintenance har subsystem transmitter .
each all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
b preventive maintenance har subsystem beacon .
each numb numi num num initial edition all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
c oncall har subsystem transmitter mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
d oncall har subsystem beacon mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
e oncall har subsystem transmitter repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
f oncall har subsystem beacon repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
g oncall har subsystem transmitter parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration of a har subsystem .
h oncall har subsystem beacon parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration of a har subsystem .
i maintenance and protection of traffic .
section numa .
num numb num initial edition section numdynamic message signs num descriptionthis work is to furnish and install a light emitting diode led based full matrix dynamic message sign dms subsystem .
the dms will be utilized to disseminate traveler information to motorists that may include but is not limited to road closure information adverse weather and roadway conditions detour routes and travel times num material a shop drawing approval .
submit the following as a minimum to the department prior to purchase of the dms subsystem a letter from the manufacturer that certifies the sign has been designed and furnished in accordance with all aashto guidelines and requirements .
sign housing shop drawings .
certification verifying the ambient operating temperature range of the dms .
led brightness and color bins that are used in each pixel .
provide a letter of certification from the led manufacturer that demonstrates testing and binning according to the international commission on illumination cie num num standard .
a list of the character fonts and samples of the fonts .
b general .
provide dms with fullmatrix amber or fullcolor rgb led displays complete with a minimum cone of vision of num degrees around the vertical axis of any pixel on the sign .
provide dms with frontpanel or walk in accessible to maintenance crews .
furnish a dms subsystem complete with all individual units components software modules cabling connectors etc .
that are completely compatible with each other and the existing subsystem at the traffic tmcrtmc .
provide a dms subsystem where all exposed material on the dms enclosure and other exposed appurtenances is corrosionresistant .
prevent ambient magnetic and electronic fields including fields generated by the dms itself from interfering with or disrupting subsystem performance .
prevent magnetic and electronic fields generated by the dms subsystem from interfering with other electronic systems near the dms .
fabricate weld and inspect dms in accordance with ansiaws .
seal or otherwise make indelible all identifications including labels markings and engravings on the sign and its components .
furnish all equipment to allow maintenance access from the front panels or from the central corridor of a walkin sign for ease of maintenance .
require no special tools to access the sign or its components .
enable all equipment to be accessible without disassembly for inspection and maintenance purposes .
orient all equipment indicator lights leds and user interfaces in a manner that is readily visible to maintenance or inspection crews accessing the sign .
provide readily accessible and clearly labeled test points for maintenance or inspection crews to test voltage at essential locations .
terminate all external connections using industry standard safe tamper resistant connectors .
key connectors to resist improper hookups .
provide the capability to store at least num preprogrammed messages num permanent and num temporary locally at the dms andor in the device tmcrtmc software .
furnish dms that meets the criteria of the following codes and standards nec aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals ite publication no .
lpnum with current addendums .
aws d num structural welding code aluminum and aws a num a num structural welding code steel astm international o astm a num steel o astm b num aluminum and aluminum alloy sheet and plate numb numc num initial edition o astm a num high strength bolts o astm b num aluminum alloy castings high strength electrical testing laboratories inc. etl electronic institute of america eia .
eia tianum e interface between data terminal equipment and data circuit terminating equipment employing serial binary data interchange and eianum a electrical characteristics of balanced voltage digital interface circuits mutcd and standard alphabets for highway signs and pavement markings most current version adopted by the department nema tsnum standard tsnum hardware standards for dynamic message signs with ntcip requirements ntcip standards most recent approved versions o ntcip num signal transportation management framework stmf o ntcip num base standard octet encoding rules oer o ntcip num simple transportation management protocol stmp o ntcip num global object definitions o ntcip num object definitions for dms section num for full list of functional requirements for dms ntcip num class b profile o ntcip num point to multipoint protocol using rsnum subnet profile o ntcip num subnet profile for ppp over fsk modems o ntcip num subnet profile for pointtopoint protocol using rs num o ntcip num subnet profile for ethernet o ntcip num transportation transport profile o ntcip num internet tcpip and udpip transport profile o ntcip num application profile for simple transportation management framework stmf o ntcip num application profile for file transfer protocol ftp standards for enclosures for electrical equipment publication no .
num standards for wiring devices dimensional requirements publication no .
wdnum nfpanum osha ul ansi ieee international standards organization iso c sign housing .
furnish dms sign and housing rated for continuous usage of at least num years .
furnish dms sign to withstand wind loads defined in publication num without deformation damage or unreasonable fatigue .
fabricate external skin of the sign housing of aluminum alloy num hnum a minimum of num inches thick .
attach any external cables to the sign housing using clamps or by other means accepted by the representative adhesive attachment is not acceptable .
encase external cabling in rigid galvanized steel rgs conduit .
continuously weld all external seams joints excluding the sign face panels or display using inert gas welding method .
the maximum number of seams at the top of the sign housing is three .
stitch weld the external sign housing to the internal housing structure to form a single unitized structure .
fabricate all external sign mounting assembly components from aluminum alloy numtnum extrusions with minimum size of wnumxnum in accordance with the publication num requirements .
provide zbrackets in accordance with publication num each of a minimum thickness of numinch .
attach all structural members to the internal framework of the sign .
provide a minimum of four drain holes on the bottom of the sign housing that are centered from the front to back edges of the bottom sign panel and spaced evenly across the signs full length .
screen all drain holes to prevent the entrance of small insects and animals .
slope the bottom of the sign housing panel towards the drain holes in order to prevent the accumulation of water at the bottom of the sign .
on the top panel of the sign housing provide multiple steel lifting eyebolts or other equivalent hoisting points to be used during transport and installation .
lifting bolts or hoisting points are to be connected directly to the sign housing internal structure .
the hoist points must enable the sign to be lifted evenly during transport and installation .
on the numc numd num initial edition top panel of the sign housing make provisions to prevent the pooling or collecting of water on the top of the sign housing .
num .
external sign face panels .
furnish weatherresistant sign face panels .
provide panels to prevent moisture dirt dust or other foreign objects to permeate the sign face at the seams or at the edges of pixel holes .
construct sign face panels of aluminum and coat with a matteblack coating system that meets or exceeds american architectural manufacturers association aama specification num .
provide sign face panels that do not limit the cone of vision of the individual led pixels or the sight distance of the sign as a whole .
num .
lens panel assembly .
incorporate lens panel assemblies with sign face panels .
furnish lens panels that are modular in design and allow for ease of removal and interchangeability .
num.a lens panel .
provide lens panel mask fabricated of aluminum .
finish mask with a matteblack coating system that meets or exceeds aama specification num .
perforate the panel to provide an aperture for each pixel on the display modules .
each aperture must be as small as possible without blocking the led light output at the required viewing angle .
provide lens panel glazing that is num ultraviolet uv opaque polycarbonate clear in color and laminated to the inside surface of the lens panel aluminum mask to form lens panel assembly .
d interior structure .
num .
internal structural members .
construct internal structural members including the structural frame out of aluminum alloy numtnum or numtnum .
provide internal structural members to accommodate all led mounting and air distribution subsystems as applicable .
provide internal structural members to retain the display modules in a manner that facilitates ease of maintenance including the rapid removal of individual display modules .
enable the removal of individual display modules without interfering with adjacent or surrounding modules .
num .
sign housing surface finish .
finish sign face with a matteblack flouropolymer coating system that meets or exceeds aama specification num .
provide certification from the licensed coating manufacturer for all aluminum face materials .
num .
sign housing access door for walkin dms .
where a walkin sign is utilized provide a sign housing door that is fabricated from aluminum .
equip sign with a minimum of two vertically hinged access doors located at the right and left sides while facing the front of the sign of the dms housing .
mount doors to door frames that are integral to the sign housing .
provide stainless steel hinges to support the door and enable the door to open outwards .
furnish access door to be a minimum of num feet wide and num inches high .
equip door with a handleoperated locking mechanism closedcell neoprene gasket and stainless steel hinges .
locate door release levers such that a person with no key and no tools can not become trapped inside the housing .
furnish doors with a hingestop mechanism that retains the door in a numdegree open position .
furnish a grade num threepoint centercase dead bolt locking mechanism that conforms to ansibuilders hardware manufacturers association bhma standard anum and utilizes a zinc finish .
provide a handle on both the inside and outside of the door .
furnish industrial strength handles that are corrosion resistant .
equip door with electronic monitoring subsystem that provides an alert to tmcrtmc personnel whenever the door is opened .
equip dms housing with an osha compliant anchor point at each entrance location for the connection of a personal fall arrest system .
provide anchorages strong enough to withstand a force of num pounds as required by osha .
locate anchorages such that they will not allow a person to freefall more than num feet when a num foot lifeline is used .
locate anchorages just inside each access door within easy reach from the outside and just outside the access door within easy reach from the doorway .
num .
sign housing access for front access signs .
for front access signs provide unobstructed access that allows servicing of internal components .
access must not require specialized tools or excessive force .
num .
sign housing operating environment .
provide sign housing that conforms to the operating environment requirements established in nema tsnum .
provide sign housing that ensures functionality of all dms equipment in the ambient operating temperature range of numf to numf or as defined in the most recent version of nema tsnum .
numd numd num initial edition where ventilation subsystem is utilized to ensure conformance to nema tsnum provide positive pressure filtered forced air sign housing ventilation subsystem that distributes air over all leds power supplies communications equipment and other electronic devices contained in the dms housing .
evenly distribute circulation across display modules in the cavity between each display module across lens panels and the back of the display modules .
submit ventilation subsystem design calculations to the representative for acceptance before sign installation .
provide screened or filtered intake holes to feed ventilation subsystem .
provide holes large enough to accommodate the air intake necessary to provide ventilation to the entire sign housing .
provide ventilation subsystem capable of being tested automatically once each day and capable of being tested on command from remote and local control access locations .
when a failure occurs send an error message to the tmcrtmc or a laptop computer through the dms controller .
provide ventilation subsystem capable of operating without any decrease in performance over an ambient operating temperature range of numf to numf as per nema ts num subsection num with a maximum relative humidity of num .
provide a failsafe ventilation subsystem that includes a snap disk thermostat that is independent of the sign controller .
preset the thermostat at numf .
if the sign housings interior reaches numf activate the thermostat to override the normal ventilation subsystem bypassing the sign controller and turning on all sign ventilation fans .
the fans will remain under the control of the thermostat until the internal sign housing temperature falls to numf at which time the failsafe subsystem will return control of the ventilation subsystem to the sign controller .
include a manual override timer switch located just inside the access door to manually activate the ventilation subsystem .
the switch must be adjustable to run for up to num hours .
furnish a sensor or a sensor assembly to monitor airflow volume to predict the need for a filter change .
the ventilation subsystem fans must possess a numhour lnum life rating .
provide inlet and exhaust filters which are numinch thick permanent reusable electrostatic filters that require no electrical attachment .
provide filters which are easily removable from within the sign housing without the use of tools .
provide blower that is capable of providing a minimum of one sign housing volume change per minute .
position the blowers in such a manner so as to provide a balanced airflow to the ventilation subsystem in the event of failure of any blower .
make all ductwork that impedes access to any sign components to be easily removable without tools for servicing of these components .
fabricate all ductwork from minimum num inches aluminum .
furnish ducts that are extremely efficient with minimal pressure drop throughout the subsystem .
num .
sign housing temperature sensor .
provide a temperature sensor in the sign housing that is controlled and monitored by the sign controller .
provide the capability for the sign to blank itself when a userdefined critical temperature threshold is exceeded .
provide the capability for the user defined critical temperature threshold to be changed remotely from the tmcrtmc or other location using the sign controller .
num .
sign housing humidity sensor .
provide a humidity sensor that detects from num to num relative humidity in num or smaller increments .
provide interface between the sensor and the controller .
allow for the humidity to be monitored remotely from the tmcrtmc .
provide a sensor with accuracy that is better than plus or minus num relative humidity .
a humidistat is not acceptable .
num .
photoelectric sensor devices .
provide sensors with the capability to monitor ambient light levels .
furnish sensors that employ a sufficient number of photocells in the appropriate locations to measure ambient light conditions .
position photocells to measure light levels on both the front and rear of the sign and light levels at the sign location .
furnish sensor that provides the dms controller with accurate ambient light condition at the sign location .
configure controller to react to the light conditions by brightening or dimming the sign leds .
reduce the brightness of the pixels in low ambient light and increase in high ambient lighting .
avoid pixel blooming in lowlight conditions .
automatically adjust led brightness in small enough increments so that the brightness of the sign changes smoothly with no perceivable brightness change between adjacent levels .
make provision to prevent perceivable brightening of the sign due to stray headlights shining upon the photo sensors at night .
provide brightness and color of each pixel that is uniform over the signs entire face within a minimum numdegree viewing angle in all lighting conditions .
nonuniformity of brightness or color over the signs face is justification for rejection of the sign by the representative .
num .
sign housing internal lighting and electrical outlets for walkin dms .
furnish a sign housing with a minimum of four internal light fixtures .
near the door locate a numhour timer without hold feature for the lights .
make numd nume num initial edition certain that all fixtures are spaced evenly above the walkway and fully enclosed in shatterproof protective fixtures .
furnish emergency lighting that automatically illuminates the interior in the event of a power outage .
prevent light produced from the internal lighting fixtures from being visible from outside the sign during nighttime or dark conditions and prevent light from interfering with normal visible operation of the sign .
equip sign housing with at least three num a num volt rated ground fault interrupter gfi outlets that include protected duplex electrical receptacles .
locate one duplex receptacle at each end of the sign housing and one at the center of the sign housing .
space the duplex receptacles evenly on the rear wall of the housing at a height of between num feet and num feet above the walkway .
e display modules .
provide display modules manufactured by one source and fully interchangeable throughout the manufacturers sign subsystems .
removal or replacement of a complete display module or led board must be able to be accomplished without the use of any special tools .
furnish display modules containing solidstate electronics to control pixel data and read pixel status .
num .
full matrix display module .
assemble display modules to form a full matrix configuration suitable for displaying three lines of characters .
provide a minimum of num characters per line and a maximum of num characters per line as indicated .
provide numinch or numinchhigh display characters that are num pixels wide by num pixels high .
standard font character spacing will follow mutcd guidelines for intercharacter and interline spacing .
num .
led and pixel specifications .
provide leds based on allngap technology .
provide diodes with a minimum num degree viewing angle centered around the optical axis or zero point of the pixel with an amber color and a peak wavelength of num nanometers .
the peak wavelength must not vary by more than num nanometers .
provide pixels on the dms and in the spare parts to have equal color and onaxis intensity .
provide sign display to produce an overall luminous intensity of at least num candelas per square meter when operating at maximum intensity .
measure brightness in accordance with the international commission on illuminations cie requirements as detailed in the test method a of the cie num num standard .
provide capability to test pixel operational status remotely from the tmcrtmc or at the site using a laptop computer pixel test .
provide subsystem capable of producing a log file that includes the pixel status module number column number and pixel number .
provide pixel status test to determine the functional status of the pixel as stuckon or stuckoff and does not affect the displayed message for more than half a second .
individually mount each led directly on a printed circuit board pcb .
provide leds that are individually removable and replaceable using conventional electronic repair methods .
prevent the failure of one pixel from affecting the functionality of any other led on the pcb .
num .
optical electrical and mechanical specifications for display modules .
provide display modules with connectors for power controls and data contains display module control electronics and memory elements and provides the signals to switch the led pixels .
furnish display modules that have identical vertical and horizontal centertocenter distances i.e .
pitch between adjacent pixels ranging from num inches to num inches .
provide separation between the last column of one display module and the first column of the next module that is equal to the horizontal distance between the columns of a single display module .
provide nema frnumrated black led pcb .
alternate led pcb configurations are to be submitted to and accepted by the representative before installation .
provide pcbs that allow components to be removed and replaced without damage to pcb traces or tracks .
finish all pcbs with a solder mask and a componentidentifying silk screen .
provide all pcbs except for the power supply and the pixels on the front of the pcb with a complete and uniform coating of silicone resin with a minimum thickness of num inch .
meet the material requirements of mili numc military standard united states department of defense usdod .
mount all leds so that the mechanical axis of the led is num degree to the signs face to ensure uniformity of brightness over the signs face .
make certain that leds are secured perpendicular to the display module within num degrees .
prevent devices used to secure leds from blocking air flow to the led leads or blocking the led light output at the required viewing angle .
provide allblack components on the led side of pcbs .
provide multiple power supplies to provide power to each display module .
power supplies must be redundant and rated such that if one supply fails the remaining supply will be able to operate num of the pixels in that display region at maximum brightness .
furnish sign controller that continuously measures and monitors all led module power supply voltages and provides power readings that indicate to the tmcrtmc or a laptop computer if the power is sufficient or insufficient nume numg num initial edition on command .
automatically generate an error message to be sent to the tmcrtmc or a laptop computer when it polls the sign controller if voltages measured are outside nominal values .
protect leds from external environmental conditions including moisture snow ice wind dust dirt and uv rays .
do not use hoods louvers cylinders or visors that could impede the free flow of air over any surface of each individual led .
do not use epoxy to encapsulate the leds .
f character displays .
provide signs that are capable of displaying american standard code for information interchange ascii characters num through num including all uppercase and lowercase letters and digits num through num at any location in the message line .
display uppercase alphanumeric characters over the complete height of the matrix .
provide characters legible under all light conditions within the minimum numdegree cone of vision centered on the pixels vertical and horizontal optical axes .
in addition to the standard character size of num pixels by num pixels provide sign capable of displaying compressed i.e .
num pixel by num pixel expanded i.e .
num pixel by num pixel or doublestroke i.e .
num pixel by num pixel character fonts and capable of changing the default spacing between characters .
provide spacing options to include num num or numpixel columns between the characters .
provide font that conforms to the local districts requirements including height style boldness and font type .
where there is no districtrequired standard font load the subsystem with a default font in accordance with the standard font set described in nema tsnum section num .
font types that are not compatible with existing district central control software or advanced traffic management system atms software may be grounds for rejection of the sign .
configure subsystem to allow the assignment of font access privileges .
provide sign controller capable of a selfupdating time andor date display on the sign .
provide sign capable of showing additional graphics or characters .
g sign controller .
provide a sign controller with operational firmware stored in nonvolatile memory .
provide controller to receive sign control commands from tmcrtmc and a local onsite laptop .
program controller to transmit responses as requested to the tmcrtmc and to control sign operation message displays and maintenance polls and statuses .
provide sign controller to control the following operations message displays sign blanking logic or data error logging error reporting to the tmcrtmc and local laptop providing operational status of the sign and all its components including each individual pixel to the tmcrtmc and local laptop via polling or realtime transmissions provide all sensor readings including internal and external temperature photocell airflow humidity led power supply and sign door opening to the tmcrtmc and local laptop temperature thresholds to activate temperature control devices transmit each sign function control to the tmcrtmc using related communications media .
provide controller that is capable of being polled on command and on a userdefinable schedule .
provide controller with the capability of storing a minimum of num logs locally in the event of communications failure .
utilize ambient environmental conditions collected by the sensors in an algorithm that activates the temperature control devices within the sign including the ventilation subsystem fans and heating devices when the temperature exceeds or dips below the temperature thresholds set in the sign controller .
furnish sign controller that consists of at a minimum local control panel status indicators including power onoff tmcrtmc communications status laptop computer communications status communications status with the electronics in the walkin housing as applicable and sign diagnostics and error status .
provide sign controller that provides automatic powerup commands that blankout the sign automatically when recovering from power off conditions and automatically returns to standby conditions in the event that power is removed then restored .
during powerup procedures the sign must return to a preprogrammed message is blanked or can display graphics or characters as desired by the tmcrtmc .
provide a hardware watchdog circuit to provide automatic recovery from critical errors and automatic shutdown in the event of critical hardware failure .
provide a dms controller that blanks the display in userdefinable situations including but not limited to pixel failure extended communications failure or extended power failure .
provide a groundlevel access point and an insign access point at the sign location that allows the sign to be programmed and controlled via a local laptop .
numg numg num initial edition prevent pedestrians from accessing the sign controller or changing displayed messages without permissions .
protect access to sign controller using security authentication or login when accessing the sign locally via a laptop computer .
provide a controller that contains clearly labeled manual onoff switch momentary contact switch that resets the sign controller provide electrical field connections by barrier type terminal connection blocks as defined in nema tsnum .
identify all terminal block connections and locate so readily accessible for maintenance .
provide all wire and cable terminations made with insulated spade terminals as defined in nema tsnum .
soldering of field terminal connections is not permitted .
provide the latest version of the dms clientserver software on the dms controller .
provide software that is compatible with the existing software and hardware at the tmcrtmc .
the software must at a minimum provide password protection to restrict access to the program and the sign control functions and the ability to fully control all programmable functions of the dms .
num .
display subsystem hardware .
provide data interface circuit to enable communications between the display modules and the sign controller .
contain the following display subsystem components in the sign housing or the field enclosure dms controller display subsystem interface circuits display modules power supplies local and remote control switches led indicators electronic industries alliance eianum plugin connection for laptop computers eianum null modem cables minimum of num feet for connection of laptop and controller workspace and convenient outlet for a laptop computer communications equipment for communications with the tmcrtmc transient voltage surge suppressors num .
sign controller communications interface .
furnish dms controller that includes at least two numpin eia num serial interfaces and one ethernet local area network lan rjnum port .
the interfaces must accommodate communications to the tmcrtmc the managed network switch and to a local laptop .
provide serial interfaces to support data bits num bit or num bit parity even odd none mark or spare number stop bits num bit or num bit terminate all cables for ethernet connection over copper media as per eiatianuma standard .
configure one eianum serial interface to drive asynchronous modems for full duplex communication with the tmcrtmc over pointtopoint dialup lines or a multidrop fiber or copper network .
switching between dialup ethernet and multidrop operation must not require sign controller software or hardware modifications .
configure the second eianum serial port for local communication with a laptop computer .
the charges acquired for installing and connecting communications cables and for all deployments involving cable services from outside service supplier are at no cost to the department .
provide modems to be retained by the department at each location .
for dialup operations provide a userselectable data transmission rate of up to num kbps .
configure sign controller and software to display singlepage and multipage messages with mixed fonts and spacing .
provide message page times and text flashing rates that are programmable between num seconds and num seconds in numsecond increments .
numg numg num initial edition provide subsystem to log and report errors and failures including data transmission errors receipt of invalid data communication failure recoveries alternating current power failures power recoveries pixel status reads fan and filter airflow status where applicable temperature status power supply status and information on the operational status of the temperature photocell airflow humidity and led power supply sensors .
report airflow and humidity sensor information using the objects from the dmsclimatectrlstatustable of the ntcip num vnum standard .
num .
message status and monitoring .
provide dms supporting two modes of operation master operation where the tmcrtmc commands and controls the sign and determines the appropriate message or test pattern .
local operation where the sign controller or a laptop computer commands and controls the sign and determines the appropriate message or test pattern .
for walkin signs keep electronic components away from the access door to protect them from the elements .
for front and rearaccess signs keep electronic components away from the access panels where possible to protect them from damage or corrosion due to exposure to the elements .
provide dms capable of performing the following functions control selection provide localremote switch on the local control panel that functions in parallel with the localremote switch located in the ground control box .
provide a led indicator near the localremote switch to indicate when either switch has selected the local mode .
the operating mode is determined by the position of the mode switch on the local control panel .
if the local control panels switch is set to local the operating mode is local .
otherwise the operating mode is master .
message selection use keypad to select a blank message or any one of the messages stored in the sign controllers nonvolatile memory when the control mode is set to local .
message implementation activate the selected message .
provide sign controller that transmits a return message to the tmcrtmc whenever it receives a valid status request .
return messages must contain an internet protocol ip address for the sign controller the actual message that is visibly displayed on the sign the displayed messages transmission origin i.e .
the tmcrtmc laptop computer manual entry etc .
remote or local control status error and failure reports temperature readings access alarms power supply voltage levels line voltage and uninterrupted power supply ups status .
in the event of a sign controller failure blank any displayed message .
during power loss provide capability to display a userdefined message including a blank page .
message additions deletions and sign controller changes must be made either remotely from the tmcrtmc or a local laptop computer .
provide capability to activate messages with specified runtime duration .
upon expiration of a runtime duration display a userdefined message including a blank page .
prevent perceivable flicker or ghosting of the pixels during sign erasure and writing periods .
in the event of an ac power loss retain all nonvolatile memory for a minimum of num calendar days .
provide controller that monitors messages downloaded from the tmcrtmc or laptop computer to make sure that the message will fit in the display area of the sign .
provide internal time clock that is integral to the controller to provide for message deactivation at the correct time even in the event of a communication loss .
maintain internal clock time during power outages and automatically display the proper message when power is restored .
num .
traffic management center communications .
provide all communications equipment cables wires interfaces and appurtenances to establish a connection to the district tmcrtmc using a specified communications method .
provide dms that complies with the ntcip num vnum num vnum num vnum num num vnum num vnum num vnum and num vnum standards .
provide documentation that ntcip testing has been completed at the factory for each dms provided by the manufacturer .
furnish dms meeting all mandatory requirements contained in ntcip num vnum protocol requirements list prl contained in sections num and num .
provide additional conformance to the following optional user needs un and functional requirements fr as described in ntcip num vnum numg numg num initial edition un fr description num .
na dms type variable message sign vms num .
na dms technology led num .
na dms display matrix configuration full matrix num .
all mandatory items logged data exchange num .
all mandatory items determine the sign display capabilities num monitor information about the currently displayed message num .
all mandatory items manage fonts num configure a font num delete a font num validate a font num .
all mandatory items manage graphics num store a graphic definition num delete a graphic num validate a graphic num .
all mandatory items manage automatic brightness num .
all mandatory items remotely reset the sign controller num .
mandatory define a message num delete all messages of a message type with one command num configure default flashon and flashoff times num configure default font num configure default line justification num configure default page justification num configure default page ontime and page offtime num configure default character set h.num .
set time num .
all mandatory items schedule messages for display num .
mandatory determine sign error conditions high level diognostics num execute climate control equipment testing num .
mandatory monitor system subsystem features midlevel diagnostics num monitor humidity warnings num .
all mandatory items monitor subsystem failure details lowlevel diagnostics num monitor sign housing humidity num .
all mandatory items monitor door status num .
all mandatory items monitor controller software operations num .
all mandatory items monitor automatic blanking of sign num .
monitor information about the currently displayed message num .
all mandatory items monitor power source num .
all mandatory items monitor power voltage num .
mandatory monitor current message num .
monitor information about the currently displayed message numg numh num initial edition requirement id specific requirement id num .
mandatory supplemental requirements for message definition num support multipage messages num support page justification num support for one page justification within a message num support for multiple page justification within a message num support multiple line messages num support line justification num support for a single line justification within a message num support line justification on a pagebypage basis num support line justification on a linebyline basis num support font commands num support one font within a message num support one font per page within a message num support flashing num support pagebypage flashing num support of graphics num all mandatory items supplemental requirements for line justification num support left line justification num support center line justification num support right line justification num support full line justification h control enclosure .
section numb and as follows provide a onedoor or twodoor nema numr control enclosure to house communications and power connections to the dms .
mount enclosure on the dms structure or on a concrete pad as indicated .
the front panel of all equipment in the enclosure must be visible from at least one of the enclosure openings .
where necessary provide a twodoor enclosure to meet this criterion .
the enclosure is to be used for the installation of control and communications equipment as well as a standard duplex receptacle convenience light surge protection and other ancillary equipment .
provide an enclosure equipped with eia standard num inch racks with fixed front frame .
provide a pullout shelf of sufficient size to support a laptop computer .
provide all enclosure accessories powered from a power distribution panel to be furnished and installed as an integral part of the enclosure .
size the power distribution panel circuit breaker and all power system components according to the loads required to operate the dms .
feed the power distribution panel from the main circuit breaker .
provide a power distribution panel that has the following ratings num v single phase three wire num kaic symmetrical num a main lugs minimum four single pole circuit breaker capacity minimum isolated neutral bus ground bus provide power distribution panel containing the following circuit breakers .
provide single pole num volt rated num kaic symmetrical circuit breakers with the following current capacity numh numl num initial edition num a spare circuit breaker num a circuit breaker for heating system and cooling fan num a circuit breaker for lamp and duplex convenience outlet num a circuit breaker minimum for its field equipment i main power supply and energy distributions .
provide a nominal singlephase power line voltage of num vac protected by one num a twopole main circuit breaker for the sign and its controller .
limit subsystem operation to a voltage range of num vac to num vac as specified in nema tsnum subsection num .
supply all service lines inside the sign by num vac independently protected by a thermomagnetic circuit breaker at the sign housings entry point .
locate all num vac wiring in conduit pull boxes raceways or control enclosures as required by the nec .
prevent exposure of num vac wiring inside or outside of the sign housing .
do not use the sign housing as a wiring raceway or control enclosure .
provide sign and controller with an operating frequency of num hertz hz num hz as stated in nema tsnum subsection num .
prevent a drop in the units voltage between noload and fullload during normal operations from exceeding num of the nominal voltage .
provide power protection through the use of a thermomagnetic circuit breaker connected to a nummilliampere gfi device that protects all service outlets .
provide a num a num vac twopole load center with mounting space for at least num breakers .
provide separate circuit breakers for each sign circuit .
provide power cables with insulation material fabricated specifically for damp and moist conditions .
size power cables as required by the nec for acceptable voltage drops while supplying alternating current to the sign .
prevent sign power consumption from exceeding num va under any circumstance including operation of the fans heaters if provided within the sign sign controllers and communication equipment and all pixels illuminated at maximum brightness .
provide protection devices such as surge suppressors and lightning arrestors installed or incorporated in the sign subsystem by the manufacturer to guard against lightning transient voltage surges and induced current .
use transient voltage surge suppression devices on all electric power and data communication connections entering and exiting the dms housing and in the dms enclosure .
surge suppression units must meet the following criteria maximum clamp voltage numv peak current num a response time num nanoseconds occurrences num times at peak current minimum series inductance num microhenries temperature range numf to numf .
provide surge suppression units for ac circuit configured for both normal mode l n and common mode ln g protection .
provide underwriters laboratories ul num listed surge protectors .
provide dc and ac voltage ratings and dissipation factors of capacitors used in the sign subsystem that exceed the worstcase design parameters of the circuitry by num .
mechanically mount all capacitors using a clamp or fastener that is resistant to cracking peeling and discoloration .
provide resistors that are within num of the tolerance of the specified temperature range and when operated in excess of num of its power rating have an adequate heat sink .
provide standard type transistors integrated circuits and diodes that are listed by the eia and clearly identifiable .
j uninterruptible power supply ups .
section numd and as follows provide dms with an ups subsystem that is capable of powering critical components at the dms including all related communications equipment for a minimum of num hours .
provide sealed absorbed glass mat agm type batteries that are maintenance free .
install ups within the sign housing or in the dms enclosure such that it does not obstruct regular maintenance efforts or access to indicator lights or panels .
k ground rod .
section numj l dms structure .
section num and section num num numd num initial edition num constructionas indicated as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a installation and mounting .
install dms on structure as indicated such that the structure does not interfere with the visibility requirements .
configure dms to automatically test the operational status of each pixel in the sign once per day .
b dms communications enclosure .
install the dms enclosure in a location that adheres to the guidelines for dms enclosures contained in publication num .
properly secure all electronic equipment contained within the dms or dms enclosures from damage due to weather moisture dust dirt and corrosion .
num .
enclosure foundation .
for base mounted enclosures construct the foundation as specified in sections numa and b .
num .
maintainer pad .
section numanum c integration .
section numc d dms structure and foundation .
section num e grounding .
section numq f testing .
section numb g training .
section numd h documentation .
section numf num measurement and payment a dynamic message sign dms subsystem .
each includes the dms sign sign housing controller enclosure enclosure foundation maintainer pad grounding mounting documentation installation training integration and all related equipment .
num of payment will be made upon complete installation of dms sign .
num of payment will be made upon completion of the standalone acceptance tests as specified in section numb .
num of payment will be made upon completion of the numday test as specified in section numb .
completion of tests includes completion of training submission of all manuals and documentation as required and completion of all final inspections as required by the representative .
b class num excavation .
section numa c class a concrete .
section numa d reinforcement bars .
section numa num numb num initial edition section numportable dynamic message signs num descriptionthis work is to furnish and install a portable dynamic message sign pdms subsystem for use in temporary and semipermanent installations and construction zones .
num material a general .
provide a pdms in trailer configuration equipped with wheels for portability .
provide portable devices that meet the physical display and operational requirements of the mutcd .
provide pdms consisting of a display panel controller support structure for sign display panel a photovoltaic cell array battery bank subsystem for powering the pdms an electronic control console remote control software and a heavyduty trailer frame .
equip pdms with a hitch to facilitate towing of the trailer .
provide capability of displaying a variety of messages using light emitting diode led matrices .
provide pdms that functions in two mechanical modes one mode for sign use and message display and another for safely and securely transporting the sign .
provide pdms that is capable of operating continuously on the solar power subsystem without regular maintenance for minimum of num month intervals .
furnish pdms to meet a minimum num year lifespan .
furnish a sign that is fully compliant with ntcip requirements for dynamic message signs .
fabricate all nuts bolts washers and other fasteners of corrosion resistant material .
provide a pdms with the following components dms trailer and dms mount structure dms controller and communications interface solar power supply subsystem including solar array and battery bank b pdms .
provide a dms for mounting to the pdms trailer frame .
provide dms display that is capable of displaying messages with minimum of two phases with each phase consisting of up to three lines of eight characters per line .
provide sign face that is colored black and complies with federal specification ttenum .
equip sign display panel with an ultraviolet uv resistant scratch resistant glare reducing protective cover .
provide display panel protective cover with a glareeliminating feature that prevents blurring and obstruction of the dms messages .
provide dms that is modular in design to facilitate easy repair .
equip display assembly with an automatic dimming operational mode capable of a minimum of num dimming under varying light conditions and a separate manual dimmer switch .
provide ambient light sensor to interface with automatic dimming functionality .
provide dms display with minimum dimensions of num inches high by num inches wide including the sign housing .
furnish dms panel and mounting capable of rotating num degrees on its support mast .
provide capability to lock into position at any angle about the vertical axis to allow for optimizing viewing angle to oncoming motorists .
provide dms enclosure that is weatherproof dust proof and rated for continuous operation or storage under the following conditions temperature of numf and numf relative humidity of num to num non condensing maintain physical integrity of equipment when subjected to a vibration of numhz to num hz up to num gravity applied in each of three mutually perpendicular planes .
prevent equipment from suffering permanent mechanical deformation or any change that renders the unit inoperable when subjected to a shock of num gravities applied in each of three mutually perpendicular planes .
provide pdms where its operation is unaffected by rfi radio frequency interference or emi electromagnetic interference .
provide pdms that while in operating position is able to withstand constant wind speeds of num miles per hour winds and while in transporting position is able to withstand constant wind speeds of num miles per hour .
equip dms display with a sighting device to assist the operators in orienting the dms display to provide maximum viewing capacity to motorists approaching the sign .
numb numd num initial edition num .
led and pixel specifications .
provide all pixels containing at minimum three led arranged in a circular or triangular pattern to produce the appearance of a round dot to oncoming motorists .
provide num nanometer wavelength ambercolored leds .
provide minimum dms display brightness of num candela per square meter at maximum intensity .
provide pixels with a minimum viewing angle of num degrees about the vertical and horizontal axes with no loss in intensity color or legibility within this cone of vision .
furnish interchangeable display modules that are mounted to the dms using simple tools and nominal force and provide for easy replacement or changeability without the need for special tools .
num .
character displays text and graphics .
provide dms display capable of displaying three lines of num characters per line with a minimum separation of num pixels between characters .
provide minimum num inch high characters .
present each displayed character using minimum num horizontal pixels and minimum num vertical pixels .
provide capability to display simple graphics on the dms including but not limited to individual and series of vertical arrows with maximum height that matches the height of the fullmatrix sign face individual and series of horizontal arrows with maximum width that matches the width of the fullmatrix sign face .
c trailer .
provide a wheeled trailer fabricated of steel .
deburr and finish all metal with a corrosion resistant coating .
equip trailer with tiedown points to facilitate storage and transport by securing the trailer to a utility trailer or flatbed truck .
equip trailer with classa tail lights using a plug adaptor .
furnish trailer that can be set up at the site with its own chassis and outriggers without being hitched to a vehicle .
equip trailer with fenders over the tires that are made from heavyduty material sufficient to allow a person to stand and operate or perform maintenance on the unit .
delineate the trailers on a permanent basis by affixing retroreflective material in a continuous line on the face of the trailer as seen by oncoming road users .
finish trailer with a glossy federal safety aliphatic acrylic urethane finish .
provide orange color to conform to the mutcd requirements for portable changeable message signs pcms .
provide a trailer mounting structure for the pdms .
provide accessible mechanism to easily raise and lower the display assembly .
provide a locking device to lock the display panel in the raised or lowered position .
provide a single metal telescoping mast pole to mount the dms that is an integral piece of the body of the trailer .
provide support capable of adjusting the height of the sign and allows the sign to rotate num degrees around the vertical axis of the support beam without requiring more than a single operator to perform height or angle adjustments .
equip dms with locking mechanisms that enable the dms to be locked at any angle of rotation .
provide capability to elevate the center point of the sign face to a minimum height of num feet .
the locking mechanisms must prevent the dms from changing angles during windy conditions or vibrations .
equip trailer with a hitch for connection to a towing vehicle .
provide hitch with a towing capacity of num pounds .
all trailer hitch components must conform to sae jnum standards for class ii trailers .
equip hitch with a num inch safety chain for secure attachment to towing vehicle .
provide trailer with sealed flushmounted combination stop tail and turn lights and front and rear sided marker lights .
provide a rear license plate display holder and a rear center identification light bar for illuminating the trailer license plate .
provide a rear fender .
provide four hydraulically or mechanically adjustable outrigger leveling pads permanently installed at each of the four corners of the sign trailer for leveling and support functions .
provide leveling pads with a minimum capacity of num pounds each .
provide leveling pads that are adjustable using a single operator and without any special tools .
the leveling pads must be capable of lifting the trailer such that the tires do not touch the ground .
equip trailer with tires that meet stnumrnum load range c. provide numlug pattern wheel configuration .
affix the manufacturers name and the trailer make and model to trailer .
provide an operators manual within the control enclosure of each unit .
d pdms controller .
equip pdms with a sign controller that contains all the necessary hardware and software to control the dms .
provide electrical and communications connections to the controller of lockingtype connectors to permit quick and simple removal of connections .
provide sign controller with a liquid crystal display lcd console for programming and operations .
all dms functions must be programmable and operable locally at the controller using a builtin graphical user interface gui that is integral to the controller .
provide controller that displays an on site graphical representation that visibly depicts the message displayed on the sign face .
provide controller and associated onboard circuitry to meet the requirements of the fcc title num subpart b section num regulations concerning the emission of electronic noise by class a digital devices .
provide capability of remote control operation of the sign via any communication medium that utilizes the ports specified or locally via a laptop computer .
local connections to a laptop computer must facilitate routine repairs diagnostics and all other operational functions .
provide the communications interface as a unit detached from the pdms controller to facilitate easy change out to other communications means .
provide at a minimum the following numd nume num initial edition interfaces to the sign controller a usb port ethernet port and serial port .
equip controller with interface to accommodate a portable keyboard for inputting sign messages .
furnish portable keyboard that is compatible with the pdms controller and deliver keyboard to location identified by the representative .
if representative does not identify delivery location for the portable keyboard place keyboard in the pdms controller enclosure .
facilitate static and dynamic internet protocol ip network connections in addition to serial dialup modem connection and cellular numg data modem connection .
protect all data and electrical connections from the dms controller using transient voltage surge suppression tvss equipment .
furnish controller capable of retaining time and date information and utilizing time and date information to facilitate an operational schedule for the display and removal of messages .
provide capability of storing num distinct messages locally in a message library .
furnish controller that is unaffected by mobile radio or any other ambient radio transmissions .
provide software for the control monitoring maintenance and operation of the pdms from a remote location .
include provision in the controller software that enforces authentication of operator credentials for control of the pdms for both local and remote controls .
include provision in the controller firmware that disallows the display of words contained in a userdefined list of disallowed words .
provide controller to monitor and display battery voltage levels on the gui .
the controller must provide battery voltage levels at any remote monitoring location .
provide pdms that is ntcip compatible supporting the following ntcip standards ntcip num vnumb global object definitions ntcip num vnuma object definitions for dynamic message signs comply with all mandatory user need and protocol requirements as specified in section num ntcip num vnum subnetwork profile pmpp over rsnum ntcip num vnum subnetwork profile internet ntcip num vnum transport profile transportation ntcip num vnum transport profile internet equip the pdms trailer with a metallic enclosure to house the sign controller .
provide a weatherproof and rust resistant enclosure that is securely fastened to the trailer structure .
equip the enclosure with a door with a key locking mechanism and provisions for externally locking the door using a typical pad lock .
e solar array and battery bank .
equip pdms with solar array and battery bank to provide power to the sign and sign equipment .
using solar array supply nominal voltage numv dc .
provide solar array that consists of photovoltaic single crystal silicon modules .
provide automatic recharging of power supply batteries to normal operating levels with meters showing charge .
securely mount the solar array to the pdms for operation and transport .
provide mounting capable of swiveling tilting and reangling the cells in order to optimize exposure to solar rays .
include capability to lock the solar panels at any angle necessary to optimize solar exposure .
provide acdc battery charger .
provide battery bank that at full charge is able to power num of the pdms pixels at continuous use for num days without recharging from the solar array .
equip battery bank with a battery controller to prevent overcharging and overdischarging .
provide battery controller with external battery level indicator .
protect the battery controller and power panel from the elements and vandalism .
provide battery subsystem with automatic recharging of power supply batteries .
equip battery subsystem with meter to indicate if batteries are being charged or used .
provide battery bank consisting of lowmaintenance gel batteries .
contain the battery in a nema rated compartment or enclosure that prevents water ingress during operation or transport .
fabricate the compartment to completely contain any spills from damaged or malfunctioning batteries .
provide battery enclosure that is separate from enclosure to house dms controller .
num .
plugin ac power .
provide an actodc power converter and a power receptacle behind a lockable window at the main frame of the pdms to allow the use of power feed from an alternate power source such as a generator set on trailer or roadside power outlet .
provide a selector switch inside the window that connects the internal loads of the pdms to the batterypowered subsystem or the above actodc power converter .
include provision for the external ac power to charge the batteries when the pdms operates using the external ac power .
provide actodc power converter that converts num vac power to dc power suitable for operating the pdms .
provide window with a grommetlined semicircular notch at the bottom to allow passage of extension cord with the window closed .
provide nume numa num initial edition twist locking type receptacle .
provide an extension cord with male plugs at both ends that is suitable for outdoor uses oil resistant minimum num feet long and be equipped with three num awg conductors .
provide cord where one of the plugs is regular type and the other plug is suitable for use with twist locking type receptacle .
deliver cord to location identified by the representative .
f grounding terminal .
provide means to connect a grounding conductor to the pdms assembly .
provide deliberate grounding connection from the trailer frame and the pdms controller frame to this grounding terminal .
provide grounding terminal suitable for terminating a wire of up to num awg .
provide painted signage next to the grounding terminal with numinch tall black letters on white background stating provide grounding termination here .
num construction as shown on the standard drawings and as follows a pdms .
install dms on trailer and dms mount structure as indicated such that the mount structure does not interfere with the visibility requirements .
num .
pdms controller .
configure pdms controller to display messages .
enable activation and editing of messages using a typical keyboard and gui of the control software .
num .
solar array and battery bank .
orient and lock solar panels in a position to optimize exposure to sunlight .
num .
integration .
section numc num .
testing .
section numb num .
training .
section numd num .
documentation .
section numf b trailer unit .
install trailer unit as specified in contract documents .
ensure the trailer is located in an area that is free of debris where a maintainer can access the unit and where applicable protected from most vehicular traffic .
configure all outriggers to equally support the weight of the trailer and that the unit is completely level .
num measurement and payment a portable dynamic message sign pdms subsystem .
each includes trailer dms mount dms display batteries solar array wires connectors integration training documentation and all work for a complete subsystem .
num of payment will be made upon delivery of the pdms .
num of payment will be made upon demonstration of full functionality of the sign locally not from the tmcrtmc .
full functionality is demonstrated upon successful completion of standalone acceptance test as specified in section numb .
num of payment will be made upon successful integration of pdms controls at the tmcrtmc and completion of system test as specified in section numb as required by the representative .
num numb num num initial edition section nummaintenance dynamic message signs dms num descriptionthis work is to furnish install modify repair replace and remove components of a dynamic message sign dms subsystem .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a preventive maintenance .
num .
general .
section numanum num .
site .
section numanum num .
enclosures .
section numanum num .
structure .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables and general condition .
check attachment hardware and tighten if necessary to the appropriate parameters .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
check anchor bolts for rust and tightness .
tighten if necessary to the appropriate parameters .
check welds .
install or replace screening at the base plate as necessary .
num .
sign .
test operation of sign all lamps and led clusters fiber bundle and pixels fiber optic shutters and perform diagnostic tests .
verify that all led and fiber pixels are functioning from the control enclosure .
do this by following the manufacturers testing procedure by using the keyboard and display in the dms control enclosure or using a laptop computer and connecting to a rs num connector in the control enclosure .
pixel test can also be performed by the tmc .
software will be provided by the department where necessary .
visually ensure that all leds are illuminated and bright .
clean surface of signs .
clean filters during every preventive maintenance pm inspection .
replace filters twice annually .
test ground rods for num ohms or less resistance utilizing fall of potential test .
test communication system .
test power and communications line surge suppressors and replace as necessary .
b oncall maintenance .
num .
general .
section numbnum .
after oncall maintenance om has been completed perform pm as described in section numa .
num .
responsiveness .
section numbnum num measurement and payment a preventive maintenance dynamic message sign dms subsystem .
each all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
b oncall dynamic message sign dms subsystem mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
numc nume num num initial edition c oncall dynamic message sign dms subsystem repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
d oncall dynamic message sign dms subsystem parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration of a dms subsystem .
e maintenance and protection of traffic .
section numa num numb num num initial edition section nummaintenance portable dynamic message sign pdms num descriptionthis work is to furnish install modify repair replace and remove components of a portable dynamic message sign pdms subsystem .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a preventive maintenance .
num .
general .
section numanum num .
site .
section numanum num .
enclosures .
section numanum num .
trailer and mount structure .
lubricate all hinges jacks stands mast and trailer hitches .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables and general condition .
check attachment hardware and tighten if necessary to the appropriate parameters .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
num .
sign .
test operation of sign all lamps and led clusters fiber bundle and pixels fiber optic shutters and perform diagnostic tests .
verify that all led and fiber pixels are functioning from the control enclosure .
do this by following the manufacturers testing procedure by using the keyboard and display in the pdms control enclosure or using a laptop computer and connecting to a rs num connector in the control enclosure .
pixel test can also be performed by the tmc .
software will be provided by the department where necessary .
visually ensure that all leds are illuminated and bright .
check batteries and add distilled water record group voltage split voltage specific gravity.check and thoroughly clean solar panels and power the battery packs .
clean surface of signs .
clean filters during every preventive maintenance pm inspection .
replace filters twice annually .
test ground rods for num ohms or less resistance utilizing fall of potential test .
test communication system .
test power and communications line surge suppressors and replace as necessary b oncall maintenance .
num .
general .
section numbnum after oncall maintenance om has been completed perform pm as described in section numa .
num .
responsiveness .
section numbnum num measurement and payment a preventive maintenance portable dynamic message sign pdms subsystem .
each all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
b oncall portable dynamic message sign pdms subsystem mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
numc nume num num initial edition c oncall portable dynamic message sign pdms subsystem repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
d oncall portable dynamic message sign pdms subsystem parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration of a pdms subsystem .
e maintenance and protection of traffic .
section numa num numb num initial edition section numvehicle detector subsystem num descriptionthis work is to furnish and install a complete vehicle detector subsystem vds consisting of a microwave vehicle detector bluetooth vehicle detector or radiofrequency identification rfid tag reader vehicle detector .
num material a general .
furnish a complete functional vds that includes a vehicle detection device mounting hardware cables and conduits installation and integration .
provide fieldhardened subsystems for longterm freeway deployment where it is typically subject to wide daily and seasonal temperature swings wind gusts typical road vibrations .
provide all solid state electronic components and circuits .
minimize the possibility that failure of any one component or module causes total subsystem failure .
failure of one component or module must not cause the failure of any other component or module .
b microwave vehicle detector mvd .
furnish a mvd that uses frequency modulated continuous wave principle fmcw and determines vehicle presence by the return or reflection of radar output waves which are converted to a data signal that corresponds to vehicle presence .
provide mvd that is easy to install and remove and is fully programmable to support a variety of applications .
comply with all applicable mandatory ntcipnum requirements and optional requirements defined by the following userneed un or functional requirement fr section numbers un section fr section description num num get sample end time num num get volume num num get percent occupancy num num get speed num num get zone status provide all solid state electronic components and circuits .
provide mvd to operate without degradation in performance under temperature range of numf to numf and relative humidity of lower than num noncondensing without auxiliary heating or cooling .
provide a true presence mvd which can provide presence volume lane occupancy and speed information on a minimum of eight detection zones .
make information available via serial communications lines .
provide userdefined numfoot resolution for each zone range limit .
provide mvd with area of detection defined as an oval shaped beam with minimum detection range and coverage angles as follows elevation beam width num degrees .
azimuth beam width num degrees .
range num feet to num feet .
furnish a mvd that complies with the limits for a class a digital device pursuant to part num of the fcc rules or the appropriate spectrum management authority .
provide mvd that does not interfere with any adjacent equipment .
where measurement energy is radiated the radiated power must not exceed num milliwatts .
furnish mvd with processor that performs and generates at minimum the following statistical calculations over a set time duration average speed percent occupancy vehicle count .
provide mvd that is capable of resolving closely spaced vehicles and does not detect vehicles that remain stationary for over num minutes within a detection zone .
enable the operator to select if data is output as contact closures emulating standard loop detector outputs andor as accumulated statistical data using detector serial ports .
provide time duration for the statistical calculations that are useradjustable from num seconds to num seconds .
provide mvd that produces data in ascii format .
provide full description of the protocol used for packaging the transmitted data and full listing of what and how certain information may be queried .
store all vds configurations data and all traffic parameters data within an internal nonvolatile numb numc num initial edition memory .
store all collected data within the mvd unit for a minimum of num days regardless of whether or not the data was already transmitted .
furnish mvd that meets or exceeds the following accuracy requirements identify vehicle presence within each detection zone with a minimum accuracy of num detect average travel speed with a minimum accuracy of num independent of the vehicles direction of travel through the detection zone .
maximum permissible error of num in the detection of the direction and magnitude of radial speed and num in the case of transverse speed .
provide mvd that operates using nominal input voltage of num vdc to num vdc and less than num watts and is compatible with all power requirements in section numb .
num .
communication .
provide mvd that generates and transmits data in serial rsnum or rsnum format .
furnish terminal server to convert signals to ethernet format where required .
c rfid tag reader vehicle detector rtvd .
furnish a complete rfid transponder based rtvd .
detection targets are the vehiclemounted rfid transponder tags used in the ezpass interagency group iag electronic toll collection etc systems .
provide rtvd that operates on num vac or is provided with relevant power conversion module that accepts num vac power supply and is compatible with section numb .
provide a rtvd that polls the transponder tags in vehicles passing through related detection zone detects the transponder identification information responded by the transponder tags timestamps and transmits the detected information to the tmcrtmc for further processing .
provide detection antenna related antenna cable and related processing unit that operates without degradation in performance under temperature range of numf to numf and relative humidity of lower than num noncondensing in absence of auxiliary heating or cooling .
provide detection antenna that radiates polling signal of no more than num milli watts per square centimeter has a detection range of minimum num feet when placed above the center of a num foot wide lane and has a coverage angle of greater than num degrees to allow detection from both lanes when placed above the center of two num foot wide lanes .
provide detection antenna with front surface measuring not more than num inches at each side and is not more than num inches thick .
unless other length is specifically required provide antenna cable that supports connection distance between a detection antenna and related processing unit of up to num feet .
furnish a rtvd that complies with the limits for a class a digital device pursuant to part num of the fcc rules or the appropriate spectrum management authority .
provide detector that does not interfere with any adjacent equipment .
furnish rtvd that meets or exceeds the following accuracy requirements identify vehicle presence within each detection zone with a minimum accuracy of num detect average travel speed with a minimum accuracy of num independent of the vehicles direction of travel through the detection zone .
maximum permissible error of num in the detection of the direction and magnitude of radial speed and num in the case of transverse speed .
num .
processing unit .
provide processing unit to interface with and process data from up to eight detection antennas provide blank cover plate on opening for all unused module slots .
provide rtvd that supports fnumc data rate of up to numkbps and properly interacts with and processes data from up to eight streams of transponder tags all moving at up to num miles per hour and spaced as close as num feet apart within respective lanes .
provide processing unit that is equipped with at least one eia rsnum port for configuration and monitoring and at least one rjnum ports for nummbps ipbased fnumc communication .
num .
communication .
furnish rtvd that supports at least serial rsnum communications or preferred serial and internet protocol ip communications platform for fieldtocenter fnumc communication .
provide rtvd that includes one or more microwave transponder based vehicle detection antennas and a related processing unit tag reader .
numd numa num initial edition d bluetooth vehicle detector bvd .
furnish a bvd capable of detecting vehicles with active bluetooth signals along the roadway .
provide bvd equipped with a standard class num bluetooth antenna at minimum and able to simultaneously detect at least four lanes of traffic when placed along the shoulder of the roadway .
provide bvd with the ability to be powered through utility power solar power battery power and poe as outlined in the contract documents .
provide a bvd having a minimum operating range of numf to numf and be able to connect to an existing network or communicate over a cellular cdma network .
the bvd must have onboard storage which can store all collected data for a minimum of num year .
provide a bvd which has the capability of gps location .
the bvd must have a mtbf of num hours minimum .
e detector housings and mounts .
if detector is not provided as a weatherproof unit enclose detector in a rugged weatherproof box and seal to protect the unit from wind dust and airborne particles and exposure to moisture .
weatherproof any control cable connection from the housing .
the maximum total weight of the detector assembly is num pounds excluding any batteries .
provide mounting assembly consisting of all painted steel stainless steel or aluminum construction and supporting a load of a minimum num pounds .
excluding the sensing surface construct housing of aluminum stainless steel nema numx rated polycarbonate or steel with a corrosionresistant finish .
furnish housing and mounting arrangement to withstand winds of num miles per hour with a numpercent gust factor and to withstand vibration of up to num inch total excursion from num hz to num hz and peak random vibrations of numgs from num hz to num hz .
for mvd provide mounting hardware assembly to incorporate a ballandsocket joint or other approved mechanism that can be tilted in both axes then locked into place to provide the optimum area of coverage .
provide mounting for mvd to be installed in either a sidefire orientation whereby the detector is mounted on the side of the roadway and projects a detection area perpendicular to the roadway or forwardlooking orientation whereby the detector is mounted above the roadway aimed downward and projects a detection area parallel to the roadway .
for bvds provide a sealed waterproof and tamperproof enclosure with has a locking mechanism and is capable of being chained or banded to structures along the roadway if necessary .
f software .
where no vehicle detector software exists at the tmcrtmc furnish software to be installed on a pc or laptop computer at a tmcrtmc .
furnish software to allow an operator to program operate and read current status of all vds features and functions using the laptop pc or tmcrtmc workstation .
provide software to display detection zones and allow control of all detection zone parameters using a simple graphical user interface gui .
provide software that enables operators to configure maintain operate setup calibrate and perform diagnostics for each detector location .
save all configuration data on the pc or laptop at the tmcrtmc workstation .
provide detector with the capability to selftune and to allow manual calibration via vendorsupplied software .
provide software with the capability to perform autocalibration and autoconfiguration .
g grounding .
section numj num construction a mvd .
where installing mvd in forwardlooking orientation above the roadway mount the mvd at a minimum height of num feet num inches above road surface .
where installing mvd in sidefire orientation mount the detector at a height that minimizes the masking of vehicles .
install mvd in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations such that all detection zones are contained within the specified elevation angle .
provide mechanical means to adjust vertical and horizontal detector aiming angles and to lock the detector aiming position securely .
provide means to double lock the final aiming position which is not prone to loosening or drifting when subject to road vibration .
for sidefire applications configure the mvds to collect and send traffic data for traffic in both directions for at least eight traffic lanes or as indicated and within the coverage limitations of the mvd at the installed position .
for overhead forward looking configurations mount the mvd over the center of the desired lane or as directed .
configure and integrate the mvd into the transportation sensor system tss travel time or central control software at the related tmcrtmc and any additional pcs or laptops as directed by the representative .
num .
detector cables .
provide nominal numinch cable slack in drip loop configuration at the mvd to allow for aiming adjustments .
provide detector cable that is flexible and rated for outdoor use .
provide weatherproof connectors numa numa num initial edition for external connections between the cable and the detector .
install single continuous run signal and control cable without splice between a detector assembly and related its enclosure .
b rtvd .
install the rtvd at a height of minimum num feet num inches maximum num feet above road surface or as specified .
provide mechanical means to adjust vertical and horizontal detector aiming angles and to lock the detector aiming position securely .
provide means to double lock the final aiming position which is not prone to loosening or drifting when subject to road vibration .
num .
detector cables .
provide nominal numinch cable slack in drip loop configuration at the rtvd to allow for aiming and height mounting adjustments .
install single continuous run antenna cable without splice between a detector antenna and related communications enclosure .
provide detector cable that is flexible and rated for outdoor use .
provide weatherproof connectors for external connections between the cable and the detector antenna .
num .
permission .
acquire written permission from the ezpass iag for the use of related transponder technology .
this permission is a requirement for the procurement of the related products .
provide provisions to address any and all privacy concerns as identified by the ezpass iag and as required to obtain permission to utilize the rfid tag reading equipment .
coordinate with the representative to obtain permission before procurement of rtvd .
c bvd .
install the bvd at the location indicated in the contract documents .
follow all manufacturers recommendations for maximum detection along the roadway including height distance from farthest travel lane and security .
ensure all cabling is terminated according to the contract documents and as specified by the manufacturer .
d integration .
section numc e grounding .
section numq f testing .
section numb g training .
section numd h documentation .
section numf num measurement and payment a vehicle detector subsystem vds .
each includes wiring connectors detector mounting housing cabling software terminal server grounding installation and integration work for a complete subsystem .
num of payment will be made upon complete installation of vds num of payment will be made upon completion of the standalone acceptance tests as specified in section numb .
num of payment will be made upon successful completion of the numday test as specified in section numb .
completion of test includes completion of training submission of all manuals and documentation as required and completion of all final inspections as required by the representative .
num numc num num initial edition section nummaintenance vehicle detector subsystem num descriptionthis work is to furnish install modify repair replace and remove components of a vehicle detector subsystem vds .
num materialsection num num constructionsection num and as follows a preventive maintenance .
num .
general .
section numanum num .
site .
section numanum num .
enclosures .
section numanum num .
structure .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables and general condition .
check attachment hardware and tighten if necessary to the appropriate parameters .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
check anchor bolts for rust and tightness .
tighten if necessary to the appropriate parameters .
check welds .
install or replace screening at the base plate as necessary .
num .
detector .
inspect for wear rust cracks missing damaged or bent parts loose connections frayed cables and general condition .
check housing and attachment hardware .
clean repaint and repair as necessary .
test communications system .
inspect and realign detector zone and range as necessary to ensure that presence is being recorded .
test power and communications line surge suppressors and replace as necessary .
b oncall maintenance .
num .
general .
section numbnum after oncall maintenance om has been completed perform preventive maintenance pm as described in section numa .
num .
responsiveness .
section numbnum num measurement and payment a preventive maintenance vehicle detector subsystem vds .
each all labor materials and equipment required for routine preventive maintenance are incidental to this item including but not limited to the statewide device identification number cleaning materials caulk metal meshing lubricants filters lamps paint surge suppressors fuses circuit breakers attachment hardware insect prevention measures rodent control measures clearing and grubbing selective tree trimming snow and ice removal and weed control measures .
mobilization is incidental to this item .
b oncall vehicle detector subsystem vds mobilization .
each mobilization will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
c oncall vehicle detector subsystem vds repair .
hour repair time will not be paid for procurement of parts .
travel to and from the site andor district stockpile is incidental to this item .
site specific snow and ice removal requested by the department is included within this item .
numd nume num num initial edition d oncall vehicle detector subsystem vds parts .
dollar includes all cables connectors equipment racks conductors and other parts necessary for proper installation and configuration of a vehicle detector subsystem .
e maintenance and protection of traffic .
section numa appendix a metric si information num a num initial edition appendix a metric si information general this appendix provides guidance on the selection of metric si units and how they relate to their counterparts in english or ip units .
topics include definitions dual units conversion rules basic units of measure commonly used si prefixes si measurements and conversion tables .
the conversion tables show multiplication values to change ip units to si units .
several additional tables in this appendix provide specific ip si relationships .
these tables include table anum .
mmnum equivalents of american wire gage table anum .
nema metric non metallic and metallic conduit and fittings table anum .
reinforcing bar information table anum .
standard test sieves u.s.a. standard sieves definitions important terms include the following si unitsunits belonging to the international system of units which is abbreviated si as interpreted or modified for use in the united states by the secretary of commerce .
english or ip unitsunits based upon the yard and the pound commonly used in the united states and defined by the national institute of standards and technology .
soft conversionan ip measurement that is mathematically converted to its exact si equivalent .
example lane width num feet ip num m si .
hard conversiona close approximation of the ip unit but is rounded logically in the si system .
example lane width num feet ip or num m si .
si base unitsthe si system consists of seven base units of measurement six of which are used in design and construction .
the seventh mole is the amount of molecular substance and is used in physics .
quantity unit symbol length mass time electric current temperature luminous intensity meter kilogram second ampere kelvin candela m kg s a k cd si derived unitsderived units are formed by combining base units supplementary units and other derived units according to the algebraic relations linking the corresponding quantities .
the symbols for derived units are obtained by means of the mathematical signs for multiplication division and use of exponents .
see the list entitled basic units of measure for examples of si derived units .
appendix a metric si information num a num initial edition dual units wherever possible measurements in these specifications are stated in dual unitssi units followed by ip units in parentheses .
dual units may be found in references to si or dual unit codes and standards e.g .
astm aashto etc ..
in other situations where references to other sources are not available logical conversion rules are applied .
many si measurements in these specifications are soft conversions of the ip measurements .
over time these si measurements will be changed through the consensus process into hard conversionsrationalized rounded si dimensions of the ip measurements .
certain situations do occur where specifications are stated in si units only or in ip units only .
these situations may occur when existing specifications have not been fully converted .
the specification was developed exclusively using ip units only or si units only .
i.e .
specified products may be available exclusively in si sizes or ip sizes .
conversion rules the metric guide for federal construction published by the national institute of building sciences provides further direction about developing specifications .
the publication presents conversion rules which aids in developing construction specifications .
the conversion rules include the following use astm e num standard practice for the use of metric si units in building design and construction as a basic reference .
follow the rules for usage conversion and rounding in ieeeastm si num standard for use of international system of units si the modern metric system annex b or ansiieee num american national standard metric practice sections num and num .
wherever possible convert measurements to rounded rationalized hard si numbers .
for instance if anchor bolts are to be imbedded to a depth of num inches the exact converted length i.e .
soft conversion of num mm might be rounded to either num mm num inches or num mm num inches .
the less critical the number the rounder it can be but ensure that allowable tolerances or safety factors are not exceeded .
when in doubt stick with the exact soft conversion .
round to preferred si numbers i.e .
hard conversion .
while the preferred numbers for the num foot num inches system are in order of preference those divisible by num num num num num and num preferred si numbers are in order of preference those divisible by num num num and num or decimal multiples thereof .
use hand calculators or software conversion programs that convert ips to si .
they are readily available and are indispensable to the conversion process .
simply check with any store or catalogue source that sells calculators or software .
be careful with the decimal marker when converting areas and volumes si numbers can be significantly larger than ip numbers a cubic meter for instance is one billion cubic millimeters .
appendix a metric si information num a num initial edition basic units of measure si prefixes micrometer m millimeter mm deci d num one tenth meter m centi c num one hundredth square meter mnum milli m num one thousandth cubic meter mnum micro  num one millionth hectare ha nano n num one billionth liter l deca da num ten hecto h num one hundred pascal pa kilo k num one thousand kilopascal kpa mega m num one million megapascal mpa giga g num one billion newton n not in si system kilonewton kn day d second s hour h degree celsius c kelvin k gram g kilogram kg megagram mg or tonne t tonne t kilogram per square meter kgmnum radian rad ampere a farad f henry h joule j lumen lm lux lx volt v watt w appendix a metric si information num a num initial edition si measurements apparent power voltamperes va length millimeters meters kilometers area square meters or hectares num square meters volume liters or cubic meters mass kilograms tonnes force newton n kg msnum pressure stress pascal pa nmnum energy work joule j n m torque newton meter n m speed velocity metersecond kilometershour acceleration meterssecond squared kilometershours squared density kilogramscubic meter temperature degrees celsius power watt w n ms viscosity dynamic pascal second pas viscosity kinematic square meter per second mnums luminous flux lumen illuminance lux luminous intensity candela conversions from english to si multiply by angle degree rad num num num area square inch mmnum num square foot mnum num num num square yard mnum num num num acre mnum num num acre ha num num square mile kmnum num energy foot pound j num num force poundforce n num num kip kn num num forceunit length lb.in .
nmm num num lb.ft .
nm num num length inch mm num foot mm num foot m num yard m num mile km num num mile m num num inchesmile mmkm num light candlepower cd num footcandle lx num num appendix a metric si information num a num initial edition conversions from english to si multiply by mass ounce g num num pound kg num num kip num lbs .
tonne num num ton tonne num num massunit area ouncessq .
yd .
kgmnum num num num lbs.sq .
ft. kgmnum num num lbs.sq .
yd .
kgmnum num num lbs.cu .
ft. kgmnum num num lbs.cu .
yd .
kgmnum num num num lbs.acre kgha num tonacre tonneha num pressure stress lbs.sq .
ft. pa num num kipssq .
ft. kpa num num lbs.sq .
in .
kpa num num lbs.sq .
in .
mpa num num kipssq .
in .
mpa num num temperature f num c volume cubic inch mmnum num num cubic foot mnum num num num cubic yard mnum num num num gallon l num num gal.yd .
lm num gal.sq .
yd .
lmnum num gal.cu .
yd .
lmnum num gal.acre lha num gal.ton ltonne num appendix a metric si information num a num initial edition table anum mmnum equivalents of american wire gage awg american wire gage astm b num soft or annealed copper wire astm b num concentriclaystranded copper conductors hard mediumhard or soft astm b num solid round wires num wires num wires num wires num wires num wires num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num appendix a metric si information num a num initial edition table anum continued mmnum equivalents of american wire gage awg american wire gage astm b num soft or annealed copper wire astm b num concentriclaystranded copper conductors hard mediumhard or soft astm b num solid round wires num wires num wires num wires num wires num wires num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table anum nema metric nonmetallic and metallic conduit and fittings table size inches metric size designations num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num a num table anum reinforcing bar information si bar information ip bar information si bar no.num si diam .
mm si area mmnum si mass kgm si grades num mpa ip bar no .
ip bar diam .
in ip area innum ip weight lbsft ip grades num ksi num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num penndot has not added the m suffix appearing in some standard literature to si bar numbers .
num grade is equivalent to min .
yield designation fy .
num astm a numa num m billetsteel .
num astm a numa num m railsteel .
num astm a numa num m axlesteel .
num astm a numa num m lowalloy steel .
num equivalent mpa values for ip grades follow num ksi num mpa num ksi num mpa num ksi num mpa and num ksi num mpa .
appendix a metric si information num a num table anum standard test sieves u.s.a. standard series standard sieve designation alternative sieve designation standard sieve designation alternative sieve designation num mm num mm num mmnum num mm num mm num mm num mm num mmnum num mm num mm num mm num mm num mmnum num mm num mm num mm num mm num mmnum num mm num mm num mm num mm num mmnum num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num in .
num in .
num in.num num num in .
num in .
num num in .
num in .
num in.num num num in .
num num in .
num num in .
num in .
num in.num num in .
num in .
num in .
num in .
num in.num num in .
num in .
num in .
num in .
num in.num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num mnum num mnum no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num these sieves are not in the standard series but they have been included because they are in common usage .
appendix b standard special provisions num b num initial edition appendix b standard special provisions to publication num general this appendix contains an explanation of the seven standard special provision ssp indices c d g i n p and s relating to publication num .
these indices and the full text of their ssp can be found on the ecms website .
ssps contain instructions standards requirements or directions applying to a project as set forth in the bid proposal but not contained within publication num .
in many applications they must be further tailored by designers and reviewers for use on specific projects .
internet access internet access to all ssps and their contents may be obtained on the ecms website .
once at the ecms homepage select construction projects then resources then special provisions .
revisions revisions will occur to the indices and their associated contents .
changes and updates to ssps may be identified by new versions example a to b or by their from dates .
as ssp entries are revised they will be retained in their original format with an appropriate notation to indicate documents that might have replaced them or their effective to dates .
thus entries will not be deleted only annotated and added .
therefore it will always be possible to determine what ssps were in effect at a certain point in time .
ssp indices .
following is an explanation of the seven indices relating to the series of ssps to publication num found in ecms c index .
this index addresses changes to specifications related ssps .
this index includes changes that will be included in the next change to publication num and are included on all projects .
they will exist until the next change to publication num becomes effective and then they will become inactive .
d index .
this index addresses design build related ssps .
this index includes ssps that are specific to design build projects only .
g index .
this index includes general provision related ssps .
the index associated with this series addresses issues that apply to publication num general provisions contract terms and conditions .
general provision related issues that apply to numbered sections within publication num are found in the s index .
i index .
this index includes standard and nonstandard construction item related ssps .
all non standard num construction items and many standard master construction items can not be included in bid proposals without reference to ssps found in this index .
n index .
this index includes nonpay item related ssps relating to those issues not paid for separately .
p index .
this index addresses provisional specification related ssps that are to be used on a caseby case or trial basis and require close monitoring when used in conjunction with construction projects .
they may be removed at any time but they also have the potential for being incorporated into the text of publication num .
an appropriate strikeoff letter further addresses each provision within this index .
s index .
this index includes section related ssps .
this particular index addresses issues and conditions that apply to current publication num numbered sections and also those numbered but considered seldom used su and therefore not currently found in the current edition of publication num .
appendix c designated special provisions num c num change no .
num appendix c designated special provisions general this appendix to publication num contains standard documents previously included in penndot bid proposals .
effective with the publication of publication num they will be maintained within this appendix in all versions hardcopy and internet and be referenced in bid proposals .
governing specifications the applicable designated special provisions and other details will be specified in a single standard special provision to each bid proposal .
this standard special provision is entitled governing specifications and applicable designated special provisions .
standard documents designated special provisions dsps that are referenced to this appendix in penndot bid proposals are dspnum .
offset provision for state contracts .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
contractor responsibility provisions .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
provisions for state contracts concerning the americans with disabilities act .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
diverse business db requirements for nonfederally funded construction projects .
see page cnum num .
dspnum .
disadvantaged business enterprise dbe requirements for federallyfunded construction projects .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
f. a. r.required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts fhwanum revised maynum num .
see attachments to the proposal .
see cnum .
dspnum .
special supplementantipollution measures august num num .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
nondiscriminationsexual harassment clause .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
contractor integrity provisions .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
executive order num with appendices a and b .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
buy america .
this is used on a project when any phase of the project was completed using federal funds .
see page cnum .
dspnum .
enhanced minimum wage provisions .
see page cnum .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum offset provision for state contracts the contractor agrees that the commonwealth of pennsylvania commonwealth may set off the amount of any state tax liability or other obligation of the contractor or its subsidiaries to the commonwealth against any payments due the contractor under any contract with the commonwealth .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum contractor responsibility provisions for the purpose of these provisions the term contractor is defined as any person including but not limited to a bidder offeror loan recipient grantee or lessor who has furnished or performed or seeks to furnish or perform goods supplies services leased space construction or other activity under a contract grant lease purchase order or reimbursement agreement with the commonwealth of pennsylvania commonwealth .
the term contractor includes a permittee licensee or any agency political subdivision instrumentality public authority or other public entity of the commonwealth .
num .
the contractor certifies in writing for itself and its subcontractors required to be disclosed or approved by the commonwealth that as of the date of its execution of this bidcontract that neither the contractor nor any such subcontractors are under suspension or debarment by the commonwealth or any governmental entity instrumentality or authority and if the contractor can not so certify then it agrees to submit along with its bidcontract a written explanation of why such certification can not be made .
num .
the contractor also certifies in writing that as of the date of its execution of this bidcontract it has no tax liabilities or other commonwealth obligations or has filed a timely administrative or judicial appeal if such liabilities or obligations exist or is subject to a duly approved deferred payment plan if such liabilities exist .
num .
the contractors obligations pursuant to these provisions are ongoing from and after the effective date of the contract through the termination date thereof .
accordingly the contractor shall have an obligation to inform the commonwealth if at any time during the term of the contract it becomes delinquent in the payment of taxes or other commonwealth obligations or if it or to the best knowledge of the contractor any of its subcontractors are suspended or debarred by the commonwealth the federal government or any other state or governmental entity .
such notification shall be made within num days of the date of suspension or debarment .
num .
the failure of the contractor to notify the commonwealth of its suspension or debarment by the commonwealth any other state or the federal government shall constitute an event of default of the contract with the commonwealth .
num .
the contractor agrees to reimburse the commonwealth for the reasonable costs of investigation incurred by the office of state inspector general for investigations of the contractors compliance with the terms of this or any other agreement between the contractor and the commonwealth that results in the suspension or debarment of the contractor .
such costs shall include but shall not be limited to salaries of investigators including overtime travel and lodging expenses and expert witness and documentary fees .
the contractor shall not be responsible for investigative costs for investigations that do not result in the contractors suspension or debarment .
num .
the contractor may obtain a current list of suspended and debarred commonwealth contractors by either searching the internet at httpwww.dgs.state.pa.us or contacting the department of general services office of chief counsel num north office building harrisburg pa num telephone no num num fax no num num appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum provisions for state contracts concerning the americans with disabilities act for the purpose of these provisions the term contractor is defined as any person including but not limited to a bidder offeror supplier or grantee who will furnish or perform or seeks to furnish or perform goods supplies services construction or other activity under a purchase order contract or grant with the commonwealth of pennsylvania state .
during the term of this contract the contractor agrees as follows num .
pursuant to federal regulations promulgated under the authority of the americans with disabilities act num c.f.r .
num et seq .
the contractor understands and agrees that no individual with a disability is on the basis of the disability to be excluded from participation in this contract or from activities provided for under this contract .
as a condition of accepting and executing this contract the contractor agrees to comply with the general prohibitions against discrimination num c.f.r .
num and all other regulations promulgated under title ii of the americans with disabilities act which are applicable to the benefits services programs and activities provided by the state through contracts with outside contractors .
num .
the contractor is to be responsible for and agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the state from all losses damages expenses claims demands suits and actions brought by any party against the state as a result of the contractors failure to comply with the provisions of paragraph num .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num appendix c designated special provision num dspnum diverse business db requirements for nonfederally funded construction projects note for use in nonfederally funded construction contracts administered and issued by the pennsylvania department of transportation department .
i .
general good faith effort requirements section num of title num of the pennsylvania consolidated statutes num pa.c.s .
num requires bidders on contracts funded pursuant to the provisions of title num transportation and num vehicle code administered and issued by the department to make good faith efforts to solicit subcontractors that are diverse businesses dbs as defined in section num .
the db requirements of section num apply to this contract .
under the statute bidders must make good faith efforts as set forth below to ensure that dbs have the opportunity to compete for and perform contracts .
do not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the award and performance of contracts .
failure to exert good faith efforts in the solicitation of subcontractors that are dbs may result in the bidder being declared ineligible for the contract .
document and submit to the department all good faith efforts to solicit subcontractors that are dbs as more fully described below .
bidders are encouraged to utilize and give consideration to secondtier or lowertier subcontractors offering to utilize dbs in the selection and award of contracts .
when declared the low bidder provide to the department within num calendar days of being declared the low bidder the name and business address of each subcontractor that is a db and will provide the contractor with construction or professional services in connection with the performance of the contract all as set forth below .
if it becomes necessary to replace a subcontractor that is a db at any time during the evaluation of a bid or construction of a project the bidder or contractor as appropriate immediately notify the department of the need to replace the db .
include the reasons for the replacement in the notice .
good faith efforts to solicit and use dbs are in addition to all other equal opportunity requirements of the contract .
failure to comply with requirements of section num or as specified may constitute a breach of contract and may result in imposition of sanctions as appropriate under section num of the procurement code num pa.c.s .
num relating to debarment and suspension .
the department requires that all prime contractors including db prime contractors perform at least num of the work on a department construction project .
the department strongly encourages db prime contractors to make additional outreach efforts to solicit dbs to perform subcontracting work on the project .
if there is a conflict between any term or condition of this special provision and the departments publication num specifications the term or condition of this special provision applies including but not limited to the definition of subcontractor and the prompt payment requirements in subsection vf .
ii .
definitions the following definitions apply for terms used in this specification a disadvantaged business .
a business that is owned or controlled by a majority of persons not limited to members of minority groups who are subject to racial or ethnic prejudice or cultural bias .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num b diverse business db .
a disadvantaged business minorityowned or womenowned business or service disabled veteranowned or veteranowned small business that has been certified by a thirdparty certifying organization and is both an ecms business partner and prequalified if required .
c ecms .
the departments engineering and construction management system .
d ecms business partner .
an individual firm partnership or corporation that has a valid registered business partner identification issued by the department through ecms .
e good faith effort review officer .
the departments executive deputy secretary for administration or hisher designee who reviews good faith efforts submitted by bidders .
f minorityowned business .
a business owned and controlled by a majority of individuals who are african americans hispanic americans native americans asian americans alaskans or pacific islanders .
g professional services .
an industry of infrequent technical or unique functions performed by independent contractors or consultants whose occupation is the rendering of the services including design professional services as defined in section num of the procurement code num pa.c.s .
num relating to definitions legal services advertising or public relations services accounting auditing or actuarial services security consulting services computer and information technology services and insurance underwriting services .
h servicedisabled veteran .
being in possession of a disability rating letter issued by the united states department of veterans affairs or a disability determination from the united states department of defense or if approved by the department of general services a surviving spouse or permanent caregiver of a such a servicedisabled veteran .
i servicedisabled veteranowned small business .
a business in the united states which is independently owned and controlled by a servicedisabled veteran or veterans not dominant in its field of operation and employs num or fewer employees .
l subcontractor .
any individual partnership firm or corporation entering into a contract with the prime contractor for work under the contract including those providing professional and other services .
m thirdparty certifying organization .
an organization that certifies a small business minorityowned business womenowned business or veteranowned small business as a db including the national minority supplier development council the womens business enterprise council the small business administration the department of veterans affairs and the pennsylvania unified certification program .
o veteran .
an individual who served on active duty in the united states armed forces including a reservist or member of the national guard who was discharged or released from the service under honorable conditions a reservist or member of the national guard who completed an initial term of enlistment or qualifying period of service and a reservist or member of the national guard who was disabled in the line of duty during training .
p veteranowned small business .
a business in the united states which is independently owned and controlled by a veteran or veterans is not dominant in its field of operation and employs num or fewer employees .
iii .
actions required by the bidder at the bidding stage and prior to award a submission requirements .
the apparent low bidder that will selfperform num of its contract is required to submit paper documentation by num p.m. prevailing local time within num calendar days after the bid opening .
submit paper documentation by email to minorityparticipationpa.gov or by fax to num num .
this paper documentation will become part of the contract .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num the apparent low bidder that will not selfperform num of its contract is required to demonstrate its good faith efforts to solicit subcontractors that are dbs through the departments ecms website by num p.m. prevailing local time within num calendar days after the bid opening .
present good faith efforts by either completing the commitment and solicitation screens in ecms or submitting paper documentation by email to minorityparticipationpa.gov or by fax to num num for all dbs that are not listed in ecms .
the good faith efforts will become part of the contract .
the paper documentation of good faith efforts must include the business name and business address of each db that is not an ecms business partner as well as all good faith efforts to solicit other dbs that are not ecms business partners .
supporting documentation must also include a db acknowledgment for each db providing construction or professional services proof of certification for dbs that are not ecms business partners and any explanation of good faith efforts the bidder would like the department to consider .
any services to be performed by a db are required to be readily identifiable to the project .
if you have any questions on using a db not listed on the ecms db listing contact the ecms help desk at num or at num .
when the seventh numth calendar day after the bid opening falls on a day that the department offices are closed submit the good faith efforts by num p.m. prevailing local time on the next business day .
if assistance with the db submission is needed contact the ecms help desk at num or at num num .
ecms help desk assistance is available num hours a day num days a week .
failure to electronically submit good faith efforts including the commitment and solicitation screens as well as all supporting paper documentation within num calendar days of the bid opening by the num p.m. deadline will result in rejection of the bid .
the apparent next lowest bidder will be notified by email to electronically submit good faith efforts in the manner described above by num p.m. prevailing local time within num calendar days notification .
b good faith efforts requirements .
good faith efforts are demonstrated by seeking out db participation in the project given all relevant circumstances .
the following illustrate the types of efforts that may be taken but they are not deemed to be exclusive or exhaustive .
the good faith review officer may consider other factors and types of efforts included in a bidders submission of good faith efforts if deemed relevant .
num .
efforts made to solicit through all reasonable and available means e.g .
use of the db directory attendance at prebid meetings advertising andor written notices the interest of all certified dbs with the capability to perform subcontracted work .
the bidder should provide written notification at least num calendar days before the bid opening to allow the dbs to respond to the solicitation .
the bidder must determine with certainty if the dbs are interested by taking appropriate steps to follow up initial solicitations .
num .
efforts made to select portions of the work to be performed by dbs .
this includes where appropriate breaking out contract work items into economically feasible units to facilitate db participation .
num .
efforts made to provide interested dbs with adequate information about the plans specifications and requirements of the contract in a timely manner to assist them in responding to a solicitation .
num .
efforts made to negotiate in good faith with interested dbs .
bidders are encouraged to make a portion of the work available to dbs and to select those portions of the work needs consistent with the available dbs so as to facilitate participation of dbs .
evidence of such negotiation includes the names addresses and telephone numbers of dbs that were considered a description of the information provided regarding the plans and specifications for the work selected for subcontracting and evidence as to why additional agreements could not be reached for dbs to perform the work .
a bidder using good business judgment would consider a number of factors in negotiating with subcontractors including db subcontractors and would take a firms price and capabilities into consideration as well as its own ability or desire to perform the work with its own work force .
num .
efforts made to thoroughly investigate dbs for qualification based on their capabilities .
bidders can not appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num reject or withhold solicitation of dbs as being unqualified without sound reasons based on this investigation of their capabilities .
the dbs standing within its industry membership in specific groups organizations or associations and political or social affiliations for example union vs. non union employee status are not legitimate causes for the rejection or nonsolicitation of bids in the contractors efforts to meet the good faith efforts requirement .
num .
efforts to assist interested dbs in obtaining bonding lines of credit or insurance .
num .
efforts to assist interested dbs in obtaining necessary equipment supplies materials or related assistance or services .
num .
efforts to effectively use existing databases and the resources of supportive services to assist in finding dbs .
iv .
actions to be taken by the department before award a approval .
if the apparent low bidder submits acceptable good faith efforts by the deadline and meets all other contract requirements the department will approve the submission .
the good faith review officer will make the determination of whether the good faith efforts are acceptable .
the contractor may be contacted for clarifications during the review .
b conditional approval .
the department will issue a conditional approval of the good faith efforts to the apparent low bidder if any db listed is not prequalified if required or not an ecms business partner at the time the department desires to award the contract .
c rejection of bid .
if the good faith review officer determines that the apparent low bidder has failed to make acceptable good faith efforts the bid will be rejected and the apparent low bidder will be notified of the rejection .
the department will then notify by email the apparent next lowest bidder on the project to electronically submit good faith efforts through ecms by num p.m. prevailing local time within num calendar days after notification .
when the seventh numth calendar day after the notification falls on a day the department offices are closed submit good faith efforts by num p.m. prevailing local time on the next business day .
v. actions required by the contractor during construction a db participation .
continue good faith efforts for the life of the project .
b subcontractor approval .
firms are not to commence work until they are approved .
all firms listed in the good faith efforts submission including those providing professional and other services must be submitted for subcontractor approval after the contract is executed and approved before the dbs actual performance of work .
submit for subcontractor approval any db to be utilized whether or not they are listed in the good faith efforts submission approved by the good faith review officer .
for a contractor that declared that it will selfperform num of its project adding a subcontractor requires a good faith effort .
attach the good faith effort documentation along with the public works employment verification form to the ecms subcontractor request .
when submitting a request for subcontractor approval provide in accordance with section nume a copy of the subcontract or agreement or a copy of the executed signature page a copy of the description of the scope of work and appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num a copy of the unit prices as they appear in the subcontract or agreement .
c conditional approval resolution .
continually monitor conditional approval of db subcontractors .
examples of these conditional approvals may include prequalification requirements .
d replacement of db .
if it becomes necessary to replace a subcontractor that is a db at any time during construction of the project immediately notify the department of the need to replace the db .
include the reasons for the replacement in the notice .
e additional work .
the obligation to make good faith efforts to solicit subcontractors that are dbs extends to additional work required for any classification of work which is identified as to be performed by a db .
f progress payments .
make payments to db subcontractors in accordance with the prompt payment requirements of chapter num subchapter d of the procurement code num pa.c.s .
num et seq .
performance of work by a db subcontractor in accordance with the terms of the contract entitles the subcontractor to payment .
enter db progress payments into ecms monthly .
the payments can not be entered into ecms until there is an approved subcontractor request .
bring to the attention of the department in writing any situation in which regularly scheduled progress payments are not made to db subcontractors .
g records and reports .
keep such project records as are necessary to perform the reporting function discussed below .
these records can be used as documentation of good faith efforts .
design these records to indicate num .
the number of db and nondb subcontractors and the type of work or services performed on the project .
num .
the progress and efforts made in seeking out db contractor organizations and individual dbs for work on the project .
num .
documentation of all correspondence personal contacts telephone calls etc .
to obtain the services of dbs for the project .
submit reports as required by the department .
certify that the amounts were actually paid to the db for work performed on the project and keep cancelled checks on file in the home office to reflect payment for the specific project and for inspection and audit by the department .
enter the payment information in ecms db payments within num business days after the end of the month and include the following a .
the number of contracts awarded with approved subcontractor requests to dbs noting the type of work and amount of each contract executed with each firm and including the execution date of each contract .
b .
the amount paid to each db during the month and the amount paid to date .
if no payments are made to a db during the month enter a zero num payment .
c. paid invoices or a certification attesting to the actual amount paid to each firm upon completion of the individual dbs work .
in the event the actual amount paid is less than the award amount provide a complete explanation of the difference .
maintain all such records for a period of num years following acceptance of final payment .
make these records available for inspection by the department .
vi .
actions required by the contractor following completion of construction when requested or within num days of the end of the contract submit a report to the department summarizing the use of approved subcontractors not on the ecms db listing .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num identify in the report the name of the subcontractor the nature of the work performed by the subcontractor i.e .
prime contractor direct or tiered subcontractor who certified the subcontractor as a db the subcontractors ecms business partner number the subcontractors ecms contract number and the amount of their subcontract .
for direct and tiered subcontractors provide the amount of the contract that is performed managed and supervised by the dbs own forces .
include the cost of supplies and materials obtained by the db for the work of the subcontract including supplies purchased or equipment leased by the db .
the amount a db subcontracts or leases to another non db firm must be excluded .
the value of the subcontracted work may be counted only if the dbs subcontractor is itself a db work that a db subcontracts to a nondb firm does not count .
vii .
actions to be taken by the department following construction upon completion of the work the department will review the actual db participation and make a determination regarding the contractors compliance with section num and this special provision .
sanctions may be imposed for noncompliance .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num appendix c designated special provision num dspnum disadvantaged business enterprise dbe requirements for federallyfunded construction projects note requires special provision for participation dbe goal percentage .
i. dbe goal the department has established in connection with this contract a dbe goal as specified in the proposal of the original contract amount for the utilization of firms owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals certified as dbes .
if the dbe goal is zero make an effort to identify and use dbes .
this dbe goal remains in effect for the life of the project .
include the following provisions paragraphs a through d in every subcontract so that such provisions will be binding not only upon the prime contractor but also upon each subcontractor supplier service provider or consultant .
a policy for federallyfunded projects .
it is the policy of the u.s. department of transportation dot and the department that dbes as defined in num cfr part num as amended part num and this specification be given the opportunity to participate in the performance of contracts financed in whole or in part with federal funds under this contract .
consequently the dbe requirements of part num as amended apply to this contract .
b dbe obligation .
take all necessary and reasonable steps to ensure that all dbes have the opportunity to compete for and perform contracts .
do not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the award and performance of penndot and dotassisted contracts .
c failure to comply with dbe requirements .
failure to carry out the requirements as specified constitutes a breach of contract and may result in termination of the contract being barred from bidding on department contracts for up to three num years withholding progress payments assessing sanctions assessing liquidated damages or any other remedy that the department deems appropriate .
failure to comply with dbe requirements may include but is not limited to failure to submit dbe minority participation and commitment within the time period specified failure to exert a reasonable good faith effort to meet the established dbe goal or failure to realize the approved dbe participation level set forth may result in the bidder being declared ineligible for the contract .
d small business enterprise sbe participation .
recruitment and utilization of certified sbes is in addition to all other equal opportunity requirements of the contract .
there is no sbe goal .
ii .
definitions the following definitions apply for terms used in this specification a disadvantaged business enterprise dbe .
a forprofit small business concern num .
an entity certified by the pennsylvania unified certification program paucp as listed on www.paucp.com .
num .
that meets the ownership and control requirements of the dbe certification program .
num .
that meets the personal net worth requirements of the dbe certification program .
b small business enterprise sbe .
a forprofit small business concern num .
an entity certified by the penndot as listed on www.dotsbe.pa.gov .
num .
that meets the ownership and control requirements of the small business element sbe certification appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num program .
num .
that meets the personal net worth requirements of the sbe certification program .
c commercially useful function .
a dbe performs a commercially useful function cuf when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing managing and supervising the work involved .
to perform a cuf the dbe must also be responsible with respect to materials and supplies used on the contract for negotiating price determining quality and quantity ordering the material installing where applicable and paying for the material itself .
d interdisciplinary review team irt .
a team of three representing both the bureau of equal opportunity and the bureau of project delivery contract management section that performs the initial review of the good faith effort documentation and makes the recommendation to the director .
e committee .
the good faith effort review committee .
f days .
calendar days .
in computing any period of time described in this specification the day from which the period begins to run is not counted and when the last day of the period is a saturday sunday or state holiday the period extends to the next day that is not a saturday sunday or state holiday .
similarly in circumstances where the penndot offices are closed for all or part of the last day the period extends to the next day on which the penndot offices are open .
g director .
director bureau of equal opportunity .
h dbe participation .
minority participation and commitment that is accessed by the departments ecms website www.dotnum.state.pa.usecms .
i revised dbe participation .
minority participation and commitment that is accessed by the departments ecms website which includes new dbe firms as well as those not affected by the revision .
j supplier .
a manufacturer regular dealer or transaction expeditorbroker .
num .
manufacturer .
a dbesbe that operates or maintains a factory or establishment that produces on the premises the materials supplies articles or equipment required under the contract and of the general character described by the specifications .
num .
regular dealer .
a dbesbe that owns operates or maintains a store warehouse or other establishment in which the materials supplies articles or equipment of the general character described by the specifications and required under the contract are bought kept in stock and regularly sold or leased to the public in the usual course of business .
to be a regular dealer the firm must be an established regular business that engages as its principal business and under its own name in the purchase and sale or lease of the products in question .
a person may be a regular dealer in such bulk items as petroleum products steel cement gravel stone or asphalt without owning operating or maintaining a place of business as provided above if the person both owns and operates distribution equipment for the products .
any supplementing of regular dealers own distribution equipment shall be by a longterm lease agreement and not on an ad hoc or contractbycontract basis .
whether a dbesbe firm meets the criteria for being treated as a regular dealer is a contractbycontract determination to be made by the department .
num .
transaction expeditorbroker .
a dbesbe packager broker manufacturers representatives or other persons who arrange or expedite transactions and who arrange for material dropshipments .
k service provider .
a dbesbe that performs work that does not have a prequalification requirement on a project .
l shortfall .
the difference between the dollar amount on the approved dbe commitment in ecms and the amount of payments to the approved dbe entities as listed in ecms .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num iii .
counting participation counting dbe participation toward the dbe goal utilization of certified dbes is in addition to all other equal opportunity requirements of the contract .
count dbe participation toward meeting the dbe goal for federal projects as follows if a firm is a certified dbe contractor or subcontractor at the time that submission of dbe minority participation and commitment documents are due the total dollar value of the contract awarded to the certified dbe is counted toward the applicable dbe goal as provided below .
any services to be performed by a dbe are required to be readily identifiable to the project .
a construction .
num .
prime contractor .
the department requires that all prime contractors including dbe prime contractors perform at least num of the work on a department project .
a dbe prime contractor will receive credit for all work performed with its own forces .
the department strongly encourages dbe prime contractors to make additional outreach efforts to solicit dbes to perform subcontracting work on the project .
num .
subcontractor .
when a dbe participates in a contract directly as a subcontractor or as a secondtier or lowertier subcontractor count only the value of the work actually performed by the dbe .
count the entire amount of that portion of a construction contract that is performed by the dbes own forces .
include the cost of supplies and materials obtained by the dbe for the work of the subcontract including supplies purchased or equipment leased by the dbe .
when a dbe subcontracts part of the work of its contract to another firm the value of the subcontracted work may be counted only if the dbes subcontractor is itself a dbe .
work that a dbe subcontracts to a nondbe firm does not count .
count expenditures to a dbe contractor only if the dbe is performing a cuf on that contract .
b materials and supplies .
num .
dbe manufacturer .
if the materials or supplies are obtained from a dbe manufacturer count num of the cost of the materials or supplies .
num .
dbe regular dealer .
if the materials or supplies are purchased from a dbe regular dealer count num of the cost of the materials or supplies .
there is no north american industry classification system naics code for regular dealer .
num .
dbe transaction expeditorbroker .
if the materials or supplies are purchased from a dbe which is neither a manufacturer nor a regular dealer count the entire amount of fees or commissions charged for assistance in the procurement of the materials and supplies or fees or transportation charges for the delivery of materials or supplies required on a job site provided the fees are determined to be reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services .
do not count any portion of the cost of the materials and supplies themselves .
c service providers .
count the entire amount of fees or commissions charged by a dbe firm for providing a bona fide service such as professional technical consultant or managerial services or for providing bonds or insurance specifically required for the performance the contract provided the fee is reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services .
d trucking firms .
count num of trucking costs using the following factors to determine what can be counted num .
count if the dbe is responsible for the management and supervision of the entire trucking operation for appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num which it is responsible on a particular contract and there can not be a contrived arrangement for the purpose of meeting dbe goals .
num .
count if the dbe owns and operates at least one fully licensed insured and operational truck used on the contract .
num .
count the total value of the transportation services the dbe provides on the contract using trucks it owns insures and operates using drivers it employs .
num .
the dbe may lease trucks from another dbe firm including an owneroperator who is a certified dbe .
if the dbe leases trucks from another dbe count the total value of the transportation services the lessee dbe provides on the contract .
num .
the dbe may also lease trucks from a nondbe firm including an owneroperator .
if the dbe leases trucks from a nondbe firm and the dbe operates these leased trucks with its own forces count the total value of the transportation services the lessee nondbe provides on the contract .
if the dbe leases trucks from a nondbe owneroperator count only the fee or commission it paid as a result of the lease arrangement .
do not count the total value of the transportation services provided by the lessee nondbe owneroperator since these services are not provided by a dbe .
num .
for purposes of this provision a lease must indicate that the dbe has exclusive use of and control over the truck .
this does not preclude the leased truck from being used for work for others during the term of the lease with the consent of the dbe so long as the lease gives the dbe absolute priority for use of the leased truck .
leased trucks must display the name and identification number of the dbe .
e specialty items .
in cases where specialty items and dbe involvement overlap follow the requirements specified in section numc .
counting sbe participation a recruitment and utilization of certified sbes is in addition to all other equal opportunity requirements of the contract .
b there is no sbe goal .
c count sbe participation the same as dbe participation .
iv .
actions required by the dbe at the bidding stage and prior to award for projects with a dbe goal include the applicable north american industry classification system naics codes for each type of work that the dbe firms quotes and intends to perform on the contract .
v. actions required by the bidder at the bidding stage and prior to award for projects with a dbe goal a submission preparation .
the prime contractor is obligated to obtain and to provide all applicable naics codes for each proposed dbe and type of work that it will perform on the contract .
b submission requirements .
when the dbe goal established by the department is met or exceeded the apparent low bidder is required to electronically submit evidence of such commitments by accessing the departments ecms website to complete and submit the dbe minority participation and commitment including dbe acknowledgement by num p.m. prevailing local time within five num calendar days after the bid opening .
the dbe minority participation and commitment detail screen must include the applicable appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num naics codes for each proposed dbe and type of work that it will perform on the contract .
if the dbe minority participation and commitment detail screen is not sufficient to provide all dbe naics information email the remaining dbe naics information to minorityparticipationpa.gov or fax the remaining dbe naics information to num num so that it is received by the time specified below for consideration .
dbe minority participation and commitment screen completed in ecms regarding commitments to certified dbes will become part of the contract .
when the fifth numth calendar day after the bid opening falls on a day that the penndot offices are closed submit the dbe minority participation and commitment by num p.m. prevailing local time on the next business day .
if assistance with the dbe submission is needed contact the ecms help desk at num or at num .
ecms help desk assistance is available num hours a day num days a week .
when the dbe goal established by the department is not met the department will not round up demonstrate a good faith effort gfe to meet the contract dbe goal .
demonstrate that the efforts made were those that a bidder seeking to meet the dbe goal established by the department would make given all relevant circumstances .
email the gfe documentation to minorityparticipationpa.gov or fax to num num num so that it is received by the time specified above for consideration .
all submissions must include as a part of the gfe documentation copies of each dbe and nondbe subcontractor quote when a nondbe subcontractor was selected over a dbe subcontractor for work on the contract due to the apparent low bidders determination that the dbes quote was too high or unreasonable .
also indicate on the dbe minority participation and commitment screen that the good faith effort is being submitted for consideration .
failure to electronically submit the dbe minority participation and commitment screen including dbe acknowledgement completed in ecms or email or fax any applicable gfe documentation for consideration within five num calendar days of the bid opening by the num p.m. deadline will result in the rejection of the bid .
the apparent next lowest bidder will be notified by email to electronically submit evidence of such commitments by accessing the departments ecms website to complete and submit the dbe minority participation and commitment by num p.m. prevailing local time within five num calendar days after notification .
c good faith effort requirements .
the demonstration of gfes is accomplished by seeking out dbe participation in the project given all relevant circumstances .
the following illustrate the types of efforts that may be taken but they are not deemed to be exclusive or exhaustive for more guidance on gfe requirements refer to num cfr part num appendix c. the director andor committee will consider other factors and types of efforts that may be relevant efforts made to conduct market research to identify small business contractors and suppliers and solicit through all reasonable and available means e.g .
use of the dbe directory attendance at prebid meetings advertising andor written notices the interest of all certified dbes who have the capability to perform the work of the contract .
the bidder should provide written notification at least num calendar days before the bid opening to allow the dbes to respond to the solicitation .
the bidder must determine with certainty if the dbes are interested by taking appropriate steps to follow up initial solicitations .
efforts made to select portions of the work to be performed by dbes in order to increase the likelihood that the dbe goal will be achieved .
this includes where appropriate breaking out contract work items into economically feasible units to facilitate dbe participation even when the prime contractor might otherwise prefer to perform these work items with its own forces .
efforts made to provide interested dbes with adequate information about the plans specifications and requirements of the contract in a timely manner to assist them in responding to a solicitation .
efforts made to negotiate in good faith with interested dbes .
it is the bidders responsibility to make a portion of the work available to dbe subcontractors and suppliers and to select those portions of the work or material needs consistent with the available dbe subcontractors and suppliers so as to facilitate dbe participation .
evidence of such negotiation includes the names addresses and telephone numbers of dbes that were considered a description of the information provided regarding the plans and appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num specifications for the work selected for subcontracting and evidence as to why additional agreements could not be reached for dbes to perform the work .
a bidder using good business judgment would consider a number of factors in negotiating with subcontractors including dbe subcontractors and would take a firms price and capabilities as well as contract dbe goals into consideration .
however the fact that there may be some additional costs involved in finding and using dbes is not in itself sufficient reason for a bidders failure to meet the contract dbe goal as long as such costs are reasonable .
also the ability or desire of a bidder to perform the work of a contract with its own work force does not relieve the bidder of the responsibility to make a gfe .
bidders are not however required to accept quotes from dbes if the price difference is too high or unreasonable .
bidders determination of a dbe as being unqualified without sound reasons based on a thorough investigation of their capabilities .
the contractors standing within its industry membership in specific groups organizations or associations and political or social affiliations for example union vs. nonunion employee status are not legitimate causes for the rejection or nonsolicitation of bids in the contractors efforts to meet the contract dbe goal .
another practice considered an inadequate gfe is the rejection of a dbe because its quotation for the work was not the lowest received .
however nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require the bidder or prime contractor to accept unreasonable quotes in order to satisfy the contract dbe goal .
efforts to assist interested dbes in obtaining bonding lines of credit or insurance .
efforts to assist interested dbes in obtaining necessary equipment supplies materials or related assistance or services .
efforts to effectively use the services of the departments dbe supportive services center services of the departments sbe supportive services center services of available minoritywomen community organizations minoritywomen contractors groups local state and federal minoritywomen business assistance offices and other organizations as allowed on a casebycase basis to provide assistance in the recruitment and placement of dbes .
vi .
actions to be taken by the department before award a approval .
if the apparent low bidder submits the dbe minority participation and commitment by the deadline and meets the contract dbe goal and all other contract requirements the department will approve the submission .
b conditional approval .
the department will issue a conditional approval of the dbe minority participation and commitment to the apparent low bidder if num any dbe listed on the dbe minority participation and commitment is not prequalified if required at the time the department desires to award the contract or num the distinction between regular dealer and transaction expeditorbroker is unclear .
c good faith effort review .
if the apparent low bidder submits the dbe submission by the deadline but fails to meet the contract dbe goal and requests a gfe review the department will review the gfe documentation .
if during the review of the contractors gfe information the reviewers have questions the contractor may be contacted for clarification .
the gfe steps are as follows num .
irt reviews and makes a recommendation to the director .
num .
the director either a .
approves recommendation that the gfe was met and the dbe minority participation and commitment will be approved or b .
recommends that the committee make a determination .
num .
if forwarded to them the committee meets and makes the final determination .
if the committee determines that the apparent low bidder met the gfe the dbe minority participation and commitment appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num will be approved .
if the committee determines that the apparent low bidder has failed to make a gfe the bid will be rejected and the apparent low bidder will be notified of the rejection .
the department will then notify by email the apparent next lowest bidder on the project to electronically submit evidence of such solicitations and commitments by accessing the departments ecms website by selecting dbe minority participation and commitment by num p.m. prevailing local time within five num calendar days after notification .
when the fifth numth calendar day after the bid opening falls on a day the penndot offices are closed submit the dbe minority participation and commitment by num p.m. prevailing local time on the next business day .
vii .
action to be taken by the department during construction to ensure that all obligations awarded to dbes under this contract are met the department will review the contractors dbe involvement efforts during the performance of the project whether or not the dbe is listed on the approved dbe minority participation and commitment .
the review will include a cuf review and analysis .
sanctions .
upon completion of the work the department will review the actual dbe participation and make a determination regarding the contractors compliance with the applicable requirements .
sanctions may be imposed for noncompliance or unwarranted shortfalls in the approved dbe goal .
viii .
actions required by the contractor during construction a dbe participation .
must continue to make gfes for the life of the project .
when dbe minority participation and commitment is approved with a dbe participation less than the contract dbe goal continue gfe toward meeting the contract dbe goal .
ensure that the commitment is attained .
proof of attainment is provided by payments to dbes and documented in ecms .
b dbe subcontractor approval .
firms listed on dbe minority participation and commitment are not to commence work until they are approved .
all firms listed on the approved dbe minority participation and commitment including those business types other than subcontractor i.e .
dealers truckers service providers must be submitted for subcontractor approval after the contract is executed and approved before dbes actual performance of work .
the subcontractor request must be equal to or greater than the committed amount .
submit for subcontractor approval any other dbe whether or not they are listed on the approved dbe minority participation and commitment .
when submitting request for subcontractor approval attach a copy of the dbe subcontract or agreement or a copy of the executed signature page a copy of the description of the scope of work and a copy of the unit prices as they appear in the dbes subcontract or agreement .
c conditional approval resolution .
continually monitor conditional approval of dbe subcontractors .
examples of these conditional approvals may include prequalification requirements and distinction between dealer and broker .
d substitution .
obtain approval before substituting a dbe or making any change to the dbe participation listed on the approved dbe minority participation and commitment or approved dbe subcontractor .
immediately request substitution authorization from the district in writing .
the request must include documentation supporting the substitution and written agreement from the dbe to the change .
include proof that a certified letter giving the dbe five num days to respond with acceptance or to notify the department of nonacceptance .
demonstrate that every effort has been made to allow the dbe to perform .
the district will contact the bureau of project delivery contract awards .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num num .
if the arrangement to be replaced is agreeable between the contractor and the dbe document the following procedures make a gfe in accordance with v.b to subcontract the work with another dbe or subcontract other work items to dbe firms to make up the dbe shortfall .
a prime contractors inability to find a replacement dbe at the contract price is not in and of itself adequate to support a finding that gfes have been made to replace the original dbe .
the fact that the prime contractor has the ability andor desire to perform the contract work with its own forces does not relieve the prime contractor of the obligation to make gfes to find a replacement dbe and it is not a sound basis for rejecting a prospective replacement dbes reasonable quote .
when the substitution results in meeting the dbe goal complete a revised dbe minority participation and commitment with dbe acknowledgement andor a revised subcontractor approval request within five num days of a revision being opened in ecms .
if the dbe performed on the project the revised dbe minority participation and commitment andor subcontractor approval request should include the total amount paid to the dbe before the dbe substitution .
when the substitution does not result in meeting the dbe goal complete a revised dbe minority participation and commitment with dbe acknowledgement andor a revised subcontractor approval request within five num days of a revision being opened in ecms and provide additional gfe documentation including num a statement of efforts made to negotiate with dbes for specific work or supplies including the names addresses telephone numbers and emails of those dbes that were contacted num the time and date each dbe was contacted num a description of the information provided to dbes regarding plans and specifications for portions of the work to be performed or the materials supplied and num an explanation of why an agreement between the prime contractor and dbe was not reached .
if the dbe performed on the project the revised dbe minority participation and commitment andor subcontractor approval request should include the total amount paid to the dbe before the dbe substitution .
good faith effort review .
the department will review the gfe documentation for substitution .
if during the review of the contractors gfe information the reviewers have questions the contractor may be contacted for clarification .
the gfe steps are as follows a .
contract awards reviews and if acceptable approves the gfe and dbe revision or recommends that the irt made the determination .
b .
the irt either approves recommendation that the gfe was met and the minority participations substitution will be approved or disapproves the gfe resulting in a shortfall requiring the contractor to continue gfes .
c. if forwarded to them the irt makes a final determination .
do not perform any of the dbe work included in the substitution request without prior approval from the department .
if the projected dbe participation on an approved dbe minority participation and commitment meets or exceeds the dbe goal amount for the contract without replacing the dbe then no contract shortfall exists .
a revised dbe minority participation and commitment andor subcontractor approval request must be submitted to reflect the decreased dollar amount .
num .
if the arrangement to be replaced is not agreeable between the contractor and the dbe the following procedures are required until a determination is made do not perform the dbe work without prior approval .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num the irt will review and make a determination and the district will notify both the contractor and the dbe .
the contractor or the dbe may request a meeting with the department by contacting the district office .
e sbe participation .
sbe firms are not to commence work until they are approved .
the sbe including those business types other than subcontractor i.e .
supplier trucking service provider must be submitted for subcontractor approval after the contract is executed and approved before the sbes actual performance of work .
f additional work .
when additional work is required for any classification of work which is identified on the dbe minority participation and commitment to be performed by the dbe at least num of this additional work will be performed by the same dbe unless the dbe submits in writing that it can not perform the work due to its own limitations .
g progress payments .
make payments in accordance with section num .
enter dbe and sbe progress payments into ecms monthly .
bring to the attention of the department in writing any situation in which regularly scheduled progress payments are not made to dbesbe subcontractors suppliers service provider or consultant .
h records and reports .
keep such project records as are necessary to determine compliance with dbe requirements .
these records can be used as gfe documentation .
design these records to indicate the number of disadvantaged and nondisadvantaged subcontractors small businesses regular dealers manufacturers consultants and service providers and the type of work or services performed on or materials incorporated in this project .
the progress and efforts made in seeking out dbe and sbe contractor organizations and individual dbes and sbes for work on this project .
documentation of all correspondence personal contacts telephone calls etc .
to obtain the services of dbes and sbes for this project .
submit reports as required by the department .
certify that the amounts were actually paid to the dbe and sbe for work performed on the project and keep cancelled checks on file in the home office to reflect payment for the specific project and for inspection and audit by the department .
enter the payment information in ecms dbe payments within num business days after the end of the month and include the following the number of contracts awarded to dbes and sbes noting the type of work and amount of each contract executed with each firm and including the execution date of each contract .
the amount paid to each dbe and sbe during the month and the amount paid to date .
if no payments are made to a dbesbe during the month enter a zero num payment .
paid invoices or a certification attesting to the actual amount paid to each firm upon completion of the individual dbes and sbes work .
in the event the actual amount paid is less than the award amount provide a complete explanation of the difference .
maintain all such records for a period of three num years following acceptance of final payment .
make these records available for inspection by the department and fhwa .
if dbe credit is being claimed for material costs included in a dbe subcontract or agreement submit purchase orders for the material to the inspectorincharge on a monthly basis .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition fhwanum revised may num num appendix c designated special provision num dspnum required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts i .
general ii .
nondiscrimination iii .
nonsegregated facilities iv .
davisbacon and related act provisions v. contract work hours and safety standards act provisions vi .
subletting or assigning the contract vii .
safety accident prevention viii .
false statements concerning highway projects ix .
implementation of clean air act and federal water pollution control act x .
compliance with governmentwide suspension and debarment requirements xi .
certification regarding use of contract funds for lobbying attachments a .
employment and materials preference for appalachian development highway system or appalachian local access road contracts included in appalachian contracts only i .
general num .
form fhwanum must be physically incorporated in each construction contract funded under title num excluding emergency contracts solely intended for debris removal .
the contractor or subcontractor must insert this form in each subcontract and further require its inclusion in all lower tier subcontracts excluding purchase orders rental agreements and other agreements for supplies or services .
the applicable requirements of form fhwanum are incorporated by reference for work done under any purchase order rental agreement or agreement for other services .
the prime contractor shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor lowertier subcontractor or service provider .
form fhwanum must be included in all federalaid designbuild contracts in all subcontracts and in lower tier subcontracts excluding subcontracts for design services purchase orders rental agreements and other agreements for supplies or services .
the designbuilder shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor lowertier subcontractor or service provider .
contracting agencies may reference form fhwanum in bid proposal or request for proposal documents however the form fhwanum must be physically incorporated not referenced in all contracts subcontracts and lowertier subcontracts excluding purchase orders rental agreements and other agreements for supplies or services related to a construction contract .
num .
subject to the applicability criteria noted in the following sections these contract provisions shall apply to all work performed on the contract by the contractors own organization and with the assistance of workers under the contractors immediate superintendence and to all work performed on the contract by piecework station work or by subcontract .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num .
a breach of any of the stipulations contained in these required contract provisions may be sufficient grounds for withholding of progress payments withholding of final payment termination of the contract suspension debarment or any other action determined to be appropriate by the contracting agency and fhwa .
num .
selection of labor during the performance of this contract the contractor shall not use convict labor for any purpose within the limits of a construction project on a federalaid highway unless it is labor performed by convicts who are on parole supervised release or probation .
the term federalaid highway does not include roadways functionally classified as local roads or rural minor collectors .
ii .
nondiscrimination the provisions of this section related to num cfr part num are applicable to all federalaid construction contracts and to all related construction subcontracts of num or more .
the provisions of num cfr part num are not applicable to material supply engineering or architectural service contracts .
in addition the contractor and all subcontractors must comply with the following policies executive order num num cfr num num cfr num title num usc section num the rehabilitation act of num as amended num usc num title vi of the civil rights act of num as amended and related regulations including num cfr parts num num and num and num cfr parts num num and num .
the contractor and all subcontractors must comply with the requirements of the equal opportunity clause in num cfr numb and for all construction contracts exceeding num the standard federal equal employment opportunity construction contract specifications in num cfr num .
note the u.s. department of labor has exclusive authority to determine compliance with executive order num and the policies of the secretary of labor including num cfr num and num cfr num .
the contracting agency and the fhwa have the authority and the responsibility to ensure compliance with title num usc section num the rehabilitation act of num as amended num usc num and title vi of the civil rights act of num as amended and related regulations including num cfr parts num num and num and num cfr parts num num and num .
the following provision is adopted from num cfr num appendix a with appropriate revisions to conform to the u.s. department of labor us dol and fhwa requirements .
num .
equal employment opportunity equal employment opportunity eeo requirements not to discriminate and to take affirmative action to assure equal opportunity as set forth under laws executive orders rules regulations num cfr num num cfr num num cfr num num cfr num and num cfr num and orders of the secretary of labor as modified by the provisions prescribed herein and imposed pursuant to num u.s.c .
num shall constitute the eeo and specific affirmative action standards for the contractors project activities under this contract .
the provisions of the americans with disabilities act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
set forth under num cfr num and num cfr num are incorporated by reference in this contract .
in the execution of this contract the contractor agrees to comply with the following minimum specific requirement activities of eeo a .
the contractor will work with the contracting agency and the federal government to ensure that it has made every good faith effort to provide equal opportunity with respect to all of its terms and conditions of employment and in their review of activities under the contract .
b .
the contractor will accept as its operating policy the following statement it is the policy of this company to assure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race religion sex color national origin age or disability .
such action shall include employment upgrading demotion or transfer recruitment or recruitment advertising layoff or termination rates of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship pre apprenticeship andor onthejob training .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num .
eeo officer the contractor will designate and make known to the contracting officers an eeo officer who will have the responsibility for and must be capable of effectively administering and promoting an active eeo program and who must be assigned adequate authority and responsibility to do so .
num .
dissemination of policy all members of the contractors staff who are authorized to hire supervise promote and discharge employees or who recommend such action or who are substantially involved in such action will be made fully cognizant of and will implement the contractors eeo policy and contractual responsibilities to provide eeo in each grade and classification of employment .
to ensure that the above agreement will be met the following actions will be taken as a minimum a .
periodic meetings of supervisory and personnel office employees will be conducted before the start of work and then not less often than once every six months at which time the contractors eeo policy and its implementation will be reviewed and explained .
the meetings will be conducted by the eeo officer .
b .
all new supervisory or personnel office employees will be given a thorough indoctrination by the eeo officer covering all major aspects of the contractors eeo obligations within thirty days following their reporting for duty with the contractor .
c. all personnel who are engaged in direct recruitment for the project will be instructed by the eeo officer in the contractors procedures for locating and hiring minorities and women .
d. notices and posters setting forth the contractors eeo policy will be placed in areas readily accessible to employees applicants for employment and potential employees .
e. the contractors eeo policy and the procedures to implement such policy will be brought to the attention of employees by means of meetings employee handbooks or other appropriate means .
num .
recruitment when advertising for employees the contractor will include in all advertisements for employees the notation an equal opportunity employer .
all such advertisements will be placed in publications having a large circulation among minorities and women in the area from which the project work force would normally be derived .
a .
the contractor will unless precluded by a valid bargaining agreement conduct systematic and direct recruitment through public and private employee referral sources likely to yield qualified minorities and women .
to meet this requirement the contractor will identify sources of potential minority group employees and establish with such identified sources procedures whereby minority and women applicants may be referred to the contractor for employment consideration .
b .
in the event the contractor has a valid bargaining agreement providing for exclusive hiring hall referrals the contractor is expected to observe the provisions of that agreement to the extent that the system meets the contractors compliance with eeo contract provisions .
where implementation of such an agreement has the effect of discriminating against minorities or women or obligates the contractor to do the same such implementation violates federal nondiscrimination provisions .
c. the contractor will encourage its present employees to refer minorities and women as applicants for employment .
information and procedures with regard to referring such applicants will be discussed with employees .
num .
personnel actions wages working conditions and employee benefits shall be established and administered and personnel actions of every type including hiring upgrading promotion transfer demotion layoff and termination shall be taken without regard to race color religion sex national origin age or disability .
the following procedures shall be followed a .
the contractor will conduct periodic inspections of project sites to insure that working conditions and employee facilities do not indicate discriminatory treatment of project site personnel .
b .
the contractor will periodically evaluate the spread of wages paid within each classification to determine any evidence of discriminatory wage practices .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition c. the contractor will periodically review selected personnel actions in depth to determine whether there is evidence of discrimination .
where evidence is found the contractor will promptly take corrective action .
if the review indicates that the discrimination may extend beyond the actions reviewed such corrective action shall include all affected persons .
d. the contractor will promptly investigate all complaints of alleged discrimination made to the contractor in connection with its obligations under this contract will attempt to resolve such complaints and will take appropriate corrective action within a reasonable time .
if the investigation indicates that the discrimination may affect persons other than the complainant such corrective action shall include such other persons .
upon completion of each investigation the contractor will inform every complainant of all of their avenues of appeal .
num .
training and promotion a .
the contractor will assist in locating qualifying and increasing the skills of minorities and women who are applicants for employment or current employees .
such efforts should be aimed at developing full journey level status employees in the type of trade or job classification involved .
b .
consistent with the contractors work force requirements and as permissible under federal and state regulations the contractor shall make full use of training programs i.e .
apprenticeship and onthejob training programs for the geographical area of contract performance .
in the event a special provision for training is provided under this contract this subparagraph will be superseded as indicated in the special provision .
the contracting agency may reserve training positions for persons who receive welfare assistance in accordance with num u.s.c .
numa .
c. the contractor will advise employees and applicants for employment of available training programs and entrance requirements for each .
d. the contractor will periodically review the training and promotion potential of employees who are minorities and women and will encourage eligible employees to apply for such training and promotion .
num .
unions if the contractor relies in whole or in part upon unions as a source of employees the contractor will use good faith efforts to obtain the cooperation of such unions to increase opportunities for minorities and women .
actions by the contractor either directly or through a contractors association acting as agent will include the procedures set forth below a .
the contractor will use good faith efforts to develop in cooperation with the unions joint training programs aimed toward qualifying more minorities and women for membership in the unions and increasing the skills of minorities and women so that they may qualify for higher paying employment .
b .
the contractor will use good faith efforts to incorporate an eeo clause into each union agreement to the end that such union will be contractually bound to refer applicants without regard to their race color religion sex national origin age or disability .
c. the contractor is to obtain information as to the referral practices and policies of the labor union except that to the extent such information is within the exclusive possession of the labor union and such labor union refuses to furnish such information to the contractor the contractor shall so certify to the contracting agency and shall set forth what efforts have been made to obtain such information .
d. in the event the union is unable to provide the contractor with a reasonable flow of referrals within the time limit set forth in the collective bargaining agreement the contractor will through independent recruitment efforts fill the employment vacancies without regard to race color religion sex national origin age or disability making full efforts to obtain qualified andor qualifiable minorities and women .
the failure of a union to provide sufficient referrals even though it is obligated to provide exclusive referrals under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement does not relieve the contractor from the requirements of this paragraph .
in the event the union referral practice prevents the contractor from meeting the obligations pursuant to executive order num as amended and these special provisions such contractor shall immediately notify the contracting agency .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num .
reasonable accommodation for applicants employees with disabilities the contractor must be familiar with the requirements for and comply with the americans with disabilities act and all rules and regulations established there under .
employers must provide reasonable accommodation in all employment activities unless to do so would cause an undue hardship .
num .
selection of subcontractors procurement of materials and leasing of equipment the contractor shall not discriminate on the grounds of race color religion sex national origin age or disability in the selection and retention of subcontractors including procurement of materials and leases of equipment .
the contractor shall take all necessary and reasonable steps to ensure nondiscrimination in the administration of this contract .
a .
the contractor shall notify all potential subcontractors and suppliers and lessors of their eeo obligations under this contract .
b .
the contractor will use good faith efforts to ensure subcontractor compliance with their eeo obligations .
num .
assurance required by num cfr numb a .
the requirements of num cfr part num and the state dots u.s. dotapproved dbe program are incorporated by reference .
b .
the contractor or subcontractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this contract .
the contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of num cfr part num in the award and administration of dotassisted contracts .
failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the contracting agency deems appropriate .
num .
records and reports the contractor shall keep such records as necessary to document compliance with the eeo requirements .
such records shall be retained for a period of three years following the date of the final payment to the contractor for all contract work and shall be available at reasonable times and places for inspection by authorized representatives of the contracting agency and the fhwa .
a .
the records kept by the contractor shall document the following num the number and work hours of minority and nonminority group members and women employed in each work classification on the project num the progress and efforts being made in cooperation with unions when applicable to increase employment opportunities for minorities and women and num the progress and efforts being made in locating hiring training qualifying and upgrading minorities and women b .
the contractors and subcontractors will submit an annual report to the contracting agency each july for the duration of the project indicating the number of minority women and nonminority group employees currently engaged in each work classification required by the contract work .
this information is to be reported on form fhwa num .
the staffing data should represent the project work force on board in all or any part of the last payroll period preceding the end of july .
if onthejob training is being required by special provision the contractor will be required to collect and report training data .
the employment data should reflect the work force on board during all or any part of the last payroll period preceding the end of july .
iii .
nonsegregated facilities this provision is applicable to all federalaid construction contracts and to all related construction subcontracts of num or more .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition the contractor must ensure that facilities provided for employees are provided in such a manner that segregation on the basis of race color religion sex or national origin can not result .
the contractor may neither require such segregated use by written or oral policies nor tolerate such use by employee custom .
the contractors obligation extends further to ensure that its employees are not assigned to perform their services at any location under the contractors control where the facilities are segregated .
the term facilities includes waiting rooms work areas restaurants and other eating areas time clocks restrooms washrooms locker rooms and other storage or dressing areas parking lots drinking fountains recreation or entertainment areas transportation and housing provided for employees .
the contractor shall provide separate or singleuser restrooms and necessary dressing or sleeping areas to assure privacy between sexes .
iv .
davisbacon and related act provisions this section is applicable to all federalaid construction projects exceeding num and to all related subcontracts and lowertier subcontracts regardless of subcontract size .
the requirements apply to all projects located within the rightofway of a roadway that is functionally classified as federalaid highway .
this excludes roadways functionally classified as local roads or rural minor collectors which are exempt .
contracting agencies may elect to apply these requirements to other projects .
the following provisions are from the u.s. department of labor regulations in num cfr num contract provisions and related matters with minor revisions to conform to the fhwanum format and fhwa program requirements .
num .
minimum wages a .
all laborers and mechanics employed or working upon the site of the work will be paid unconditionally and not less often than once a week and without subsequent deduction or rebate on any account except such payroll deductions as are permitted by regulations issued by the secretary of labor under the copeland act num cfr part num the full amount of wages and bona fide fringe benefits or cash equivalents thereof due at time of payment computed at rates not less than those contained in the wage determination of the secretary of labor which is attached hereto and made a part hereof regardless of any contractual relationship which may be alleged to exist between the contractor and such laborers and mechanics .
contributions made or costs reasonably anticipated for bona fide fringe benefits under section numbnum of the davis bacon act on behalf of laborers or mechanics are considered wages paid to such laborers or mechanics subject to the provisions of paragraph num.d .
of this section also regular contributions made or costs incurred for more than a weekly period but not less often than quarterly under plans funds or programs which cover the particular weekly period are deemed to be constructively made or incurred during such weekly period .
such laborers and mechanics shall be paid the appropriate wage rate and fringe benefits on the wage determination for the classification of work actually performed without regard to skill except as provided in num cfr numanum .
laborers or mechanics performing work in more than one classification may be compensated at the rate specified for each classification for the time actually worked therein provided that the employers payroll records accurately set forth the time spent in each classification in which work is performed .
the wage determination including any additional classification and wage rates conformed under paragraph num.b .
of this section and the davisbacon poster whnum shall be posted at all times by the contractor and its subcontractors at the site of the work in a prominent and accessible place where it can be easily seen by the workers .
b .
num the contracting officer shall require that any class of laborers or mechanics including helpers which is not listed in the wage determination and which is to be employed under the contract shall be classified in conformance with the wage determination .
the contracting officer shall approve an additional classification and wage rate and fringe benefits therefore only when the following criteria have been met i the work to be performed by the classification requested is not performed by a classification in the wage determination and ii the classification is utilized in the area by the construction industry and appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition iii the proposed wage rate including any bona fide fringe benefits bears a reasonable relationship to the wage rates contained in the wage determination .
num if the contractor and the laborers and mechanics to be employed in the classification if known or their representatives and the contracting officer agree on the classification and wage rate including the amount designated for fringe benefits where appropriate a report of the action taken shall be sent by the contracting officer to the administrator of the wage and hour division employment standards administration u.s. department of labor washington dc num .
the administrator or an authorized representative will approve modify or disapprove every additional classification action within num days of receipt and so advise the contracting officer or will notify the contracting officer within the numday period that additional time is necessary .
num in the event the contractor the laborers or mechanics to be employed in the classification or their representatives and the contracting officer do not agree on the proposed classification and wage rate including the amount designated for fringe benefits where appropriate the contracting officer shall refer the questions including the views of all interested parties and the recommendation of the contracting officer to the wage and hour administrator for determination .
the wage and hour administrator or an authorized representative will issue a determination within num days of receipt and so advise the contracting officer or will notify the contracting officer within the numday period that additional time is necessary .
num the wage rate including fringe benefits where appropriate determined pursuant to paragraphs num.b.num or num.b.num of this section shall be paid to all workers performing work in the classification under this contract from the first day on which work is performed in the classification .
c. whenever the minimum wage rate prescribed in the contract for a class of laborers or mechanics includes a fringe benefit which is not expressed as an hourly rate the contractor shall either pay the benefit as stated in the wage determination or shall pay another bona fide fringe benefit or an hourly cash equivalent thereof .
d. if the contractor does not make payments to a trustee or other third person the contractor may consider as part of the wages of any laborer or mechanic the amount of any costs reasonably anticipated in providing bona fide fringe benefits under a plan or program provided that the secretary of labor has found upon the written request of the contractor that the applicable standards of the davisbacon act have been met .
the secretary of labor may require the contractor to set aside in a separate account assets for the meeting of obligations under the plan or program .
num .
withholding the contracting agency shall upon its own action or upon written request of an authorized representative of the department of labor withhold or cause to be withheld from the contractor under this contract or any other federal contract with the same prime contractor or any other federallyassisted contract subject to davisbacon prevailing wage requirements which is held by the same prime contractor so much of the accrued payments or advances as may be considered necessary to pay laborers and mechanics including apprentices trainees and helpers employed by the contractor or any subcontractor the full amount of wages required by the contract .
in the event of failure to pay any laborer or mechanic including any apprentice trainee or helper employed or working on the site of the work all or part of the wages required by the contract the contracting agency may after written notice to the contractor take such action as may be necessary to cause the suspension of any further payment advance or guarantee of funds until such violations have ceased .
num .
payrolls and basic records a. payrolls and basic records relating thereto shall be maintained by the contractor during the course of the work and preserved for a period of three years thereafter for all laborers and mechanics working at the site of the work .
such records shall contain the name address and social security number of each such worker his or her correct classification hourly rates of wages paid including rates of contributions or costs anticipated for bona fide fringe benefits or cash equivalents thereof of the types described in section numbnumb of the davisbacon act daily and weekly number of hours worked deductions made and actual wages paid .
whenever the secretary of labor has found under num cfr numanumiv that the wages of any laborer or mechanic include the amount of any costs reasonably appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition anticipated in providing benefits under a plan or program described in section numbnumb of the davisbacon act the contractor shall maintain records which show that the commitment to provide such benefits is enforceable that the plan or program is financially responsible and that the plan or program has been communicated in writing to the laborers or mechanics affected and records which show the costs anticipated or the actual cost incurred in providing such benefits .
contractors employing apprentices or trainees under approved programs shall maintain written evidence of the registration of apprenticeship programs and certification of trainee programs the registration of the apprentices and trainees and the ratios and wage rates prescribed in the applicable programs .
b .
num the contractor shall submit weekly for each week in which any contract work is performed a copy of all payrolls to the contracting agency .
the payrolls submitted shall set out accurately and completely all of the information required to be maintained under num cfr numanumi except that full social security numbers and home addresses shall not be included on weekly transmittals .
instead the payrolls shall only need to include an individually identifying number for each employee e.g .
the last four digits of the employees social security number .
the required weekly payroll information may be submitted in any form desired .
optional form whnum is available for this purpose from the wage and hour division web site at httpwww.dol.govesawhdformswhnuminstr.htm or its successor site .
the prime contractor is responsible for the submission of copies of payrolls by all subcontractors .
contractors and subcontractors shall maintain the full social security number and current address of each covered worker and shall provide them upon request to the contracting agency for transmission to the state dot the fhwa or the wage and hour division of the department of labor for purposes of an investigation or audit of compliance with prevailing wage requirements .
it is not a violation of this section for a prime contractor to require a subcontractor to provide addresses and social security numbers to the prime contractor for its own records without weekly submission to the contracting agency .. num each payroll submitted shall be accompanied by a statement of compliance signed by the contractor or subcontractor or his or her agent who pays or supervises the payment of the persons employed under the contract and shall certify the following i that the payroll for the payroll period contains the information required to be provided under num anumii of regulations num cfr part num the appropriate information is being maintained under num anumi of regulations num cfr part num and that such information is correct and complete ii that each laborer or mechanic including each helper apprentice and trainee employed on the contract during the payroll period has been paid the full weekly wages earned without rebate either directly or indirectly and that no deductions have been made either directly or indirectly from the full wages earned other than permissible deductions as set forth in regulations num cfr part num iii that each laborer or mechanic has been paid not less than the applicable wage rates and fringe benefits or cash equivalents for the classification of work performed as specified in the applicable wage determination incorporated into the contract .
num the weekly submission of a properly executed certification set forth on the reverse side of optional form wh num shall satisfy the requirement for submission of the statement of compliance required by paragraph num.b.num of this section .
num the falsification of any of the above certifications may subject the contractor or subcontractor to civil or criminal prosecution under section num of title num and section num of title num of the united states code .
c. the contractor or subcontractor shall make the records required under paragraph num.a .
of this section available for inspection copying or transcription by authorized representatives of the contracting agency the state dot the fhwa or the department of labor and shall permit such representatives to interview employees during working hours on the job .
if the contractor or subcontractor fails to submit the required records or to make them available the fhwa may after written notice to the contractor the contracting agency or the state dot take such action as may be necessary to cause the suspension of any further payment advance or guarantee of funds .
furthermore failure to submit the required records upon request or to make such records available may be grounds for debarment action pursuant to num cfr num .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num .
apprentices and trainees a. apprentices programs of the usdol .
apprentices will be permitted to work at less than the predetermined rate for the work they performed when they are employed pursuant to and individually registered in a bona fide apprenticeship program registered with the u.s. department of labor employment and training administration office of apprenticeship training employer and labor services or with a state apprenticeship agency recognized by the office or if a person is employed in his or her first num days of probationary employment as an apprentice in such an apprenticeship program who is not individually registered in the program but who has been certified by the office of apprenticeship training employer and labor services or a state apprenticeship agency where appropriate to be eligible for probationary employment as an apprentice .
the allowable ratio of apprentices to journeymen on the job site in any craft classification shall not be greater than the ratio permitted to the contractor as to the entire work force under the registered program .
any worker listed on a payroll at an apprentice wage rate who is not registered or otherwise employed as stated above shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the classification of work actually performed .
in addition any apprentice performing work on the job site in excess of the ratio permitted under the registered program shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the work actually performed .
where a contractor is performing construction on a project in a locality other than that in which its program is registered the ratios and wage rates expressed in percentages of the journeymans hourly rate specified in the contractors or subcontractors registered program shall be observed .
every apprentice must be paid at not less than the rate specified in the registered program for the apprentices level of progress expressed as a percentage of the journeymen hourly rate specified in the applicable wage determination .
apprentices shall be paid fringe benefits in accordance with the provisions of the apprenticeship program .
if the apprenticeship program does not specify fringe benefits apprentices must be paid the full amount of fringe benefits listed on the wage determination for the applicable classification .
if the administrator determines that a different practice prevails for the applicable apprentice classification fringes shall be paid in accordance with that determination .
in the event the office of apprenticeship training employer and labor services or a state apprenticeship agency recognized by the office withdraws approval of an apprenticeship program the contractor will no longer be permitted to utilize apprentices at less than the applicable predetermined rate for the work performed until an acceptable program is approved .
b .
trainees programs of the usdol .
except as provided in num cfr num trainees will not be permitted to work at less than the predetermined rate for the work performed unless they are employed pursuant to and individually registered in a program which has received prior approval evidenced by formal certification by the u.s. department of labor employment and training administration .
the ratio of trainees to journeymen on the job site shall not be greater than permitted under the plan approved by the employment and training administration .
every trainee must be paid at not less than the rate specified in the approved program for the trainees level of progress expressed as a percentage of the journeyman hourly rate specified in the applicable wage determination .
trainees shall be paid fringe benefits in accordance with the provisions of the trainee program .
if the trainee program does not mention fringe benefits trainees shall be paid the full amount of fringe benefits listed on the wage determination unless the administrator of the wage and hour division determines that there is an apprenticeship program associated with the corresponding journeyman wage rate on the wage determination which provides for less than full fringe benefits for apprentices .
any employee listed on the payroll at a trainee rate who is not registered and participating in a training plan approved by the employment and training administration shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the classification of work actually performed .
in addition any trainee appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition performing work on the job site in excess of the ratio permitted under the registered program shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the work actually performed .
in the event the employment and training administration withdraws approval of a training program the contractor will no longer be permitted to utilize trainees at less than the applicable predetermined rate for the work performed until an acceptable program is approved .
c. equal employment opportunity .
the utilization of apprentices trainees and journeymen under this part shall be in conformity with the equal employment opportunity requirements of executive order num as amended and num cfr part num. d. apprentices and trainees programs of the u.s .
dot .
apprentices and trainees working under apprenticeship and skill training programs which have been certified by the secretary of transportation as promoting eeo in connection with federalaid highway construction programs are not subject to the requirements of paragraph num of this section iv .
the straight time hourly wage rates for apprentices and trainees under such programs will be established by the particular programs .
the ratio of apprentices and trainees to journeymen shall not be greater than permitted by the terms of the particular program .
num .
compliance with copeland act requirements .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements of num cfr part num which are incorporated by reference in this contract .
num .
subcontracts .
the contractor or subcontractor shall insert form fhwanum in any subcontracts and also require the subcontractors to include form fhwanum in any lower tier subcontracts .
the prime contractor shall be responsible for the compliance by any subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor with all the contract clauses in num cfr num .
num .
contract termination debarment .
a breach of the contract clauses in num cfr num may be grounds for termination of the contract and for debarment as a contractor and a subcontractor as provided in num cfr num .
num .
compliance with davisbacon and related act requirements .
all rulings and interpretations of the davis bacon and related acts contained in num cfr parts num num and num are herein incorporated by reference in this contract .
num .
disputes concerning labor standards .
disputes arising out of the labor standards provisions of this contract shall not be subject to the general disputes clause of this contract .
such disputes shall be resolved in accordance with the procedures of the department of labor set forth in num cfr parts num num and num .
disputes within the meaning of this clause include disputes between the contractor or any of its subcontractors and the contracting agency the u.s. department of labor or the employees or their representatives .
num .
certification of eligibility .
a .
by entering into this contract the contractor certifies that neither it nor he or she nor any person or firm who has an interest in the contractors firm is a person or firm ineligible to be awarded government contracts by virtue of section numa of the davisbacon act or num cfr numanum .
b .
no part of this contract shall be subcontracted to any person or firm ineligible for award of a government contract by virtue of section numa of the davisbacon act or num cfr numanum .
c. the penalty for making false statements is prescribed in the u.s. criminal code num u.s.c .
num .
v. contract work hours and safety standards act the following clauses apply to any federalaid construction contract in an amount in excess of num and subject to the overtime provisions of the contract work hours and safety standards act .
these clauses shall be inserted in addition to the clauses required by num cfr numa or num cfr num .
as used in this paragraph the terms laborers and mechanics include watchmen and guards .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num .
overtime requirements .
no contractor or subcontractor contracting for any part of the contract work which may require or involve the employment of laborers or mechanics shall require or permit any such laborer or mechanic in any workweek in which he or she is employed on such work to work in excess of forty hours in such workweek unless such laborer or mechanic receives compensation at a rate not less than one and onehalf times the basic rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of forty hours in such workweek .
num .
violation liability for unpaid wages liquidated damages .
in the event of any violation of the clause set forth in paragraph num. of this section the contractor and any subcontractor responsible therefor shall be liable for the unpaid wages .
in addition such contractor and subcontractor shall be liable to the united states in the case of work done under contract for the district of columbia or a territory to such district or to such territory for liquidated damages .
such liquidated damages shall be computed with respect to each individual laborer or mechanic including watchmen and guards employed in violation of the clause set forth in paragraph num. of this section in the sum of num for each calendar day on which such individual was required or permitted to work in excess of the standard workweek of forty hours without payment of the overtime wages required by the clause set forth in paragraph num. of this section .
num .
withholding for unpaid wages and liquidated damages .
the fhwa or the contacting agency shall upon its own action or upon written request of an authorized representative of the department of labor withhold or cause to be withheld from any moneys payable on account of work performed by the contractor or subcontractor under any such contract or any other federal contract with the same prime contractor or any other federallyassisted contract subject to the contract work hours and safety standards act which is held by the same prime contractor such sums as may be determined to be necessary to satisfy any liabilities of such contractor or subcontractor for unpaid wages and liquidated damages as provided in the clause set forth in paragraph num. of this section .
num .
subcontracts .
the contractor or subcontractor shall insert in any subcontracts the clauses set forth in paragraph num. through num. of this section and also a clause requiring the subcontractors to include these clauses in any lower tier subcontracts .
the prime contractor shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor with the clauses set forth in paragraphs num. through num. of this section .
vi .
subletting or assigning the contract this provision is applicable to all federalaid construction contracts on the national highway system .
num .
the contractor shall perform with its own organization contract work amounting to not less than num percent or a greater percentage if specified elsewhere in the contract of the total original contract price excluding any specialty items designated by the contracting agency .
specialty items may be performed by subcontract and the amount of any such specialty items performed may be deducted from the total original contract price before computing the amount of work required to be performed by the contractors own organization num cfr num. a .
the term perform work with its own organization refers to workers employed or leased by the prime contractor and equipment owned or rented by the prime contractor with or without operators .
such term does not include employees or equipment of a subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor agents of the prime contractor or any other assignees .
the term may include payments for the costs of hiring leased employees from an employee leasing firm meeting all relevant federal and state regulatory requirements .
leased employees may only be included in this term if the prime contractor meets all of the following conditions num the prime contractor maintains control over the supervision of the daytoday activities of the leased employees num the prime contractor remains responsible for the quality of the work of the leased employees num the prime contractor retains all power to accept or exclude individual employees from work on the project and num the prime contractor remains ultimately responsible for the payment of predetermined minimum wages the submission of payrolls statements of compliance and all other federal regulatory requirements .
b .
specialty items shall be construed to be limited to work that requires highly specialized knowledge abilities or equipment not ordinarily available in the type of contracting organizations qualified and expected to bid or propose on the contract as a whole and in general are to be limited to minor components of the overall contract .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num .
the contract amount upon which the requirements set forth in paragraph num of section vi is computed includes the cost of material and manufactured products which are to be purchased or produced by the contractor under the contract provisions .
num .
the contractor shall furnish a a competent superintendent or supervisor who is employed by the firm has full authority to direct performance of the work in accordance with the contract requirements and is in charge of all construction operations regardless of who performs the work and b such other of its own organizational resources supervision management and engineering services as the contracting officer determines is necessary to assure the performance of the contract .
num .
no portion of the contract shall be sublet assigned or otherwise disposed of except with the written consent of the contracting officer or authorized representative and such consent when given shall not be construed to relieve the contractor of any responsibility for the fulfillment of the contract .
written consent will be given only after the contracting agency has assured that each subcontract is evidenced in writing and that it contains all pertinent provisions and requirements of the prime contract .
num .
the num selfperformance requirement of paragraph num is not applicable to designbuild contracts however contracting agencies may establish their own selfperformance requirements .
vii .
safety accident prevention this provision is applicable to all federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts .
num .
in the performance of this contract the contractor shall comply with all applicable federal state and local laws governing safety health and sanitation num cfr num .
the contractor shall provide all safeguards safety devices and protective equipment and take any other needed actions as it determines or as the contracting officer may determine to be reasonably necessary to protect the life and health of employees on the job and the safety of the public and to protect property in connection with the performance of the work covered by the contract .
num .
it is a condition of this contract and shall be made a condition of each subcontract which the contractor enters into pursuant to this contract that the contractor and any subcontractor shall not permit any employee in performance of the contract to work in surroundings or under conditions which are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to hisher health or safety as determined under construction safety and health standards num cfr num promulgated by the secretary of labor in accordance with section num of the contract work hours and safety standards act num u.s.c .
num .
num .
pursuant to num cfr num it is a condition of this contract that the secretary of labor or authorized representative thereof shall have right of entry to any site of contract performance to inspect or investigate the matter of compliance with the construction safety and health standards and to carry out the duties of the secretary under section num of the contract work hours and safety standards act num u.s.c.num .
viii .
false statements concerning highway projects this provision is applicable to all federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts .
in order to assure high quality and durable construction in conformity with approved plans and specifications and a high degree of reliability on statements and representations made by engineers contractors suppliers and workers on federalaid highway projects it is essential that all persons concerned with the project perform their functions as carefully thoroughly and honestly as possible .
willful falsification distortion or misrepresentation with respect to any facts related to the project is a violation of federal law .
to prevent any misunderstanding regarding the seriousness of these and similar acts form fhwanum shall be posted on each federalaid highway project num cfr num in one or more places where it is readily available to all persons concerned with the project appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num u.s.c .
num reads as follows whoever being an officer agent or employee of the united states or of any state or territory or whoever whether a person association firm or corporation knowingly makes any false statement false representation or false report as to the character quality quantity or cost of the material used or to be used or the quantity or quality of the work performed or to be performed or the cost thereof in connection with the submission of plans maps specifications contracts or costs of construction on any highway or related project submitted for approval to the secretary of transportation or whoever knowingly makes any false statement false representation false report or false claim with respect to the character quality quantity or cost of any work performed or to be performed or materials furnished or to be furnished in connection with the construction of any highway or related project approved by the secretary of transportation or whoever knowingly makes any false statement or false representation as to material fact in any statement certificate or report submitted pursuant to provisions of the federalaid roads act approved july num num num stat .
num as amended and supplemented shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than num years or both .
ix .
implementation of clean air act and federal water pollution control act this provision is applicable to all federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts .
by submission of this bidproposal or the execution of this contract or subcontract as appropriate the bidder proposer federalaid construction contractor or subcontractor as appropriate will be deemed to have stipulated as follows num .
that any person who is or will be utilized in the performance of this contract is not prohibited from receiving an award due to a violation of section num of the clean water act or section num of the clean air act .
num .
that the contractor agrees to include or cause to be included the requirements of paragraph num of this section x in every subcontract and further agrees to take such action as the contracting agency may direct as a means of enforcing such requirements .
x .
certification regarding debarment suspension ineligibility and voluntary exclusion this provision is applicable to all federalaid construction contracts designbuild contracts subcontracts lowertier subcontracts purchase orders lease agreements consultant contracts or any other covered transaction requiring fhwa approval or that is estimated to cost num or more as defined in num cfr parts num and num .
num .
instructions for certification first tier participants a .
by signing and submitting this proposal the prospective first tier participant is providing the certification set out below .
b .
the inability of a person to provide the certification set out below will not necessarily result in denial of participation in this covered transaction .
the prospective first tier participant shall submit an explanation of why it can not provide the certification set out below .
the certification or explanation will be considered in connection with the department or agencys determination whether to enter into this transaction .
however failure of the prospective first tier participant to furnish a certification or an explanation shall disqualify such a person from participation in this transaction .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition c. the certification in this clause is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when the contracting agency determined to enter into this transaction .
if it is later determined that the prospective participant knowingly rendered an erroneous certification in addition to other remedies available to the federal government the contracting agency may terminate this transaction for cause of default .
d. the prospective first tier participant shall provide immediate written notice to the contracting agency to whom this proposal is submitted if any time the prospective first tier participant learns that its certification was erroneous when submitted or has become erroneous by reason of changed circumstances .
e. the terms covered transaction debarred suspended ineligible participant person principal and voluntarily excluded as used in this clause are defined in num cfr parts num and num .
first tier covered transactions refers to any covered transaction between a grantee or subgrantee of federal funds and a participant such as the prime or general contract .
lower tier covered transactions refers to any covered transaction under a first tier covered transaction such as subcontracts .
first tier participant refers to the participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a grantee or subgrantee of federal funds such as the prime or general contractor .
lower tier participant refers any participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a first tier participant or other lower tier participants such as subcontractors and suppliers .
f. the prospective first tier participant agrees by submitting this proposal that should the proposed covered transaction be entered into it shall not knowingly enter into any lower tier covered transaction with a person who is debarred suspended declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this covered transaction unless authorized by the department or agency entering into this transaction .
g. the prospective first tier participant further agrees by submitting this proposal that it will include the clause titled certification regarding debarment suspension ineligibility and voluntary exclusionlower tier covered transactions provided by the department or contracting agency entering into this covered transaction without modification in all lower tier covered transactions and in all solicitations for lower tier covered transactions exceeding the num threshold .
h. a participant in a covered transaction may rely upon a certification of a prospective participant in a lower tier covered transaction that is not debarred suspended ineligible or voluntarily excluded from the covered transaction unless it knows that the certification is erroneous .
a participant is responsible for ensuring that its principals are not suspended debarred or otherwise ineligible to participate in covered transactions .
to verify the eligibility of its principals as well as the eligibility of any lower tier prospective participants each participant may but is not required to check the excluded parties list system website httpswww.epls.gov which is compiled by the general services administration .
i .
nothing contained in the foregoing shall be construed to require the establishment of a system of records in order to render in good faith the certification required by this clause .
the knowledge and information of the prospective participant is not required to exceed that which is normally possessed by a prudent person in the ordinary course of business dealings .
j .
except for transactions authorized under paragraph f of these instructions if a participant in a covered transaction knowingly enters into a lower tier covered transaction with a person who is suspended debarred ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this transaction in addition to other remedies available to the federal government the department or agency may terminate this transaction for cause or default .
num .
certification regarding debarment suspension ineligibility and voluntary exclusion first tier participants a .
the prospective first tier participant certifies to the best of its knowledge and belief that it and its principals num are not presently debarred suspended proposed for debarment declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participating in covered transactions by any federal department or agency appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num have not within a threeyear period preceding this proposal been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered against them for commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining attempting to obtain or performing a public federal state or local transaction or contract under a public transaction violation of federal or state antitrust statutes or commission of embezzlement theft forgery bribery falsification or destruction of records making false statements or receiving stolen property num are not presently indicted for or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a governmental entity federal state or local with commission of any of the offenses enumerated in paragraph anum of this certification and num have not within a threeyear period preceding this applicationproposal had one or more public transactions federal state or local terminated for cause or default .
b .
where the prospective participant is unable to certify to any of the statements in this certification such prospective participant shall attach an explanation to this proposal .
num .
instructions for certification lower tier participants applicable to all subcontracts purchase orders and other lower tier transactions requiring prior fhwa approval or estimated to cost num or more num cfr parts num and num a .
by signing and submitting this proposal the prospective lower tier is providing the certification set out below .
b .
the certification in this clause is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was entered into .
if it is later determined that the prospective lower tier participant knowingly rendered an erroneous certification in addition to other remedies available to the federal government the department or agency with which this transaction originated may pursue available remedies including suspension andor debarment .
c. the prospective lower tier participant shall provide immediate written notice to the person to which this proposal is submitted if at any time the prospective lower tier participant learns that its certification was erroneous by reason of changed circumstances .
d. the terms covered transaction debarred suspended ineligible participant person principal and voluntarily excluded as used in this clause are defined in num cfr parts num and num .
you may contact the person to which this proposal is submitted for assistance in obtaining a copy of those regulations .
first tier covered transactions refers to any covered transaction between a grantee or subgrantee of federal funds and a participant such as the prime or general contract .
lower tier covered transactions refers to any covered transaction under a first tier covered transaction such as subcontracts .
first tier participant refers to the participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a grantee or subgrantee of federal funds such as the prime or general contractor .
lower tier participant refers any participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a first tier participant or other lower tier participants such as subcontractors and suppliers .
e. the prospective lower tier participant agrees by submitting this proposal that should the proposed covered transaction be entered into it shall not knowingly enter into any lower tier covered transaction with a person who is debarred suspended declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this covered transaction unless authorized by the department or agency with which this transaction originated .
f. the prospective lower tier participant further agrees by submitting this proposal that it will include this clause titled certification regarding debarment suspension ineligibility and voluntary exclusionlower tier covered transaction without modification in all lower tier covered transactions and in all solicitations for lower tier covered transactions exceeding the num threshold .
g. a participant in a covered transaction may rely upon a certification of a prospective participant in a lower tier covered transaction that is not debarred suspended ineligible or voluntarily excluded from the covered transaction unless it knows that the certification is erroneous .
a participant is responsible for ensuring that its principals are not suspended debarred or otherwise ineligible to participate in covered transactions .
to verify the eligibility of its appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition principals as well as the eligibility of any lower tier prospective participants each participant may but is not required to check the excluded parties list system website httpswww.epls.gov which is compiled by the general services administration .
h. nothing contained in the foregoing shall be construed to require establishment of a system of records in order to render in good faith the certification required by this clause .
the knowledge and information of participant is not required to exceed that which is normally possessed by a prudent person in the ordinary course of business dealings .
i .
except for transactions authorized under paragraph e of these instructions if a participant in a covered transaction knowingly enters into a lower tier covered transaction with a person who is suspended debarred ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this transaction in addition to other remedies available to the federal government the department or agency with which this transaction originated may pursue available remedies including suspension andor debarment .
certification regarding debarment suspension ineligibility and voluntary exclusionlower tier participants num .
the prospective lower tier participant certifies by submission of this proposal that neither it nor its principals is presently debarred suspended proposed for debarment declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participating in covered transactions by any federal department or agency .
num .
where the prospective lower tier participant is unable to certify to any of the statements in this certification such prospective participant shall attach an explanation to this proposal .
xi .
certification regarding use of contract funds for lobbying this provision is applicable to all federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts which exceed num num cfr num .
num .
the prospective participant certifies by signing and submitting this bid or proposal to the best of his or her knowledge and belief that a .
no federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid by or on behalf of the undersigned to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any federal agency a member of congress an officer or employee of congress or an employee of a member of congress in connection with the awarding of any federal contract the making of any federal grant the making of any federal loan the entering into of any cooperative agreement and the extension continuation renewal amendment or modification of any federal contract grant loan or cooperative agreement .
b .
if any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any federal agency a member of congress an officer or employee of congress or an employee of a member of congress in connection with this federal contract grant loan or cooperative agreement the undersigned shall complete and submit standard formlll disclosure form to report lobbying in accordance with its instructions .
num .
this certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into .
submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by num u.s.c .
num .
any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than num and not more than num for each such failure .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition num .
the prospective participant also agrees by submitting its bid or proposal that the participant shall require that the language of this certification be included in all lower tier subcontracts which exceed num and that all such recipients shall certify and disclose accordingly .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition attachment a employment and materials preference for appalachian development highway system or appalachian local access road contracts this provision is applicable to all federalaid projects funded under the appalachian regional development act of num .
num .
during the performance of this contract the contractor undertaking to do work which is or reasonably may be done as onsite work shall give preference to qualified persons who regularly reside in the labor area as designated by the dol wherein the contract work is situated or the subregion or the appalachian counties of the state wherein the contract work is situated except a .
to the extent that qualified persons regularly residing in the area are not available .
b .
for the reasonable needs of the contractor to employ supervisory or specially experienced personnel necessary to assure an efficient execution of the contract work .
c. for the obligation of the contractor to offer employment to present or former employees as the result of a lawful collective bargaining contract provided that the number of nonresident persons employed under this subparagraph numc shall not exceed num percent of the total number of employees employed by the contractor on the contract work except as provided in subparagraph num below .
num .
the contractor shall place a job order with the state employment service indicating a the classifications of the laborers mechanics and other employees required to perform the contract work b the number of employees required in each classification c the date on which the participant estimates such employees will be required and d any other pertinent information required by the state employment service to complete the job order form .
the job order may be placed with the state employment service in writing or by telephone .
if during the course of the contract work the information submitted by the contractor in the original job order is substantially modified the participant shall promptly notify the state employment service .
num .
the contractor shall give full consideration to all qualified job applicants referred to him by the state employment service .
the contractor is not required to grant employment to any job applicants who in his opinion are not qualified to perform the classification of work required .
num .
if within one week following the placing of a job order by the contractor with the state employment service the state employment service is unable to refer any qualified job applicants to the contractor or less than the number requested the state employment service will forward a certificate to the contractor indicating the unavailability of applicants .
such certificate shall be made a part of the contractors permanent project records .
upon receipt of this certificate the contractor may employ persons who do not normally reside in the labor area to fill positions covered by the certificate notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph numc above .
num .
the provisions of num cfr nume allow the contracting agency to provide a contractual preference for the use of mineral resource materials native to the appalachian region .
num .
the contractor shall include the provisions of sections num through num of this attachment a in every subcontract for work which is or reasonably may be done as onsite work .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum special supplementnum antipollution measures part i section a pennsylvania statutes act relating to abandoned mines act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to black powder act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to camp regulation act of nov. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to cavein or subsidence of surface above mines act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to cavingin collapse subsidence act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to coal land improvement act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to coal mine subsidence insurance fund act of aug. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to coal stripping act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to coal under state lands act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to control and drainage of water from coal formations act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to delaware river pollution act of apr .
num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to discharge of coal into banks of streams act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to excavation and demolition act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to explosives act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to explosives act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to flood control act of aug. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to general safety act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to hazardous materials transport act of june num num num pa. c.s.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to junkyards along highways act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to land use act of jan. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to maps and plans act of june num num num pa. stat .
num as amended .
num the listed state and federal statutes and regulations are for informational use .
not all of the statutes and regulations that may be applicable are listed .
in addition new statutes and regulations and amendments to existing statutes and regulations are promulgated at various times and sections of the statutes and regulations are renumbered .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition act relating to mine fires and subsidence act of april num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to mining safety zones act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to noise pollution act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to pollution control devices act of march num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to pollution from abandoned mines act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to potomac river pollution act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to preservation and acquisition of land for open space uses act of jan. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to public eating and drinking places act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to schuylkill river pollution act of apr .
num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to stream clearance act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to water power and water supply permits act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
act relating to weather modification act of jan. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
administrative code of april num num num pa. stat .
num num et seq .
as amended .
agricultural liming material act of march num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
air pollution control act of jan. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
anthracite strip mining and conservation act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
the bituminous mine subsidence and land conservation act of apr .
num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
bluff recession and setback act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
brandywine river valley compact act of sept. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
cave protection act of nov. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
chesapeake bay commission agreement act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
the clean streams law of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
coal and gas resource coordination act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
the coal mine sealing act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
coal refuse disposal control act of september num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
conservation and natural resources act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
conservation district law act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition the crimes code act of dec. num num num pa. c.s.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
dam safety and encroachments act of nov. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
delaware river basin compact act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
fish and boat code act of october num num num pa. c.s.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
flood plain management act of oct. num num section num and num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
the game and wildlife code act of july num num num pa. c.s.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
great lakes protection fund act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
hazardous material emergency planning and response act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
hazardous sites cleanup act of oct. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
highway vegetation control act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
history code act of may num num num pa. c.s.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
interstate mining compact act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
land recycling and environmental remediation standards act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
land and water conservation and reclamation act of jan. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
lowlevel radioactive waste disposal act of february num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
noncoal surface mining conservation and reclamation act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
noxious weed control law act of april num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
nutrient management act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
ohio river valley water sanitation compact act of apr .
num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
oil and gas act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
oil and gas conservation law act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
oil spill responder liability act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania anthracite coal mine act of nov. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania appalachian trail act of apr .
num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania bituminous coal mine act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania fertilizer law of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania occupational disease act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania pesticide control act of num act of march num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition pennsylvania safe drinking water act of may num num num pa. stat num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania scenic rivers act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania sewage facilites act of jan. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania solid waste management act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania solid wasteresource recovery development act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania used oil recycling act of apr .
num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
pennsylvania workmens compensation act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
phosphate detergent act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
plant pest act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
plumbing system lead ban and notification act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
project num land acquisition and borrowing act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
the public bathing law act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
publicly owned treatment works penalty law act of march num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
radiation protection act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
rails to trails act of dec. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
seasonal farm labor act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
sewage system cleaner control act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
sewage treatment plant and waterworks operators certification act of nov. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
site development act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
snowmobile law act of june num num num pa. c.s.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
state highway law act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
storage tank and spill prevention act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
storm water management act of oct. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
surface mining conservation and reclamation act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
susquehanna river basin compact act of july num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
vehicle code act of june num num num pa. c.s.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
water power and water supply act of june num num num pa. stat .
num as amended .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition water well drillers license act of may num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
wheeling creek watershed protection and flood prevention district compact act of aug. num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
wild resource conservation act of june num num num pa. stat .
num et seq .
as amended .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition part i section b pennsylvania regulations pursuant to the above statutes regulations are promulgated by state agencies and are published in the pennsylvania code pa. code .
the following are the sections of the pa. code that are assigned to the following state agencies pennsylvania department of environmental protectiontitle num of the pa. code pennsylvania department of conservation and natural resourcestitle num of the pa. code pennsylvania department of transportationtitle num of the pa. code pennsylvania department of labor and industrytitle num of the pa. code pennsylvania department of agriculturetitle num of the pa. code pennsylvania historical and museum commissiontitle num of the pa. code public utility commissiontitle num of the pa. code pennsylvania fish and boat commissiontitle num part ii of the pa. code pennsylvania game commissiontitle num part iii of the pa. code delaware river commissiontitle num of the pa. code .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition part ii federal statutes and regulations abandoned mine reclamation act of num num u.s.c.num num et seq .
acid precipitation act of num num u.s.c .
num num num .
act to prevent pollution from ships num u.s.c .
num as amended .
num c.f.rnum .
part num agricultural act of num num u.s.c .
num .
airport and airway development act of num num u.s.c .
num num .
anadromous fish conservation act num u.s.c .
numanumg et seq .
as amended .
appalachian regional development act of num num app .
num num num num num num num num num as amended .
asbestos hazard emergency response act of num see toxic substances control act sections num num u.s.c .
num .
atomic energy act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num num num aviation safety and noise abatement act of num num app .
u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
bankheadjones farm tenant act num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
clean air act num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num clean vessel act of num pub .
l. num title v num stat .
num .
coastal wetlands planning protection and restoration act num u.s.c .
num coastal zone management act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
num u.s.c .
refers to the united states code .
num pursuant to the above statutes regulations are promulgated by the federal agencies and are published in the code of federal regulations c.f.r ..
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act cercla of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
num c.f.r .
parts num num num num department of transportation act num u.s.c .
num num num num num num num num as amended .
emergency planning and community righttoknow act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num endangered species act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
energy supply and environmental coordination act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
num c.f.r .
parts num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num environmental quality improvement act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
num c.f.r .
parts num num federal agriculture improvement and reform act of num num u.s.c .
num numf num numd numc num num num .
federal aid in fish restoration act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num note also known as fish restoration and management projects act and the dingelljohnson sport fish restoration act .
federal facility compliance act of num pub .
l. num num stat .
num .
federalaid highway act num u.s.c.a .
num et seq .
as amended .
federal aid in wildlife restoration act num u.s.c .
num numanumi as amended .
federal insecticide fungicide and rodenticide act num u.s.c .
numy as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num federal land policy and management act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num federal power act num u.s.c .
numa et seq .
as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
parts numb num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num federal water project recreation act num u.s.c .
numlnum numlnum to num num as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num fish and game sanctuary act num u.s.c .
numb appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition fish and wildlife act of num num u.s.c .
numcnum num u.c.s.a .
numanumj as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
parts num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num u.s.c .
numa numj num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num num num fish and wildlife coordination act num u.s.c .
numc as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
parts num num num c.f.r .
parts num num num flood control num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended num c.f.r .
parts num num num num c.f.r .
parts num num fishermens protective act of num pelly amendment num u.s.c .
num num as amended .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
part num food quality protection act of num num u.s.c .
numy .
forest and rangeland renewable resources planning act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
forest ecosystems and atmospheric pollution control act of num num u.s.c .
num .
game and wildlife act num u.s.c .
numb numdnum numdnum nume numenum numknum nums numb nume as amended .
geothermal energy research development and demonstration act of num gerdda num u.s.c .
num num num num num as amended .
global climate protection act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
hazardous material transportation act num u.s.c .
num num u.s.c .
num num num num app .
num num num num as amended .
hazardous substance response revenue act of num num u.s.c .
num num num num .
hazardous materials transportation authorization act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
hazardous materials transportation uniform safety act of num num app .
num num .
intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of num see transportation equity act of the numst century tea num .
lacey act amendments of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
land and water conservation fund act of num num u.s.c .
numd numlnum numlnum as amended .
leadbased paint exposure reduction act num u.s.c .
num .
leadbased paint poisoning prevention act num u.s.c .
num num num num num num as amended .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition lead contamination control act of num num u.s.c .
num note numbnum numjnum numjnum to num .
lowlevel radioactive waste policy amendments act of num num u.s.c .
numbnumj as amended .
magnusonstevens fisheries conservation and management act num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
marine protection research and sanctuaries act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
migratory bird conservation act num u.s.c .
numr as amended .
migratory bird treaty act num u.s.c .
num numa num num .
mining and mineral resources research institutes act num u.s.c .
num .
multipleuse sustainedyield act of num num u.s.c .
num num num as amended .
national climate program act num u.s.c .
num as amended .
national coastal monitoring act num u.s.c .
num .
national contaminated sediment assessment and management act num u.s.c .
num .
national emission standards act num u.s.c .
num as amended .
national energy conservation policy act pub .
l. num num stat .
num as amended .
national environmental policy act of num num u.s.c .
num num num as amended .
national invasive species act of num num u.s.c .
num .
national ocean pollution planning act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
national trails system act num u.s.c .
num as amended .
national wildlife refuge system administration act of num num u.s.c .
numdd numee nums as amended .
noise control act of num num u.s.c .
num .
nuclear waste policy act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
oil pollution act num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
oil pollution act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
organotin antifouling paint control act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
outer continental shelf lands act amendments of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
pollution prevention act of num num u.s.c .
num .
public health service act num u.s.c .
numfnumjnum .
radon gas and indoor air quality research act of num num u.s.c .
num .
recreation use of conservation areas act num u.s.c .
numk .
refuse act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition renewable resources extension act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
resource conservation and recovery act of num num u.s.c .
num .
river and harbor act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
safe drinking water act see public health service act sections num num u.s.c .
numf numjnum as amended .
shore protection act of num num u.s.c .
num num num .
soil and water resources conservation act of num num u.s.c .
num as amended .
soil conservation and domestic allotment act num u.s.c .
numa et seq .
as amended .
solid waste disposal act num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
surface mining control and reclamation act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
toxic substances control act num u.s.c .
num as amended .
transportation equity act of the numst century tea num pub .
l. num num stat .
num as amended .
travel and transportation reform act of num num u.s.c .
num et seq .
united states public vessel medical waste antidumping act of num num u.s.c .
num .
uranium mill tailings radiation control act of num num u.s.c .
num num .
water bank act num u.s.c .
num as amended .
water pollution prevention and control act num u.s.c .
num et seq .
as amended .
commonly known as the clean water act .
num c.f.r .
part num num c.f.r .
parts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num water resources research act of num num u.s.c .
num .
water resources development act of num num u.s.c .
numj .
watershed protection and flood prevention act num u.s.c .
num num u.s.c .
numb .
wetlands loan act num u.s.c .
numknumknum as amended .
wilderness act num u.s.c .
num as amended .
wood residue utilization act of num num u.s.c .
num .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum nondiscriminationsexual harassment clause nondiscriminationsexual harassment clause during the term of the contract the contractor agrees as follows num .
in the hiring of any employees for the manufacture of supplies performance of work or any other activity required under the contract or any subcontract the contractor subcontractor or any person acting on behalf of the contractor or subcontractor shall not by reason of gender race creed or color discriminate against any citizen of this state who is qualified and available to perform the work to which the employment relates .
num .
neither the contractor nor any subcontractor nor any person on their behalf shall in any manner discriminate against or intimidate any employee involved in the manufacture of supplies the performance of work or any other activity required under the contract on account of gender race creed or color .
num .
the contractor and any subcontractors shall establish and maintain a written sexual harassment policy and shall inform their employees of the policy .
the policy must contain a notice that sexual harassment will not be tolerated and employees who practice it will be disciplined .
num .
the contractor and each subcontractor shall not discriminate by reason of gender race creed or color against any subcontractor or supplier who is qualified to perform the work to which the contract relates .
num .
the contractor and each subcontractor shall within the time periods requested by the state furnish all necessary employment documents and records to and permit access to their books records and accounts by the contracting agency and the bureau of minority and women business opportunities bmwbo for purpose of ascertaining compliance with provisions of this nondiscriminationsexual harassment clause .
within num days after award of any contract the contractor shall be required to complete sign and submit form stdnum the initial contract compliance data form .
if the contract is a construction contract then the contractor shall be required to complete sign and submit form stdnum the monthly contract compliance report for construction contractors each month no later than the fifteenth of the month following the reporting period beginning with the initial job conference and continuing through the completion of the project .
those contractors who have fewer than five employees or whose employees are all from the same family or who have completed the form stdnum within the past num months may within the num days request an exemption from the form stdnum submission requirement from the contracting agency .
num .
the contractor shall include the provisions of this nondiscriminationsexual harassment clause in every subcontract so that those provisions applicable to subcontractors will be binding upon each subcontractor .
num .
the state may cancel or terminate the contract and all money due or to become due under the contract may be forfeited for a violation of the terms and conditions of this nondiscriminationsexual harassment clause .
in addition the agency may proceed with debarment or suspension and may place the contractor in the contractor responsibility file .
dated num appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum contractor integrity provisions it is essential that those who seek to contract with the commonwealth of pennsylvania commonwealth observe high standards of honesty and integrity .
they must conduct themselves in a manner that fosters public confidence in the integrity of the commonwealth procurement process .
in furtherance of this policy contractor agrees to the following num .
contractor shall maintain the highest standards of honesty and integrity during the performance of this contract and shall take no action in violation of state or federal laws or regulations or any other applicable laws or regulations or other requirements applicable to contractor or that govern contracting with the commonwealth .
num .
contractor shall establish and implement a written business integrity policy which includes at a minimum the requirements of these provisions as they relate to contractor employee activity with the commonwealth and commonwealth employees and which is distributed and made known to all contractor employees .
num .
contractor its affiliates agents and employees shall not influence or attempt to influence any commonwealth employee to breach the standards of ethical conduct for commonwealth employees set forth in the public official and employees ethics act num pa.c.s .
num et seq .
the state adverse interest act num p.s .
num et seq .
and the governors code of conduct executive order num num pa. code num et seq .
or to breach any other state or federal law or regulation .
num .
contractor its affiliates agents and employees shall not offer give or agree or promise to give any gratuity to a commonwealth official or employee or to any other person at the direction or request of any commonwealth official or employee .
num .
contractor its affiliates agents and employees shall not offer give or agree or promise to give any gratuity to a commonwealth official or employee or to any other person the acceptance of which would violate the governors code of conduct executive order num num pa. code num et seq .
or any statute regulation statement of policy management directive or any other published standard of the commonwealth .
num .
contractor its affiliates agents and employees shall not directly or indirectly offer confer or agree to confer any pecuniary benefit on anyone as consideration for the decision opinion recommendation vote other exercise of discretion or violation of a known legal duty by any commonwealth official or employee .
num .
contractor its affiliates agents employees or anyone in privity with him or her shall not accept or agree to accept from any person any gratuity in connection with the performance of work under the contract except as provided in the contract .
num .
contractor shall not have a financial interest in any other contractor subcontractor or supplier providing services labor or material on this project unless the financial interest is disclosed to the commonwealth in writing and the commonwealth consents to contractors financial interest prior to commonwealth execution of the contract .
contractor shall disclose the financial interest to the commonwealth at the time of bid or proposal submission or if no bids or proposals are solicited no later than contractors submission of the contract signed by contractor .
num .
contractor its affiliates agents and employees shall not disclose to others any information documents reports data or records provided to or prepared by contractor under this contract without the prior written approval of the commonwealth except as required by the pennsylvania righttoknow law num p.s .
num or other applicable law or as otherwise provided in this contract .
any information documents appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition reports data or records secured by contractor from the commonwealth or a third party in connection with the performance of this contract shall be kept confidential unless disclosure of such information is a .
approved in writing by the commonwealth prior to its disclosure or b .
directed by a court or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction unless the contract requires prior commonwealth approval or c. required for compliance with federal or state securities laws or the requirements of national securities exchanges or d. necessary for purposes of contractors internal assessment and review or e. deemed necessary by contractor in any action to enforce the provisions of this contract or to defend or prosecute claims by or against parties other than the commonwealth or f. permitted by the valid authorization of a third party to whom the information documents reports data or records pertain or g. otherwise required by law .
num .
contractor certifies that neither it nor any of its officers directors associates partners limited partners or individual owners has been officially notified of charged with or convicted of any of the following and agrees to immediately notify the commonwealth agency contracting officer in writing if and when it or any officer director associate partner limited partner or individual owner has been officially notified of charged with convicted of or officially notified of a governmental determination of any of the following a .
commission of embezzlement theft forgery bribery falsification or destruction of records making false statements or receiving stolen property .
b .
commission of fraud or a criminal offense or other improper conduct or knowledge of approval of or acquiescence in such activities by contractor or any affiliate officer director associate partner limited partner individual owner or employee or other individual or entity associated with num obtaining num attempting to obtain or num performing a public contract or subcontract .
contractors acceptance of the benefits derived from the conduct shall be deemed evidence of such knowledge approval or acquiescence .
c. violation of federal or state antitrust statutes .
d. violation of any federal or state law regulating campaign contributions .
e. violation of any federal or state environmental law .
f. violation of any federal or state law regulating hours of labor minimum wage standards or prevailing wage standards discrimination in wages or child labor violations .
g. violation of the act of june num num p.l.num no .
num known as the workers compensation act num p.s .
num et seq .
h. violation of any federal or state law prohibiting discrimination in employment .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition i. debarment by any agency or department of the federal government or by any other state .
j .
any other crime involving moral turpitude or business honesty or integrity .
contractor acknowledges that the commonwealth may in its sole discretion terminate the contract for cause upon such notification or when the commonwealth otherwise learns that contractor has been officially notified charged or convicted .
num .
if this contract was awarded to contractor on a nonbid basis contractor must as required by section num of the pennsylvania election code file a report of political contributions with the secretary of the commonwealth on or before february num of the next calendar year .
the report must include an itemized list of all political contributions known to contractor by virtue of the knowledge possessed by every officer director associate partner limited partner or individual owner that has been made by a .
any officer director associate partner limited partner individual owner or members of the immediate family when the contributions exceed an aggregate of one thousand dollars num by any individual during the preceding year or b .
any employee or members of his immediate family whose political contribution exceeded one thousand dollars num during the preceding year .
to obtain a copy of the reporting form contractor shall contact the bureau of commissions elections and legislation division of campaign finance and lobbying disclosure room num north office building harrisburg pa num .
num .
contractor shall comply with requirements of the lobbying disclosure act num pa.c.s .
numanum et seq .
and the regulations promulgated pursuant to that law .
contractor employee activities prior to or outside of formal commonwealth procurement communication protocol are considered lobbying and subjects the contractor employees to the registration and reporting requirements of the law .
actions by outside lobbyists on contractors behalf no matter the procurement stage are not exempt and must be reported .
num .
when contractor has reason to believe that any breach of ethical standards as set forth in law the governors code of conduct or in these provisions has occurred or may occur including but not limited to contact by a commonwealth officer or employee which if acted upon would violate such ethical standards contractor shall immediately notify the commonwealth contracting officer or commonwealth inspector general in writing .
num .
contractor by submission of its bid or proposal andor execution of this contract and by the submission of any bills invoices or requests for payment pursuant to the contract certifies and represents that it has not violated any of these contractor integrity provisions in connection with the submission of the bid or proposal during any contract negotiations or during the term of the contract .
num .
contractor shall cooperate with the office of inspector general in its investigation of any alleged commonwealth employee breach of ethical standards and any alleged contractor noncompliance with these provisions .
contractor agrees to make identified contractor employees available for interviews at reasonable times and places .
contractor upon the inquiry or request of the office of inspector general shall provide or if appropriate make promptly available for inspection or copying any information of any type or form deemed relevant by the inspector general to contractors integrity and compliance with these provisions .
such information may include but shall not be limited to contractors business or financial records documents or files of any type or form that refers to or concern this contract .
num .
for violation of any of these contractor integrity provisions the commonwealth may terminate this and any other contract with contractor claim liquidated damages in an amount equal to the value of anything received in breach of these provisions claim damages for all additional costs and expenses incurred in obtaining another contractor to complete performance under this contract and debar and suspend contractor appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition from doing business with the commonwealth .
these rights and remedies are cumulative and the use or non use of any one shall not preclude the use of all or any other .
these rights and remedies are in addition to those the commonwealth may have under law statute regulation or otherwise .
num .
for purposes of these contractor integrity provisions the following terms shall have the meanings found in this paragraph num. a .
confidential information means information that a is not already in the public domain b is not available to the public upon request c is not or does not become generally known to contractor from a third party without an obligation to maintain its confidentiality d has not become generally known to the public through a act or omission of contractor or e has not been independently developed by contractor without the use of confidential information of the commonwealth .
b .
consent means written permission signed by a duly authorized officer or employee of the commonwealth provided that where the material facts have been disclosed in writing by pre qualification bid proposal or contractual terms the commonwealth shall be deemed to have consented by virtue of execution of this contract .
c. contractor means the individual or entity that has entered into this contract with the commonwealth including those directors officers partners managers and owners having more than a five percent interest in contractor .
d. financial interest means num ownership of more than a five percent interest in any business or num holding a position as an officer director trustee partner employee or holding any position of management .
e. gratuity means tendering giving or providing anything of more than nominal monetary value including but not limited to cash travel entertainment gifts meals lodging loans subscriptions advances deposits of money services employment or contracts of any kind .
the exceptions set forth in the governors code of conduct executive order num the num pa. code numb shall apply .
f. immediate family means a spouse and any unemancipated child .
g. nonbid basis means a contract awarded or executed by the commonwealth with contractor without seeking bids or proposals from any other potential bidder or offeror .
h. political contribution means any payment gift subscription assessment contract payment for services dues loan forbearance advance or deposit of money or any valuable thing to a candidate for public office or to a political committee including but not limited to a political action committee made for the purpose of influencing any election in the commonwealth of pennsylvania or for paying debts incurred by or for a candidate or committee before or after any election .
dated num appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum executive order num with appendix a and b notice of requirement for affirmative action to ensure equal employment opportunity a the offerors or bidders attention is called to the equal opportunity clause and the standard federal equal employment opportunity construction contract specifications set forth herein .
b the goals and timetables for minority and female participation expressed in percentage terms for the contractors aggregate workforce in each trade on all construction work in the covered area are as follows timetables goals for minority participation in each trade goals for female participation in each trade see attached appendix b see attached appendix a the hours of minority and female employment is to be reported monthly by the contractor on standard form num to be supplied by penndot and expressed in percentage terms of the contractors aggregate workhours for each trade craft .
these goals are applicable to all the contractors construction work whether or not it is federal or federally assisted performed in the covered area .
if the contractor performs construction work in a geographical area located outside of the covered area it shall apply the goals established for such geographical area where the work is actually performed .
with regard to this second area the contractor also is subject to the goals for both its federally involved and nonfederally involved construction .
the contractors compliance with the executive order and the regulations in num cfr part num shall be based on its implementation of the equal opportunity clause specific affirmative action obligations required by the specifications set forth in num cfr numa and its efforts to meet the goals .
the hours of minority and female employment and training must be substantially uniform throughout the length of the contract and in each trade and the contractor shall make a good faith effort to employ minorities and women evenly on each of its projects .
the transfer of minority or female employees or trainees from contractor to contractor or from project to project for the sole purpose of meeting the contractors goals shall be a violation of the contract the executive order and the regulations in num cfr part num .
compliance with the goals will be measured against the total work hours performed .
c the contractor shall provide written notification to penndot within num working days of award of any construction subcontract in excess of num at any tier for construction work under the contract resulting from this solicitation .
the notification shall list the name address and telephone number of the subcontractor employer identification number of the subcontractor estimated dollar amount of the subcontract estimated starting and completion dates of the subcontract and the geographical area in which the subcontract is to be performed .
d as used in this notice and in the contract resulting from this solicitation the covered area is indicated in the special provision entitled e.e.o .
covered area .
goals for females are listed in appendix a and for minorities includes the areas listed in appendix b .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition standard federal equal employment opportunity construction contract specifications executive order num a as used in these specifications num .
covered area means the geographical area described in the solicitation from which this contract resulted num .
director means director office of federal contract compliance programs u.s. department of labor dol or any person to whom the director delegates authority num .
employer identification number means the federal social security number used on the employers quarterly federal tax return u.s. treasury department form num and num .
minority includes black all persons having origins in any of the black african racial groups not of hispanic origin hispanic all persons of mexican puerto rican cuban central or south american or other spanish culture or origin regardless of race asian and pacific islander all persons having origins in any of the original peoples of the far east southeast asia the indian subcontinent or the pacific islands and american indian or alaskan native all persons having origins in any of the original peoples of north america and maintaining identifiable tribal affiliations through membership and participation or community identification .
b whenever the contractor or any subcontractor at any tier subcontracts a portion of the work involving any construction trade it shall physically include in each subcontract in excess of num the provisions of these specifications and the notice which contains the applicable goals for minority and female participation and which is set forth in the solicitation from which this contract resulted .
c if the contractor is participating pursuant to num cfr num in a hometown plan approved by the u.s. dol in the covered area either individually or through an association its affirmative action obligations on all work in the plan area including goals and timetables shall be according to that plan for those trades which have unions participating in the plan .
contractors must be able to demonstrate their participation in and compliance with the provisions of any such hometown plan .
each contractor or subcontractor participating in an approved plan is individually required to comply with its obligations under the eeo clause and to make a good faith effort to achieve each goal under the plan in each trade in which it has employees .
the overall good faith performance by other contractors or subcontractors toward a goal in an approved plan does not excuse any covered contractors or subcontractors failure to take good faith efforts to achieve the plan goals and timetables .
d the contractor shall implement the specific affirmative action standards provided in paragraphs gnum through gnum of these specifications .
the goals set forth in the solicitation from which this contract resulted are expressed as percentages of the total hours of employment and training of minority and female utilization the contractor should reasonably be able to achieve in each construction trade in which it has employees in the covered area .
covered construction contractors performing construction work in geographical areas where they do not have a federal or federally assisted construction contract shall apply the minority and female goals established for the geographical area where the work is being performed .
goals are published periodically in the federal register in notice form and such notices may be obtained from any office of federal contract compliance programs office or from federal procurement contracting officers .
the contractor is expected to make substantially uniform progress toward its goals in each craft during the period specified .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition e neither the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement nor the failures by a union with whom the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement to refer either minorities or women shall excuse the constructors obligations under these specifications executive order num or the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto .
f in order for the nonworking training hours of apprentices and trainees to be counted in meeting the goals such apprentices and trainees must be employed by the contractor during the training period and the contractor must have made a commitment to employ the apprentices and trainees at the completion of their training subject to the availability of employment opportunities .
trainees must be trained pursuant to training programs approved by the u.s. dol .
g the contractor shall take specific affirmative actions to ensure equal employment opportunity .
the evaluation of the contractors compliance with these specifications shall be based upon its efforts to achieve maximum results from its actions .
the contractor shall document these efforts fully and shall implement affirmative action steps at least as extensive as the following num .
ensure and maintain a working environment free of harassment intimidation and coercion of all sites and in all facilities at which the contractors employees are assigned to work .
the contractor where possible will assign two or more women to each construction project .
the contractor shall specifically ensure that all foremen superintendents and other onsite supervisory personnel are aware of and carry out the contractors obligation to maintain such a working environment with specific attention to minority or female individuals working at such sites or in such facilities .
num .
establish and maintain a current list of minority and female recruitment sources provide written notification to minority and female recruitment sources and to community organizations when the contractor or its unions have employment opportunities available and maintain a record of the organizations responses .
num .
maintain a current file of the names addresses and telephone numbers of each minority and female offthestreet applicant and minority or female referral from a union a recruitment source or community organization and of what action was taken with respect to each such individual .
if such individual was sent to the union hiring hall for referral and was not referred back to the contractor by the union or if referred not employed by the contractor this shall be documented in the file with the reason therefore along with whatever additional actions the contractor may have taken .
num .
provide immediate written notification to penndot when the union or unions with which the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement has not referred to the contractor a minority person or woman sent by the contractor or when the contractor has other information that the union referral process has impeded the contractors efforts to meet its obligations .
num .
develop onthejob training opportunities andor participate in training programs for the area which expressly include minorities and women including upgrading programs and apprenticeship and trainee programs relevant to the contractors employment needs especially those programs funded or approved by the dol .
the contractor shall provide notice of these programs to the sources compiled under gnum above .
num .
disseminate the contractors eeo policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and training programs and requesting their cooperation in assisting the contractor in meeting its eeo obligations by including it in any policy manual and collective bargaining agreement by publicizing it in the company newspaper annual report etc .
by specific review of the policy with all management personnel and with all minority and female employees at least once a year and by posting the company eeo policy on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each location where construction work is performed .
num. review at least annually the companys eeo policy and affirmative action obligations under these specifications with all employees having any responsibility for hiring assignment layoff termination or other employment decisions including specific review of these items with onsite supervisory appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition personnel such as superintendents general foreman etc .
prior to the initiation of construction work at any job site .
a written record shall be made and maintained identifying the time and place of these meetings persons attending subject matter discussed and disposition of the subject matter .
num .
disseminate the contractors eeo policy externally by including it in any advertising in the news media specifically including minority and female news media and providing written notification to and discussing the contractors eeo policy with other contractors and subcontractors with whom the contractor does or anticipates doing business .
num .
direct its recruitment efforts both oral and written to minority female and community organizations to schools with minority and female students and to minority and female recruitment and training organizations serving the contractors recruitment area and employment needs .
not later than num month prior to the date for the acceptance of applications for apprenticeship or other training by any recruitment source the contractor shall send written notification to organizations such as the above describing the openings screening procedures and tests to be used in the selection process .
num .
encourage present minority and female employees to recruit other minority persons and women and where reasonable provide after school summer and vacation employment to minority and female youth both on the site and in other areas of the contractors workforce .
num .
validate all tests and other selection requirements where there is an obligation to do so under num cfr part num .
num .
conduct at least annually an inventory and evaluation at least of all minority and female personnel for promotional opportunities and encourage these employees to seek or to prepare for through appropriate training etc .
such opportunities .
num .
ensure that seniority practices job classifications work assignments and other personnel practices do not have a discriminatory effect by continually monitoring all personnel and employment related activities to ensure that the eeo policy and the contractors obligations under these specifications are being carried out .
num .
ensure that all facilities and company activities are nonsegregated except that separate or singleuser toilet and necessary changing facilities shall be provided to ensure privacy between the sexes .
num .
document and maintain a record of all solicitations of offers for subcontracts from minority and female construction contractors and suppliers including circulation of solicitations to minority and female contractor associations and other business associations .
num .
conduct a review at least annually of all supervisors adherence to and performance under the contractors eeo policies and affirmative action obligations .
h contractors are encouraged to participate in voluntary associations that assist in fulfilling one or more of their affirmative action obligations gnum through gnum .
the efforts of a contractor association joint contractorunion contractorcommunity or other similar group of which the contractor is a member and participant may be asserted as fulfilling any one or more of its obligations under gnum through gnum or these specifications provided that the contractor actively participates in the group makes every effort to ensure that the group has a positive impact on the employment of minorities and women in the industry ensures that the concrete benefits of the program are reflected in the contractors minority and female appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition workforce and can provide access to documentation which demonstrates the effectiveness of actions taken on behalf of the contractor .
the obligation to comply however is the contractors and failure of such a group to fulfill an obligation shall not be a defense for the contractors noncompliance .
i a single goal for minorities and a separate single goal for women have been established .
the contractor however is required to provide equal employment opportunity and to take affirmative action for all minority groups both male and female and all women both minority and nonminority .
consequently the contractor may be in violation of the executive order if a particular group is employed in a substantially disparate manner for example even though the contractor has achieved its goals for women generally the contractor may be in violation of the executive order if a specific minority group of women is underutilized .
j the contractor shall not use the goals and timetables or affirmative action standards to discriminate against any person because of race color religion sex or national origin .
k the contractor shall not enter into any subcontract with any person or firm debarred from government contracts pursuant to executive order num. l the contractor shall carry out such sanctions and penalties for violation of these specifications and of the equal opportunity clause including suspension termination and cancellation of existing subcontracts as may be imposed or ordered pursuant to executive order num as amended and its implementing regulations by the office of federal contract compliance programs .
any contractor who fails to carry out such sanctions and penalties shall be in violation of these specifications and executive order num as amended .
m the contractor in fulfilling its obligations under these specifications shall implement specific affirmative action steps at least as extensive as those standards prescribed in paragraph g of these specifications so as to achieve maximum results from its efforts to ensure equal employment opportunity .
if the contractor fails to comply with the requirements of the executive order regulations or these specifications penndot shall proceed according to num cfr num. n the contractor shall designate a responsible official to monitor all employment related activity to ensure that the company eeo policy is being carried out to submit reports relating to the provisions hereof as may be required by the government and to keep records .
records shall at least include for each employee the name address telephone numbers construction trade union affiliation if any employee identification number when assigned social security number race sex status e.g .
mechanic apprentice trainee helper or laborer dates of changes in status hours worked per week in the indicated trade rate of pay and locations at which the work was performed .
records shall be maintained in an easily understandable and retrievable form however to the degree that existing records satisfy this requirement contractors shall not be required to maintain separate records .
o nothing herein provided shall be construed as a limitation upon the application of other laws which establish different standards of compliance or upon the application of requirements for the hiring of local or other area resident e.g .
those under the public works employment act of num and the community development block grant program .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix a the following goals and timetables for female utilization shall be included in all federal and federally assisted construction contracts and subcontracts in excess of num .
the goals are applicable to the contractors aggregate onsite construction workforce public and private whether or not part of that workforce is performing work on a federal or federally assisted construction contract or subcontract .
area covered see special provision entitled e.e.o .
covered area .
goals and timetables timetable goals percent from april num num until further notice num goals are applicable in each construction craft employed by the contractor in the covered area .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix b until further notice the following goals for minority utilization in each construction craft shall be included in federal or federally assisted construction contracts and subcontracts in excess of num to be performed in the respective covered areas in the state .
the goals are applicable to the contractors aggregate onsite construction workforce regardless of whether that workforce is performing work on a federal federally assisted or nonfederally related construction contract or subcontract .
this appendix b shall be used jointly with appendix a .
economic areas area goal percent area goal percent scranton wilkes barre pa smsa counties northeast pennsylvania num pa lackawanna pa luzerne pa monroe nonsmsa counties num pa columbia pa wayne pa wyoming williamsport pa smsa counties williamsport pa. num pa lycoming nonsmsa counties num pa cameron pa centre pa clearfield pa clinton pa elk pa jefferson pa montour pa northumberland pa snyder pa sullivan pa union erie pa smsa counties erie pa num pa erie nonsmsa counties num pa clarion pa crawford pa forest pa venango pa warren pittsburgh pa smsa counties altoona pa. num pa blair johnstown pa. num pa cambria pa somerset pittsburgh pa .. num pa beaver pa washington pa westmoreland pa allegheny nonsmsa counties num pa armstrong pa bedford pa butler pa fayette pa greene pa indiana md allegheny md garrett wv mineral harrisburg york lancaster pa smsa counties harrisburg pa num pa cumberland pa dauphin pa perry lancaster pa .. num pa lancaster york pa. num pa adams pa york nonsmsa counties num pa franklin pa fulton pa huntingdon pa juniata pa lebanon pa mifflin appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition economic areas area goal percent area goal percent philadelphia pa smsa counties allentownbethlehem easton panj .. num pa carbon pa lehigh pa northampton nj warren philadelphia panj num pa bucks pa chester pa delaware pa montgomery pa philadelphia nj burlington nj camden nj gloucester reading pa. num pa berks nonsmsa counties .. num pa schuylkill de kent de sussex nj cape may buffalo ny nonsmsa counties num pa mckean pa potter ny allegany ny cattaraugus ny chautauqua ny wyoming binghamtonelmira ny smsa counties binghamton nypanum pa susquehanna ny broome ny tioga nonsmsa counties num pa bradford pa tioga ny chenango ny delaware ny otsego ny schuyler ny tompkins new york ny nonsmsa countiesnum pa pike nj hunterdon nj ocean nj sussex ny orange ny sullivan ny ulster ohio nonsmsa counties .. num pa lawrence pa mercer oh columbiana oh cleveland appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num initial edition appendix c designated special provision num dspnum buy america section numa applies to this project .
appendix c designated special provision num dspnum num cnum num change no .
num appendix c designated special provision num dspnum enhanced minimum wage provisions num .
enhanced minimum wage .
contractorlessor agrees to pay no less than num per hour to its employees for all hours worked directly performing the services called for in this contractlease and for an employees hours performing ancillary services necessary for the performance of the contracted services or lease when such employee spends at least twenty per cent num of their time performing ancillary services in a given work week .
num .
adjustment .
beginning january num num and annually thereafter contractorlessor shall pay its employees described in paragraph num. above an amount that is no less than the amount previously in effect increased from such amount by the annual percentage increase in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers united states city average all items not seasonally adjusted or its successor publication as determined by the united states bureau of labor statistics and rounded to the nearest multiple of num .
the applicable adjusted amount shall be published in the pennsylvania bulletin by march num of each year to be effective the following july num .
num .
exceptions .
these enhanced minimum wage provisions shall not apply to employees a. exempt from the minimum wage under the minimum wage act of num b. covered by a collective bargaining agreement c. required to be paid a higher wage under another state or federal law governing the services including the prevailing wage act and davisbacon act or d. required to be paid a higher wage under any state or local policy or ordinance .
num .
notice .
contractorlessor shall post these enhanced minimum wage provisions for the entire period of the contract conspicuously in easilyaccessible and welllighted places customarily frequented by employees at or near where the contracted services are performed .
num .
records .
contractorlessor must maintain and upon request and within the time periods requested by the commonwealth furnish all employment and wage records necessary to document compliance with these enhanced minimum wage provisions .
num .
sanctions .
failure to comply with these enhanced minimum wage provisions may result in the imposition of sanctions which may include but shall not be limited to termination of the contract or lease nonpayment debarment or referral to the office of general counsel for appropriate civil or criminal referral .
num .
subcontractors .
contractorlessor shall include the provisions of these enhanced minimum wage provisions in every subcontract so that these provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor .
july num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num a abbreviations num metric appendix a abrasion coarse aggregate numcnum abrasives cleaning steel numcnum absolute refusal piledriving to numbnum.a absorption numc numcnum abutment protective coating numb abutting joints fabricated structural steel numr acceptance bar mat design numc cement concrete numd pavements rps numu certificate numb concrete block precast numc median barrier nume geomembrane numc geotextiles numc joint sealing material numh material num plans rps numanum plant precast concrete products num prestressed concrete bridge beam numanum plates metal culverts numanum ride nump samples plantmix superpave mixture numhnum.b numjnum.c shotcrete numk testing cement concrete numdnum traffic signal materials numa waterstops pvc numcnum.c work numc accessibility of fire hydrants num accommodation traffic num act num numc act public works employment verification num additional traffic control signs numb warning lights numb work payment numb adhesive anchor numc exterior use numbnum numb joint seal and lubricant bridges numa lubricant preformed neoprene compression seals and strip seals numdnum.b snowplowable raised pavement markers numb timber members glulam numbnum numb structures glulam fabrication numb adjustable extensions existing inlets manholes or utility boxes numb adjusted payment numanum.c bonded concrete overlay of asphaltsurfaced pavement numc bonded concrete overlay of concretesurfaced pavements numc bituminous materials num diesel fuel cost fluctuations num diamond grinding of concrete pavement num hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numa inspectors field office and inspection facilities numa low strength cement concrete num microcomputer numa plain cement concrete pavements rps numa prestressed concrete beams num reinforced cement concrete pavements rps numa adjustment required completion date numbnum specified milestone date numbnum adjustment grade existing miscellaneous structures num adjustments existing traffic signal numcc adjustments reinforcement numdnum admixtures air entraining numd cement concrete numenum num latex emulsion nume aggregate clean up numg aggregatelimepozzolan base course num agitators cement concrete numb aggregate num bituminous base course num cement base course num concrete measurement numenum general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num coarse num control numc fine num gabions numa handling numb lightweight numanum pipe underdrain numb potentially reactive numg prefabricated pavement base drain numb production testing numb numb storage numb transportation numb agricultural limestone pulverized numanum air content prestressed concrete bridge beams numdnum.b curtain destructor numb entraining admixtures numd pollution control num act act num numa temperature num thermal cutting steel nump alteration of drawings or work num alteration of detectable warning surface numc alternate design bolts numcnum.f equipment numcnum fasteners numcnum.c.num methods numcnum terminal section numa aluminum alloy end sections numc blanks permanent barricade panels nume bridge hand railing num railing num channel extruded barricades numd curb drain numb fabricated structural num material numanum amendments soil numf american wire gage metric equivalents appendix a americans with disabilities act provisions for appendix c anchor adhesive numb bases lighting poles numanum traffic signal numanum blocks metal median barrier numanum bolt numcnum covers lighting poles numanum placing cement concrete structures numf setting steel bridge numcnum.d.num sign structure steel nume steel bridge superstructure numcnum.d structural steel fabricated numcnum through numa traffic signal nume material pavement patching numk traffic signing numi wall numc pin connected droppin numc anchorage steel bridge numcnum remove concrete numf numm anchorages posttensioning numc rightofway fence numc anchoring devices erosion control numc annealed iron wire reinforcement numb annealing structural steel numw ansi surface roughness requirements numq anticollusion requirements numf antidesiccant numb antipollution measures special supplement appendix c antiskid material num numc antitheft sign hardware numj antitranspirant numb application method numf automated numfnum manual numfnum semi mechanized numfnum application of boiled linseed oil for concrete numanum late season pavements num.pnum cable highway lighting nume cold plastic pavement markings num epoxy coating for structural steel numc numenum resin for concrete numbnum.c hot thermoplastic pavement general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num markings numb live loads bridge deck wearing surface numg paint for structural steel numcnum penetrating sealers numcnum.b shotcrete numh surface tolerant coating system numdnum waterborne pavement markings num waterproofing numc nume approach slabs bridge num approval contract num prefabricated pavement base drain numanum.e preformed fabric filter drain numanum apron rock numc aprons precast box culvert numk archeological findings num arches metal plate numbnum reinforced concrete numknum arm mount luminaire hps cobra head numb led cobra head numc armored preformed neoprene compression dam num arrow panel numb ash bottom numf fly numh num asphalt joint and crack sealing num rubber sealing compound numa numg asphalt concrete pavement nummonth warranty num assignment of antitrust claims num contracts num atms its device integreation num augered conduit numd authority representative num inspectorincharge num to suspend work numb auxiliary supports for exit sign panels numc award cancellation of num of contract num b backfill box culvert numgnum excavation below indicated elevation numf flowable num geogrids numb mix for planting and transplanting nume selected borrow excavation numg shoulder numf stone for misc .
drainage num structure numbnum numqnum.b subgrade drains numa suitable material required numj trench lighting numc trench utility numbnum backfilling base drain prefabricated pavement numanum.b numa numcnum culverts metal plate numc curb bituminous concrete numh plain cement concrete numg embankment numqnum.b excavation nume nume numh gutter plain cement concrete nume planting numgnum pointed structures numh sidewalks cement concrete numg structure backfill numqnum.b surfaced structures numh trench pipe culverts numf storm sewer numc underdrain numc backing material joint num baffle wall temporary num bag cement handling and transportation numd bag inlet filter numa numa numa ballasts highway lighting numa sign lighting numc balled and burlapped general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num bb plants numanum banding traffic signing numk bar mats refinforcement steel num precast concrete numb reinforcement see reinforcement stretcher rightofway fence num bare root br plants numanum barricades permanent num barrier bridge pa num pa ht num pa type numm num concrete glare screen num median structure mounted numb reset nump median num structure mounted numb reset numb temporary structure mounted num reset num fence silt num heavy duty num median metal num temporary median structure mounted numb reset numb protective num rock num sound num temporary num num numb reset num num numb steel num waterfilled num warning light num barriers bridge pa num pa ht num pa type numm num concrete bridge numknum modification of existing num slip forming bridge numknum.b.num sound num timber structures numdnum base course aggregatebituminous num aggregatecement num aggregatelime pozzolan num cold recycled bituminous num num concrete roller compacted num crushed aggregate num crushed aggregate type dg num hma superpave asphalt mixture design num wma superpave asphalt mixture design num pavement relief joint numd permeable asphalt treated num permeable cement treated num plain cement concrete num drains pavement num flexible replacement num basin detention numc numd rock numa riprap numd sediment num batch plant cement concrete numa hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numc wma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numc batcher mixer slip numenum battery backup system microcomputer numd battery bank solar array nume beacons numhnum beam construction prestressed concrete num beams bridge prestressed concrete numb bearing areas concrete substructures numknum steel sign structures numc devices posttensioning numc pads plain and laminated neoprene num pile nume plates bronze numi sill caps timber structures numcnum strata drilled caissons numc general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num surfaces facing numq value piles numg bearings bridge beam prestressed concrete numdnum construction numcnum.a.num determination of flatness numc disc numbnum elastomeric numcnum.c expansion numcnum numcnum fabrication numcnum.a.num handling numcnum.a.num high load multirotational numcnum.h num installation numcnum.a.num manufacture numcnum.a.num numcnum neoprene num packaging numcnum.a.num painting numd pot numbnum numanum seats steel bridge numcnum.h.num setting steel bridge numcnum.e spherical steel bridge numcnum.f steel numb numdnum.a bridge numcnum storage numcnum.a.num tolerances num working drawings steel bridge numcnum.a.num bedding material bridge shoes numh pipe culverts numb beds casting concrete bridge beams numanum bell footing drilled caisson numb bending of plates cold numtnum hot numtnum reinforcement numc bent piles timber structures numcnum plates structural steel numt bentonite slurry for caissons numd bents framed timber structures numcnum bid delivery num examination num execute numd guaranty for execution of contract num irregular numbnum preparation num public opening of num right to reject numa withdrawal or revision num bidders disqualification num bidding requirements and conditions num billetsteel bars numa binder course see bituminous binder course membrane numc bituminous coating metal plate culverts numbnum.b concrete see bituminous concrete leveling course timber deck numg material num aggregatebituminous base course numb aggregatecement base course numd certification numb cold recycled bituminous base course numb handling numc hma plantmixed superpave mixture numa wma plantmixed superpave mixture numa fine graded num stone matrix asphalt numa transportation numc waterproofing num materials price adjustment num mixing plant concrete curb numa hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numc wma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numc stone matrix asphalt numc overlays sawing and sealing num paint numf paper num pavement surface milling num num pavement system pervious num profile num pavers numenum .
prime coat num rollers superpave mixture numf stone matrix asphalt numf rumble strips temporary numa general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num numb seal coat see bituminous seal coat surface treatment see bituminous surface tack coat num wearing course see bituminous wearing course wearing surface timber deck numg widners numenum bituminous binder course quality requirements numc bituminous concrete curb num sand numanum numanum bituminous seal coat num quality requirements numc using precoated aggregate num bituminous surface quality requirements numc treatment num using precoated aggregate num wearing timber decks numg bituminous wearing course quality requirements numc blanks aluminum permanent wood barricade panels nume sign numa blast cleaning steel numcnum furnace slag numanum blasting for rock cut slope excavation controlled numa numf numa presplit blasting numanum numfnum trim blasting numanum numfnum production blasting numb numg block concrete strom inlet protection numb numb numb block revetment systems concrete num blocks modular architectural numa blocks concrete precast num board of claims num boiled linseed oil numb numpnum numa bolted surfaces facing structural steel numgg bolting structural steel numf bolts alternate design numcnum.f aluminum numm anchor see anchor bolt antitheft numj bearing type holes for numcnum expansion numh extruded panel sign postclips numa flat sheet aluminum signs numf general application numcnum high strength connections numj inspection numcnum.i threads numz tightening numcnum.d numcnum.e turned holes for numcnum numinum ubolts numi unfinished connections numi bolt assemblies high strength numk numd bond surety num warranty numb bondbreaker concrete nume joint filler and sealer num prestressing strands numcnum.b bondbreaking requirements force transfer units numanum bonding electrical distribution numd bonded concrete overlay of asphaltsurfaced pavement num concretesurfaced pavements num bonded wearing course ultrathin num border sign numd numf bored conduit numd holes timber structures numbnum boring directional electrical distribution numb borrow areas num common numb excavation num bottom ash numf box general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num beam bridges nonshrink epoxy grout for shear keys numg shear key joint numd void forms numm culvert precast reinforced concrete num reinforced concrete numknum shaped truss steel sign structure numb braces fence num bracing for excavation numh timber substructure numcnum bracket type lighting pole arms numb brackets offset num post mounted signs type a numbnum rotating numc s or w beam posts numa breakaway bases lighting pole numanum steel posts num distance markers num post mounted signs type a num type b num num s or w beam posts num terminal foundation wood posts nume wood posts numd brick building numb certification numc masonry num sewer numa bridge approach slabs num approaches temporary num box beam nonshrink epoxy grout for shear keys numg bridge barrier concrete numknum slip forming numknumb deck concrete finishing numknum placing numknum repair num intermediate curing numpnum.c compound numd tack coat nums timber stringers numdnum gluedlaminated numdnum wearing surface num erection superstructure numc misfits erection numcnum over navigable waters num railing aluminum num hand aluminum num steel num steel num reference for construction surveying numg removal of existing num steel superstructure num superstructure prestressed concrete num steel num temporary num bronze bearing elements nume plates numi expansion plates numi interlocked bearing structures numcnum brush painting structural steel numcnum.c buckle straps numg building brick numb buildings demolition total or partial num bulb herbaceous plants numanum.b numgnum.b bulk cement handling and transportation numc bulk density numcnum buried cable markers numt numb conduit markers numt numb burlap numd burning of material num num butadiene acrylonitrile numg butting plates sign numh buy america provisions numa appendix c c cable communication numfnum control numfnum detector lead in numanum general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num direct burial underground numb duct lighting numi numd highway lighting num installation lighting numh instrument numfnum markers buried numt numb microfiber optic numa numa nondirect burial above ground numc pulling lubricant numanum signal nume sign lighting num sound barrier walls numf numg standard fiber optic numb numb support traffic signals numanum tags numd traffic signal communications numg caisson casing numa permanent numh removal numi temporary numi caissons drilled num records numj calcium chloride num numb num calculations highway lighting design num calibrated wrench tightening bolts numcnum.e calibration cement concrete mixing plant numd mixing equipment mortar or concrete numanum.f camber beams and girders numanum numanum camera closed circuit television num lowering device cld numh portable closed circuit television num cancellation of award num contract num cantilever steel sign structure numa numd care of private property num public property num casing drilled caisson numa casting beds beam construction numanum castinplace cement concrete slab slope wall num concrete piles numb cast iron pipe numn caulking compound num cellular communications system numh cellulose fiber recycled mulch binder numbnum cement num certification numb chemical requirements nume handling and transportation numc aggregates numb bags numd bulk numc limited number of sources numf physical requirements nume quality control numa storage numd testing nume cement concrete num acceptance numd adjustment of mass weight of free water numbnum admixtures numenum retarding numfnum agitation numc agitators numb air content numcnum batching numbnum plant numa block slope wall precast num calibration of mixing plant numd class numcnum cement measurement numenum connections existing new numm criteria numa delivery numc density of material numbnum design basis numc forms cement concrete structures numa mixers numb mixing numc conditions numf pavement protective coating num paving for stream beds num plant mixed numanum pozzolan numenum quality assurance testing numdnum sand numanum numanum sidewalks num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num slab slope wall num specific gravity of aggregates numbnum structures num testing numd tremie numj truckdrum revolutions numc truck mixed numanum verification numdnum volumetric mixed numanum water num centerline application painting numg centermount steel sign structure numa numd certificate acceptance numb final settlement computations numc insurance num num certification acceptance of material numbnum aggregates bituminous plants num concrete plants num bearings bridge nume numh bituminous material numb bolts high strength numdnum.b numdnum.c brick numc cement numb concrete admixtures numb curing compounds nume covers numg epoxy injection crack seal numd resin numbnum expansion joint filler premolded numd fabricator numbnum fence num gabion baskets numcnum gaskets joint material numa geogrids num geomembrane numd geotextiles numd highway lighting numc num joint sealing material silicone numh manufacturer numbnum pavement base drain prefabricated numanum.f precast concrete products num producer numbnum protecting covers numg rate of wage numc reinforcement steel num structural steel fabricated numv traffic signals numc waterstops joint material numa welded stud shear connectors numenum certified test report highstrength bolts manufacturer mctr numdnum.b distributor dctr numdnum.c certify pipe plant numanum.b.num chairs fabrication numb changeable message sign numw numb changes payment for num channel excavation num num extruded aluminum permanent barricades numd channelizing devices for dropoffs numj character of workers num charpy vnotch toughness requirements num check assembly numerically controlled drilling numgnum chemical requirements cement nume chemicals glued laminated member treatment numd chromiumalloy steel castings numgnum circuit breaker panels numi breakers distribution numh television camera num num claims board of num delay num disputes nume clause nondiscrimination appendix c sexual harassment appendix c clay lumps coarse aggregate numcnum cleaning biodegradable cleaners numbnum blast numbnum brush numbnum concrete numbnum crack num existing ditches numd existing drainage structures numb existing pipe culvert numj iron castings numhnum project site num sedimentation structures num solvent numbnum general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num cleanup planting numgnum selective tree removal nume tree trimming nume clearances falsework numcnum.c clearing num for signs type a numd clips for bar mats numa clock time traffic signal numb closedcell neoprene sponge nummnum numpnum closed loop signal system numd coal coarse aggregate numcnum findings num coarse aggregate num coating compound metal curb drain numa low slip coefficient numjnum.c minimum curing time numjnum.d protective cement concrete pavement num prestressed box beam bituminous interface nume reinforced concrete surfaces num treatment signs numb system numa epoxy structural steel numa painting existing bridges num numa galvanized steel numb structural steel numa zinc rich num cobra head arm mount luminaire hps numb led numc cofferdams numi numd coke coarse aggregate numcnum cold plastic pavement markings or legends num application num inlaid numc surface applied numd recycled bituminous base course num num weather curing cement concrete structures numpnum protection cement concrete structures numpnum collar concrete for pipe extension num collected plants numanum color codes conductor numenum combination storm sewer and underdrain num commercial fertilizer numanum common borrow areas numb excavation numa communications camera numf its num traffic signal num compaction aggregatebituminous base course numc aggregatecement base course numc bituminous mixture curb nume cover box culvert numgnum embankments numb hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numi shoulder numc stone martix asphalt numj subgrade numb subbase nume compatibility microcomputer numf compensable delays num completion of contract by department forces numc by surety numb component item schedule submission of numa compost numfnum numa numa paper mill numfnum sewage sludge numfnum blanket num filter berm num filter sock num compound concrete bonding num curing num epoxybonding num other bonding num compression dam armored preformed neoprene num joint seal for bridges preformed neoprene num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num seals preformed neoprene numd compressive strength cement concrete numdnum.b concrete acceptance numdnum admixtures num barrier median num single face numf temporary num structure mounted num numb median numb reset numb structure mounted num numb median numb blocks precast num block revetment systems num block slope wall num bonding nume bonding compound num epoxy num other num bridge beam prestressed numdnum deck repair num decks numknum caissons numb numh cement num classes of numb numcnum cleaning numbnum collar for pipe extension num connections structures numm consistency structures numh cork joint material numb cribbing reinforced numa numa criteria cement concrete numa crushed fragments coarse aggregate numcnum curb gutter plain cement num plain cement num ramps numinum numh curing base course plain cement concrete structures nump compounds see curing compounds covers protective num material num mortar shear key joints numdnum pavement patching numj precast concrete products num protection latex modified mortar or concrete wearing surface numd structures nump temperature numpnum.b disposition num drilled caissons num dry packaged numb evaluation num finishing structures numk glare screen num gutter plain cement num median barrier num mixing conditions numf mixture pavements numc outlet structure num packaged dry numb pavement crossstitching num longlife num partialdepth repair num curing numg joints longitudinal nume transverse nume joint sealing numh mixing equipment numd partialdepth repair numf rapidset concrete patching material numc repair area preparation numb resounding repairs numi patching num roller compacted num paving inverts of metal plate culverts numbnum.c pervious num piles castinplace numb placing structures numk plain cement pavements num precast units num reinforced cement pavements num rps concrete pavements num roller compacted base course num pavements num shoulders plain cement numa roller compacted numb general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num sidewalks cement numd slab slope wall num specification flowchart nume strength num num structures cement num superstructures numknum technician numdnum testing see testing under water structures numknum wearing surface num conditions for painting structural steel numcnum conductor color codes numenum conduit augered numd backfill trench numa bored numd cement concrete structures nume concrete encased numc direct burial numb electrical distribution numc numa exposed numc fiberglass reinforced epoxy numbnum highway lighting numg num jacked numd markers buried numt numb metric si sizes appendix a polyvinyl chloride pvc numbnum numcnum rigid nonmetallic numbnum.d pvc numanum steel numcnum numanum sealant numanum trench numa conference preconstruction numa configuration information its device numd conflict monitor traffic signal numbnum.c numbnum.c conflict resolution team numcnum conflicting overhead signs numdd conformity with drawings and specifications num connections bolted numgnum high strength bolts numj cement concrete structures numm field welded numgnum numerically controlled drilled field numcnum pin steel bridges numcnum prefabricated pavement base drain numcnum steel bridge using high strength bolts numcnum turned bolts numi unfinished bolts numi welded numee connectors timber structures numbnum consideration of bids num consistency of concrete structures numh consolidation cement concrete pavements numk concrete pavement patching numh construction incidental num joints cement concrete pavements numi numj schedule numb scheduling num surveying num num containergrown plants numanum contents of proposal num continuous heating steel numanumb continuously reinforced concrete pavement patching num contract approval of num award of num cancellation of num default of numa drawings numa deviations from numbnum.a execution of num failure to execute num final settlement of numd settlement of numd termination clause nume time extensions and reductions num contraction joints concrete pavements numinum contractor integrity provisions appendix c noncompliance by num responsibility of num num provisions appendix c substructure bridge numcnum.g.num superstructure bridge numcnum.g.num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num contractors cooperation between num prequalification num contractors responsibility numcnum.b contractors responsibility for public and private facilities and structures num work num contracts assignment of num separate bridge substructure and superstructure numcnum.g subletting of num control cabinet enclosure numc numc contactor sign lighting numb device photoelectric numm of aggregates numc material num work num stakes num traffic num controlled blasting numa numf numa controller pdms numd segment numc sign numg controller assembly traffic signal num cabinet numbnum.f numbnum.f cable terminalharness assembly numcnum conflict monitor numbnum.c numbnum.c controller unit nema numbnum type num numbnum type num numbnum electrical load center numcnum flasher numc load switches numc master num police panel numcnum relays numcnum time clock numcnum controls sign lighting num conventional finish cement concrete structures numknum.a convict produced materials numb cool weather curing cement concrete structures numpnum protection cement concrete structures numpnum cooperation between contractors num coordination of drawings and specifications num unit traffic signal systems numc numa copper sheet nump core materials prefabricated pavement base drains numanum.c cork joint material numb corner post fence num corrosion inhibitor numb protection numb resistant uncoated steel reinforcemet bars numj corrugated metal pipearch culverts num countersinks nume couplings posttensioning numc crack cleaning num sealing asphalt num concrete pavement numn num epoxy injection num cracks culverts waterproofing numrnum slab stabilization numdnum numdnum creosote treating cycle numc cribbing num crownvetch plants numanum numgnum crumb rubber numdnum crushed aggregate base course num crushed aggregate base course type dg num culverts excavation num metal plate num pipe num pipearch corrugated metal num removal of existing num curb bituminous concrete num concrete plain cement num depressed numc numi num drain metal num gutter plain cement concrete num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num machine numd mountable plain concrete num modification numh plain cement concrete num ramps numinum numh curing admixtures num bituminous concrete curb numg brick masonry numc bridge deck intermediate numpnum.c burlap numlnumd cold weather numlnum numpnum compound see curing compounds concrete numl nump overlay numl numg pavement patching numj structures nump cool weather numpnum covers for concrete num material num mortar pressure numg normal numpnum prestressed concrete bridge beams numdnum.g record of temperatures numdnum.g.num saturated cover numdnum.g.num slurry seal numh steam numdnum.g.num temperature numpnum.b test cylinders cement concrete numd water numpnum.b white polyethylene numlnum.a burlapbacked numlnum.b curing compounds num bridge deck intermediate numd liquid membranefoaming numpnum.a black numc clear or white numa white membrane forming numlnum.c current estimate payments num curvature girder measurement numanum curving rolled beams and welded girders numa cut see excavation edges plate numk cutoff wall numc numi cutting off piles numc other methods numpnum thermal nump d dam compression armored preformed neoprene num expansion neoprene strip seal num tooth with drain trough num damage claims responsibility for num prevention painting steel numanum to utility infrastructure numd damages liquidated num data gathering numv dead loads numqnum.a debonding of strands numbnum.b deck bridge concrete repair num steel bridge numa superstructure prestressed concrete numa default of contract numa defective material num work num concrete pavements numu rps numt hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numo stone matrix asphalt nump structures numu waterborne pavement markings numj waterproofing numf definitions num deformed reinforcement steel numanum welded wire fabric num delay claims num notification of num procedures num of contract numa delays in the performance of work numb deleterious shale numcnum delineation devices num delineators barrier mount numb delivery bids num box culvert numf cement concrete general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num plant mixed numc truck mixed numc volumetric mixed nume demolition total or partial of buildings and other structures num density aggregatebituminous base course numf aggregatecement base course numg bulk numcnum subbase nume density acceptance plantmixed hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numj stone matrix ashpalt numk department forces completion of contract numc furnished material num of environmental protection numa labor and industry numa department of general services nume departments responsibility numcnum.a depressed curb numc numi num design basis cement concrete numc box culvert numa calculations highway lighting num loads falsework numcnum.b sound barriers numa traffic signal supports numanum designated borrow areas numb special provisions appendix c waste areas numb detectable warning surface num detector num num card rack assembly numb leadin cable numa loop numanum magnetic numanum magnetometer numanum microwave vehicle numb rfid tag reader rtvd numc radar numanum video numa detensioning numcnum.i detention basin numc numd detours numd development roadside num devices its num num maintenance num dewatering caissons numg diamond grinding of concrete pavement num differing site conditions suspensions of work and significant changes in the character of work num dimensions metal pipe arches pipe pipearches numanum.b direct tension indicator dti devices numdnum tightening numcnum.g directional boring numb disadvantaged business enterprises numc requirements appendix c disc bearings numbnum numanum disconnect main highway lighting numd service numdnum discrimination num display signal numc numb display signs speed numaa disposal of existing highway structures num disposition of lots numanum disputes labor num over changes nume over precast concrete products num resolution numanum numbnum hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numanum.b disqualification of bidders and rejection of bids num dissipator paved energy num rock energy numb distance marker num supports num distributor certified test report dctr numdnum.c ditch diversion num excavation num slopes numf diverse businesses requirements numd appendix c general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num diversion ditch num docking station numbnum double slurry seal numc numb dowel bars coating numb mechanically galvanized numc requirements longlife numenum.c stainless steel numd uncoated corrosion resistatnt nume holes num dowel preparation and placement numd dowel retrofit num dowels see reinforcement bars downspouting num drain excavation num metal curb num outlets subsurface num slope pipe temporary num slotted num subgrade num trough num drainage misc .
stone backfill for num drawings num alteration of num conformity with num contract numa coordination with specifications num shop numd standard num working numc drawn polyester fiber bituminous concrete curb numc drill holes concrete pavement crossstitching numc drilled caissons num drilling and blasting foundation numb drive anchor num driving piles numb resistance maximum permissible timber piles numo piles numj dropoffs numj drum mixer plant hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numcnum wma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numcnum dry concrete packaged numb material embankments numbnum duct cable numi sheathing numd ductile iron castings numhnum dust control palliatives numb dynamic message signs num portable num dynamometers numcnum.c e earthwork num edge planing numknum slump numk slumping numtnum edgeline application painting numh elastomeric bearings bridge numcnum.c disc numb electrical control cabinets numc numc distribution num traffic signals num enclosures numc numc grounds fence numf service numf numd electronic release of project plan files num elliptical reinforced concrete pipe numanum.a elongated particles coarse aggregate numcnum elongation metal pipes nume metal plate culverts numbnum.a embankment num granular material type num numbnum.b type num numbnum.c material numa placement and compaction numb plain cement concrete curb numg random material numbnum.f rock numbnum.d shale numbnum.e soil numbnum.a stability numc general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num structure areas numbnum enclosure control control cabinet numc numc installation highway lighting numn its numanum numb numa numa maintenance numanum encoder external video nume high definition video nume standard video numd end bearing drilled caisson numa pile numg joints glued laminated hardwood numbnum posts fence num sections pipe num treatments guide rail numanum endwalls num protective coating numb energy dissipator paved num rock numb enhanced minimum wage provisions appendix c environmental protection department of numa epoxy bonding compound num numk numenum numl coating reinforcement bars numc numg structural steel numa welded wire fabric numa grout nonshrink numb injection crack seal num mechanical splice system numc pavement markings num protection structural steel num resin numb protective coating numb numb system crack seal numa equal employment opportunity officer numc policy numb equipment numc calibration numc force account work numdnum mixing bridge wearing surface numanum painting numb pile driving numa slab stabilization numc surface preparation bridge deck numanum testing see testing equipment cement concrete volumetric mixed num communications numc lasercontrolled numd paving nume reclaimer numanum specialized numd storage numf nuclear numanum erected steel numb erecting metal plate culverts numb erection bridge superstructure prestressed concrete bridge numc steel bridge numc drawings steel bridge numcnum.d procedure steel bridge numcnum sign numh sound barriers numenum tolerances numfnum stresses steel bridge numcnum.b erosion control geotextiles numdnum numb plans num num estimate of quantities num current payments num estimated pile tip elevation numl evaluation of bituminous pavement ride quality num acceptance numc corrective action numd defective work nume equipment and operator numa general requirements numa lot size numb testing numb bituminous pavement longitudinal joint density num corrective action numg general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num excluded areas numd general requirements numa lot size numb sampling nume concrete pavement ride quality num acceptance numc corrective action numd defective work nume equipment and operator numa general requirements numa lot size numb testing numb examination of proposal forms plans specifications special provisions and site of work num excavation beyond established slope lines nume borrow num caissons numa class num class numa and class numb num class num class num and class num num curb plain cement concrete num gabions numa highway lighting pole foundations numb paved shoulder type num nume pavement relief joint numa pole foundation highway lighting numb prefabricated pavement base drain numcnum sidewalk numa suitable material required numj stream channels numf topsoil numg numg traffic signal supports numa trench highway lighting numc execution and approval of contract num bid guaranty num executive order num appendix c existing barrier modification num bridges removal num culverts removal num department signs during construction numh ditches numd highway structures disposal num miscellaneous structures grade adjustment num structural steel painting num spotzone maintenance painting num surface conditioning bituminous seal coat numa slurry seal nume course preparation of hma courses plantmixed hma mixture numg removal num exit panels auxiliary supports numc expansion bolts numh dam neoprene strip seal num tooth with drain trough num joint filler premolded num joints cement concrete sidewalks nume concrete pavements numinum plates bronze numi placing concrete structures numf steel sign structure numf exploratory drilling caissons numa numb numc numd extension of existing pipe numi time numa external loads application to concrete numq pointing device microcomputer numbnum extra work num numbnum payment num extruded aluminum channel numa coating treatment numb permanent barricades numd posts numa signs numa num aluminum stiffeners numd eyebars numw general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num numv f fabric composite properties numh containing ptfe fibers numcnum deformed welded wire num fiberglass numb geotextile numa prefabricated pavement base drain numanum.d preformed fabric filter drain numanum polyester numf polyesterpolypropylene numb protective fence numanum reinforcement pressure mortar for pointing or surfacing structures nume rightofway fence numd numanum numbnum tie wire fence numanum waterproofing numb welded wire steel num numbnum fabricated structural steel num num fabricated structural aluminum num fabrication anchor bolts bridge numcnum.d bearing pads num bearings bridge numcnum.a.num num bridge beams prestressed concrete numd deck panels laminated timber numgnum girders laminated timber numgnum glued laminated hardwood timber members num metal plate arches numanum.a pipe arches numanum.a pipes numanum.a posts steel s or w beam numc steel square numbnum sign nume sound barrier numenum steel sign structure numd structural steel concrete bridge superstructure numd fabricated num facilities and structures contractors responsibility num facilities treatment of glued laminated hardwood numb facing of bearing surfaces numq bolted surfaces numgg failure to complete work on time num execute contract num maintain performed work num falsework construction steel bridge numcnum.e design steel bridge numcnum clearances numcnum.c erection drawings numcnum.d loads numcnum.b removal concrete structures numqnum fastener tension numcnum.g fasteners alternate for steel bridges numcnum.c.num fence fabric numanum numbnum lockpin and collar numcnum.h silt barrier fence numd heavy duty numc fastening reinforcement numd fatigue analysis highway lighting num federalaid construction contracts required contract provisions appendix c provisions num fence gates num protective num rightofway num num silt barrier num heavy duty num stretchers pretensioning numcnum.g.num temporary protective num fertilizer commercial numanum for plants plantings and transplanting numc slowrelease nitrogen numanum fertilizing planting numgnum numgnum.c fiber fiber optic communications system numj joint material numc fiberglass general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num fabric numb reinforced epoxy conduit numbnum field adjustment reinforcement numc assembly steel bridge numcnum connections preassembly numg preparation numd numerically controlled drilled numcnum laboratory numanum office inspectors numanum painting numc treatment wood preservative numd welded connections numgnum fill see embankment slope pipe num filler bituminous concrete curb numc stone slope walls numb filling pile shells with concrete numd shear key joints with mortar numdnum filter berm compost num filter sock compost num filter bag pumped water num final acceptance num computations numc inspection numa payment num payment calculation numa payment schedule numb payments release of num settlement certificate nume settlement of contract numd strikeoff see strikeoff surface rubblized concrete pavement nume tensioning pretensioning numcnum.h fine aggregate num fineness modulus numc finish coat existing structural steel numdnum.f numdnum.c painting structural steel numcnum.c glued laminated hardwood nume iron castings numhnum pavements not being overlaid numi sound barriers numc steel castings numgnum structural steel fabricated numb welded stud shear connectors numenum finishes final structures numknum finishing cement concrete arches reinforced numknum bearing areas of substructures numknum box culverts reinforced numknum bridge barriers numknum decks numknum curb numc final finishes numknum gutter numc patching numknum pavements numk structures numk superstructures numknum under water numknum cold recycled bituminous base course numd equipment wearing surface bridge deck numanum hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numh precast concrete products nume prestressed concrete bridge beams numdnum.e.num stone matrix ashpalt numi wearing surface bridge numc fire hydrants accessibility num fit structural steel stiffeners numu fittings electrical metric appendix a fence numanum prefabricated pavement base drain numcnum posttensioning numc slope pipe num fixture light numa flagger training numy flagging construction surveying numk flared terminal section numc flasher traffic signal numbnum.d numbnum.d numbnum.d flashing warning sign numi flat construction surveying numi sheet aluminum signs numb num flatness surface numhh flexible pavements num floating numknum floodlights numb general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num flowchart concrete specification nume flushing numhnum flyash numb num foam insulation numf numpnum.b joint fillers numf footings spread numenum forceaccount work payment numd forcetransfer units concrete pavements num longlife concrete nume foreign borrow excavation numb numc forest fires num regulations num forms casting numanum cement concrete centering numanum for internal voids numdnum gutter numb metal bridge deck permanent numanum pavements numd structures numh concrete pavement patching numf curb plain cement concrete numb numf guarantee notification numw metal bridge deck numhnum pretensioning numcnum.b removal cement concrete sidewalk numf concrete median barrier numd pavements numm curb plain cement concrete numf structures numqnum sidewalk numc temporary numhnum test highway lighting numu tie holes waterproofing numrnum void box beam numm formulas for seed numbnum foundation box culvert material numgnum castinplace numgnum.a drains structure numd excavation numa highway lighting pole numb gutter numa sidewalk numa sign numg sound barriers nume numenum steelfinned pipe numgnum.b traffic signal supports numb framed bents timber structures numcnum frames inlet numa manhole numb frangible bases lighting pole numanum free fall method concrete placement numhnum friable particles coarse aggregate numcnum friction pile numh frozen material embankment numbnum full depth reclamation num furnishing of right of way num g gabion baskets numc gabions num gaging system tensioning bridge beams numcnum galvanized faying surfaces bolted numjnum.e mechanical spice system numc reinforcement bars numh steel coating system numb surfaces preparing for painting numbnum galvanize repair numr numsnum galvanizing numb numanum nums num num paint num gaskets joint material numb gates rightofway fence nume num general its devices num maintenance num plant num provisions num requirements temporary traffic control signals num geocell num load distribution mat num geogrids num num class num uniaxial reinforcement numc general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num num class num and num biaxial numd num geocell confinement system num geofoam lightweight fill num geomembrane num physical requirements numb geomembrane hydrocarbon resistant numb geometric limitations for heat curving numanum geotextiles num num construction classes numb fabric prefabricated pavement base drains numanum.d numb interlayer nonwoven numa physical requirements numb rock basin numa energy dissipator numb lining numb silt barrier fence numa heavy duty numa germination seed numbnum numi glare screen concrete num glass beads application rate numcnum numc intermix numc numcnum reflective num surfaceapplied numc numcnum glassy particles coarse aggregate numcnum glued laminated hardwood timber members num members timber structures numgnum.b stringers bridge deck numdnum glulam timber structures hardwood num gps numd numdnum nume gradation antiskid material numc fine aggregate numcnum numcnum select granular material numb grade adjustment of existing misc .
structures num point construction surveying numf sheet num grading fine aggregate numc timber members glued laminated hardwood numanum granular material embankment type num numanum.b type num numanum.c select num granulated slag numanum graphite lubricant joint material num grates inlet numa gratuities and penalties numc gravel coarse aggregate numanum gray iron castings numhnum grinding concrete pavement num grooving longitudinal existing concrete pavement num transverse concrete pavement retexturing num ground anchors nume granulated blast furnace slag num rod numq numi numj wire numbnum grounding numq numj bushings numfnum lugs numfnum structures numqnum terminal numf grounds electrical fence numd numf on structures numq sign lighting numk traffic signal numanum grout box culverts numgnum nonshrink epoxy numb for shear keys numg pipe culverts numc posttensioning numfnum water num grouting equipment numfnum posttensioning operations numfnum strand ducts numonum grubbing num for signs numd guarantee general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num cold plastic pavement markings or legends nume epoxy pavement markings numd hot thermoplastic pavement markings nume lighting numw snowplowable raised pavement markers numf traffic signals numh waterborne pavement markings numk guaranty bid num guard stake construction surveying nume guide rail num num at box culvert numh elements numanum end treatments numanum material num offset brackets numanum over underground structures numanum posts numanum remove existing numd contractor property numdnum department property numdnum reset numc strong post anchor terminals numanum strong post inline anchors numanum structuremounted nume terminal sections numanum thrie beam num gutter curb plain cement concrete num plain cement concrete num guy anchor assembly numm wire silt barrier fence numf h halfcircle pipe numanum hammers pile driving numanum handholes traffic signal pole numanum handling bearings bridge numcnum.a.num numfnum bituminous material numc box culvert nume cement numc material num plants numanum precast concrete products num prestressed concrete bridge beams numf steel bridge superstructure numcnum timber numa hand railing bridge aluminum num steel num hardware fence num guide rail num metal median barrier num signal head numh timber structures numc hardwood glulam timber structures num hauling restrictions num hay mulch numanum.a hazardous waste unexpected num head frame assembly high mast lighting numb heads signal num heat scarification pavement markings numk treating structural steel numw heating concrete protection numpnum.a structural steel fabrication numa heavy duty membranes num herbaceous plants numanum numgnum herbicides numd numh num treatment numb hex head bolts lighting hardware numa high load multirotational bearings numcnum.h num mast installations supervision numf material num tests numu warranty numc strength bolts connections steel bridges numcnum numj material numd high friction surface treatment hfst num highpressure sodium lamps numa numa highway advisory radio subsystem num highway lighting num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num cable installation numh certification numc temporary numn numb hinge plates numbnum.a historical findings num hog rings aluminum numanum holes accuracy numcnum bolt numc nume bored timber structures numbnum dowel num nume drilled numcnum group accuracy nume nail nume pin boring numy probe numc punched numcnum reamed numcnum numenum rod nume screw nume test numb hot mix asphalt hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture base course num design num fine graded num hot thermoplastic pavement markings num housing sign numc housings high mast lighting numbnum numcnum hub construction surveying numc hydrants fire accessibility num hydrated lime num i identification sign numf steel during fabrication numdd identifying marks highstrength bolts numdnum illuminated signs internally numg impact attenuating devices permanent num temporary num numb reset num numb impending damage pile numn inaccessible areas painting numcnum.d incidental construction num incinerators open pit numb infiltration rate pipe underdrain and pavement base drain numanum.e infiltration testing numm nummnum initial tensioning pretensioning numcnum.g injection epoxy crack seal num fittings epoxy injection numc procedure epoxy numd ink sign numd inlaid pavement marking cold plastic numc inlet extensions numa grates and frames numa protection storm num concrete block numb numb numb filter bag numa numa numa pipe numc numc numc inlets num precast num inoculant leguminous seed numc numd inoculation mycorrhizal numfnum input devices microcomputer numbnum inserts fabrication numb inspection box culvert numc caissons nume epoxy protection for structural steel numd facilities num numenum numenum fence num final numa num year design life pipes numo except num year design life pipes numn concrete pipes numnnum metal pipes numnnum thermoplastic pipes numnnum glued laminated hardwood timber members nume metal plate culverts numanum.c numanum general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num pipe culverts during installation numq pipe culverts except num year design life pipes numn pipe culverts num year design life pipes numo remote numonum manual numonum plants nursery stock numanum precast concrete numa plate cut edges numknum reports drilled caissons numj project records num structural steel fabricated nume welds num work num inspector duties num inspectorincharge authority and duties num inspectors field office num installation bearings bridge numcnum.a.num bolts alternate design numcnum.f box culvert numg cable highway lighting numh sign lighting numi compression joint seal for bridges numd compost filter berm numbnum filter sock numa conduit highway lighting numg sign lighting numh connectors timber structures numbnum enclosure highway lighting numn high mast lighting numf joint seal bridge numd service pole numk sheathing ducts numd snowplowable raised pavement markers numc sound barriers nume traffic signal supports numc instruction manuals traffic signals numh insulating mats nume numpnum.b insulation foam numf insurance certificate num num workers compensation num liability numb integration atms its device num its device numc kit numb intelligent transportaion system its devices num intent of plans and specifications num interlayer nonwoven geotextile numa intermediate coat existing structural steel numdnum.f numdnum.b structural steel numcnum.b curing compound numd internally illuminated signs numg internet service nume interpretation of approximate estimate of quantities num invoices numdnum iron castings numh metallic coarse aggregate numcnum issuance of proposal num j jacked conduit numd pipe numh jacking force tensioning bridge beams numcnum slabjacking numcnum jobmix formula numcnum nume nume nume joint abutting structural steel numr backing material num bonded concrete overlay of asphalt surfaced pavement numi bituminous concrete curb numf cement concrete paving stream beds numc structures numn cleaning concrete pavements longitudinal num transverse num compression seal for bridges numb concrete median barrier numc pavement patching general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num longitudinal numm transverse nume shoulders num construction aggregatebituminous base course nume aggregatecement base course nume cement concrete pavements numinum contraction cement concrete pavements numinum elliptical concrete pipe numdnum expansion cement concrete pavements numinum sidewalk nume filler preformed closed cell polyethylene nume polyurethane foam numf premolded expansion num hma courses plantmixed longitudinal superpave mixture numknum other superpave mixture numknum transverse superpave mixture numknum material num metal pipe numdnum new pavement patching numb numenum noncoated bolted connection numjnum.a notched wedge numknum.c painted bolt connection numjnum.b patching concrete pavement numa numenum continuously reinforced concrete pavement numa plain cement concrete curb nume concrete mountable curb nume pressure relief num rehabilitation num reinforced or plain cement concrete pavement longitudinal numj transverse numi relief pavement num sealing concrete pavement patching numn concrete longitudinal num pavements numn transverse num material num shear key between adjacent box beams numd shoulder relief num slipform paving method numgnum slurry seal longitudinal numgnum transverse numgnum surface tolerance numonum venture num joints see joint junction boxes highway lighting nump numa precast concrete num sign lighting num traffic signal numc k key former longitudinal joint material numc l laboratory field numanum labor disputes num laborers selection of num lag screws numd laminated girders and deck panels numg neoprene bearing pads num timber members surfacing of numd laminating requirements glued laminated hardwood timber members numc lamination definition numbnum lamps high pressure sodium numbnum lane restrictions numm laneuse traffic control signal heads numd numg lapping reinforcement nume lashing traffic signal numi latching device high mast lighting numc latent defects numb general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num lateral lane restrictions numm latex emulsion admixture nume modified mortar num laws to be observed num layer separation geotextiles numdnum laying pipe pipe culverts numc layout of plantings numb snowplowable raised pavement markers numa lead sheet numr leads piledriver numanum legal relations to the public num rights no waiver of num legend application equipment numbnum sign numd numf advisory numhnum legends pavement cold plastic num leveling courses hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numgnum liability public officials num third party num liability insurance numb licenses numa numg light emitting diode led blankout signs numj specifications numenum numbnum light fixture numa lighting contactor numf highway num num temporary numn numb material num sign num num lighting pole see pole lighting anchorages numg placing anchorage numg lightning arrester nume lights warning num lightweight aggregate numanum lime hydrated num lime pozzolan num limestone pulverized agricultural numanum limitations of operations num bridge deck wearing surface nume epoxy application or injection nume line application equipment numbnum post num line item joint venture numa lining rock num linseed oil boiled numpnum num numa liquid membraneforming curing compound numab c numpnum.a liquidated damages construction engineering numa erosion and sedimentation control es noncompliance liquidated numd road users numb work zone numc live loads cement concrete structures numqnum.c load external cement concrete structures backfilling numqnum.b dead numqnum.a live numqnum.c pile test numb dynamic numd static numc switch traffic signal controller assembly numbnum.e numbnum.e numbnum.e local stone stone backfill num local traffic maintenance nume safety nume lockpin and collar fasteners numcnum.h log pile driving numh longitudinal grooving of existing pavements num longitudinal joints see joint longlife concrete pavement num loop amplifiers nume numbnum.b numbnum.c numbnum.d numbnum.e detector numanum numbnum sensors numd general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num numbnum.a lot acceptance hma courses plant mixed superpave mixture numhnum metal plate culverts numanum.b size precast concrete products numd lowalloy steel pipe numk low slip coefficient bolted connection numjnum.c strength cement concrete adjusted payment of num strength precast concrete products num tier subcontractor num lubricant adhesive joint material numdnum.b bearing high load multirotational numf graphite joint material num pulling numc lumber numa luminaires arm mount cobra head hps numb led numc conventional lighting num high mast lighting hps numa led numb highway lighting numj overhead mount underpass numf post top mount hps offset numd ring assembly numd sign lighting numf num wall mount underpass nume m magnetic amplifiers numl numbnum.b numbnum.c detector numanum numbnum dry film thickness gage numcnum sensors numk numbnum.a magnetometer amplifiers numj numbnum.b numbnum.c detector numanum numbnum sensor numi numbnum.a main disconnect highway lighting numd maintenance agreement microcomputer nume compost blanket numanum filter berm numbnum filter sock numb during temporary suspension of work numb num erosion control numc existing roadway num on call closed circuit television cctv camera numb dynamic message signs dms numb highway advisory radio har subsystem numb its devicesgeneral numb portable closed circuit television pcctv numb portable dynamic message signs pdms numb vehicle detector subsystem numb painting of existing structural steel num performed work num preventive closed circuit television cctv camera numa dynamic message signs dms numa highway advisory radio har subsystem numa its devicesgeneral numa portable closed circuit television pcctv numa portable dynamic message signs pdms numa vehicle detector subsystem numa roadway numb seeding numj sod nume general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num structures numb traffic during blasting operations numi during construction num local nume tree removal selective numf trimming numf vegetative material numb malleable iron castings numhnum manholes num covers numb extensions numa frames numb sections precast reinforced concrete num steps numc manufacture bridge bearings numcnum.a.num manufactured material num sand numanum manufactured certified test report mctr numdnum.b manual bituminous patching num markers cable numt numb conduit numt numb distance num raised pavement plowable num subsurface drain outlet red num num tubular numg marking bearings bridge nume epoxy resin numbnum lubricant adhesive joint material numdnum.b precast products numd removal pavement num seals joint material for shipping numdnum.a structural steel fabricated numdd timber members glued laminated hardwood numc traffic num markings pavement cold plastic num epoxy num hot thermoplastic num preformed thermoplastic num waterborne num work area numk masonry brick num num units num mass theoretical metal plate culverts numanum.b limits vehicle numb master controller assembly traffic signal systems num numb matchmarking numh material num acceptance num antiskid num numc bituminous num cement concrete numb control of num defective num departmentfurnished num disposal within the project num from within the project use num handling num inspection numb joint num backing num manufactured num measurement cement concrete nume on hand payment num other than rps certification numbnum quality control numbnum unacceptable num preliminary acceptance and approval numa reclaimed numa rps acceptance or rejection numanum acceptance plans numanum disposition of lots numanum quality control numanum responsibility numanum select granular num selected surfacing num steel square posts numbnum storage num stored payment numa suitable embankment and backfill numj numh structural traffic signals numb surplus numk numi tests num topsoil num transportation num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num unacceptable num unsuitable numk numi mating surface bearing numcnum mat geocell load distribution num mats bar num insulating nume material transfer vehicle mtv numcnum meaning of terms num measure units of num measurement of drilled cores numsnum forces pretensioning numcnum.e material cement concrete nume nondestructive testing numsnum quantities num mechanical splice system reinforcement bars numc mechanically laminated panels timber structures numgnum.a mechanics selection of num median barrier concrete num metal num metal material num precast concrete num meeting preplacement numanum numknum.a meetings project control numbnum membrane heavy duty num waterproofing numc numh mesh reinforcement fabrication numb support silt barrier fence numb message sign changeable numw numb message signs dynamic num portable num metal bridge deck forms permanent numanum cribbing numb numb curb drain num median barrier num material num pin erosion protection numcnum pipearch culverts corrugated num plate arches numa numbnum culverts num pipearches numa pipes numa waterstops numcnum metallic coated corrugated steel pipe numanum.b steel pipearch numa slope pipe fittings numd steel end sections numb iron aggregate numcnum meter socket numdnum methods num reforestation numgnum metric si information appendix a microcomputer battery backup system numd compatibility numf input devices numbnum maintenance agreement nume miscellanous numbnum monitor numbnum price adjustments numa software numc surge protector numbnum system num micro surfacing num microwave vehicle detector mtv numb mild steel castings numgnum milling of bituminous pavement surface num profile num milling of cement concrete pavement surface num mill orders numenum numenum mill test report mtr numdnum.a mineral valuable findings num minimum strength ratio fine aggregate numcnum wage provisions enhanced appendix c wage specifications and rates num miscellaneous drainage stone backfill num material highway lighting num microcomputer numbnum structures grade adjustment num rebuilt num misfits steel bridge numcnum mix design see mixture design mixers general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num cement concrete plant and truck mixed numb rcc numg slurry seal nume mixing aggregatebituminous base course numb aggregatecement base course numb cement concrete conditions cool and cold weather numfnum hot weather numfnum plant mixed numc retarding admixtures numfnum truck mixed numc volumetric mixed nume concrete prestressed bridge beams numdnum.d cold recycled bituminous base course numb numb epoxy resin numbnum.b numc touch up system numenum mortar pressure numc paints numcnum subbase numc water for num mixture composition hma courses plantmixed finegraded nume stone matrix asphalt nume superpave mixture nume wma courses plantmixed superpave mixture nume polymermodified emulsified asphalt paving system numf mixture design aggregatecement base course numf bituminous concrete curb numd concrete bridge deck wearing surface numf prestressed bridge beams numdnum.c latex modified mortar numf potentially reactive aggregate numg precast concrete products numb slab stabilization numf slabjacking num mobilization num modified pozzolancement combinations mechanically num modular architectural block system num module digital recorderplayback numc weather reciever numd moisture and density control embankment numb content hardwood lumber numanum numbnum monitor microcomputer numbnum monitoring airblast numk vibration numj water supply numl monopipe steel sign structure numa mortar num application pressure mortar numf block supports numdnum.a curing pressure mortar numg horizontal joints between manhole components numb latex modified num masonry joints numb mixing pressure mortar numc moisture content nume nonshrink numd anchor bolts nume dowels nume studs nume nonstaining numd pipe joints numa pointing structures num pressures numd stone slope walls numb surfacing structures num water num mountable curb plain cement num mulch binders numb mulches numa mulching num numgnum maintenance numd planted areas numc seeded areas numa multirotational bearings high load numcnum.h num municipal waste num mycorrhizal inoculation numfnum n nail construction surveying numd natural sand numanum neglect of contract numa general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num neoprene bearing pads plain and laminated num compression seals preformed numd material numm nump strip seal dam num nitrogen fertilizer slow release numanum nonasphaltic emulsion mulch binder numbnum noncompliance num nondesignated borrow areas numa waste areas numa nondiscrimination clause appendix c nonshrink epoxy grout numb for shear keys numg prestressed concrete bridge superstructure numc mortar numd for studs dowels and anchor bolts nume nonstaining mortar numd nonwoven geotextile interlayer numa normal curing cement concrete structures numpnum protection cement concrete structures numpnum normalizing structural steel numw notice to proceed num notification of delay claim num numericallycontrolled drilled field connections numcnum nursery stock numanum numgnum.a nut rotation numcnum.d nuts aluminum numn antitheft numj driving numcnum extruded panel sign postclips numa flat sheet aluminum signs numf highstrength numdnum pilot numcnum o obstruction drilled caisson numj occupational safety and health num office inspectors field numanum offset brackets guide rail numanum num metal median barrier num provision state contracts appendix c open graded subbase ogs numa compaction nume placement numd pit incinerators numb opening of bids num sections of project to traffic num box beam noncomposite numdnum concrete pavement patching numq overlay asphaltsurfaced pavement numq concretesurfaced pavement numl slab stabilization numf work zone to traffic numbnum numcnum operational losses pretensioning numcnum.f support period numday numbnum operations limitation of num optically programmed signals numc signal heads numb numc other bonding compound num outlet prefabricated pavement base drain numcnum protection rock num structure concrete num subsurface drain num overhead numdnum mount luminaire underpass numf supports traffic signal numb signs conflicting numdd overjacking numcnum overlay asphaltsurfaced pavement bonded concrete num concretesurfaced pavements bonded concrete num num mm thin asphalt superpave mixture design num ultrathin portland cement concrete num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num overtime charges numdnum p packaged dry concrete numb packaging bridge bearings numcnum.a.num numfnum epoxy resin numbnum packing plants numanum paint application to structural steel numcnum coating system see coating system construction surveying numh primer see primer shop prequalification numa structural steel existing num num thickness numcnum thinning numcnum waterborne pavement markings numb painting bearings bridge numd brush numcnum.c conditions for numcnum field numcnum finish coat numcnum.c inaccessible areas numcnum.d intermediate coal numcnum.b pollution control numanum primer numcnum.a numcnum.a protection of structure persons and property numanum removal unsatisfactory paint numcnum roller numcnum.b shop numcnum spray numcnum.a steel bridge superstructure numd structural steel num existing num num fabricated numu numcc surface preparation numb technical data numc timber structures numf waterborne pavement markings num paneltopanel connections interconnected decks numdnum panels solar numbnum paper bituminous num let bids num mill compost numfnum parameters timining numh partialdepth repair concrete pavement num numf curing numg joint sealing numh joints longitudinal nume transverse nume mixing equipment for numd opening to traffic numj repair area preparation numb resounding repairs numi participation requirements diverse buisness appendix c party walls refinishing nume patching concrete bridge deck repair numf pavement num structures numknum hole slab stabilization numdnum manual bituminous patching num material numa precast concrete products numf prestressed concrete bridge beams numdnum.f patented devices material and processes num paved energy dissipator num shoulders type num type numf type nums and type numsp num type num num type num num type num type numf type nums and type numsp num type num num pavement base drain num longlife concrete num markers raised snowplowable num marking removal numb num markings cold plastic num epoxy num hot thermoplastic num preformed thermoplastic num standard paint beads numb general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num tape numb waterborne num work area numk relief joint num rubblizing concrete num pavements reinforced or plain cement concrete num reinforced or plain cement concrete rps num removal of existing numc roller compacted concrete num paving for stream beds cement concrete num payment num bond num construction surveying numa final calculation numa inspectors field office and inspection facilities num mobilization num mowing numb schedule numb stored material numa unidentified work construction surveying numb watering numb payments current estimate num release of final num payment of incentive evaluation of bituminous pavement ride quality and num evaluation of concrete pavement ride quality and num payment of incentivedisincentive evaluation of bituminous longitudinal joint density num peat numfnum pot numanum.c numgnum.a pedestal supports traffic signal numc pedestal units numb pedestrian pushbutton numbnum numcnum railing num signal heads numc nume numf stub poles numd penalties gratuities numc prevailing wage numf penetrating sealers reinforced concrete substructure surfaces numc pennsylvania installation direct design paidd computer program numanum.a pennsylvania trade practices act num percent joint venture two party numb three party numc percent within tolerance numanum.a perforations pipe underdrain and pavement base drain numanum.c performance and progress num bond num performed work maintenance num responsibility numa period of establishment plants numgnum permanent barricades num permanent erosion control products numb permeable base course asphalt treated num cement treated num permits numa numg erosion and sediment pollution control num personal liability of public officials num pervious pavement system bituminous num concrete num photoelectric control device numm numb physical properties closed cell neoprene sponge nummnum numpnum requirements cement nume epoxy resin numbnum pier caps protective coating numb piles num absolute refusal numbnuma bearing nume value numg bent timber structures numcnum castinplace concrete numb numbnum cutting off numc driving numb resistance numj timber numo end bearing numg general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num end driving criteria numbnum.b extending nume friction numh hpiles steel numc impending damage numn load test numf dynamic numc numgnum static numd log for driving numh penetration numi rate numk point bearing numf preservative treatment numa rebuilding nume shells filling with concrete numd steel numbnum thickwall numbnum.a thinwall numbnum.b test numa numb load numb timber numa numbnum tip elevation estimated numl predetermined numm reinforcement numbnum welding numi piledriver leads numanum piledriving equipment numa pin connections numcnum holes boring numy metal erosion control numcnum structural steel numx threads for numz pipe acrylonitrilebutadiene styrene abs numanum assembly temporary riser num bedding numb and backfill numbnum cast iron numn cement concrete structures nume placement in certification numanum cleaning existing culverts numj coated corrugated galvanized steel numanum.d corrugated aluminum alloy numanum.c numanum.d numanum polyethylene pe numanum.a.num numanum.b.num numanum.c.num numanum.d.num numanum.e.num steel pipe metallic coated numanum.b numanum.b numanum culverts num ductile iron numanum.a elliptical reinforced cement concrete numanum.a elongation metal nume endsections num extension existing culvert numi concrete collar num fittings numjnum numknum flanges numjnum numknum halfcircle numanum inspection numn numo numq jacked numh laying pipe culverts numc storm sewer numa underdrain numa lowalloy steel numk metal numanum plate numbnum perforated plastic semicircular numanum polyethylene group i and ip numanum.a.num group ii and iip numanum.b.num group iii numanum.c.num group iiip numanum.e.num group iv numanum.d.num group ivp numanum.f.num group v numanum.e.num group vp numanum.g.num group vi numanum.f.num group vip numanum.h.num group vii numanum.g.num polypropylene group vi numanum.f.num group vip numanum.h.num group vii numanum.g.num polyvinyl chloride pvc group i and ip numanum.a.num group iii numanum.c.num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num group iiip numanum.e.num porous concrete numanum reinforced concrete rc numanum numanum.b relaid numk removal and replacement numm round reinforced concrete numanum.a slope fittings num steel numj storm inlet protection numc numc numc storm sewer numa thermoplastic numanum threaded parts numjnum numknum trench numb underdrain numa num welded fittings numjnum numknum pipearch coated corrugated galvanized steel numc corrugated aluminum alloy numb numanum.e steel metallic coated numa culverts corrugated metal num plate numbnum pipe joints mortar numa caulking compound numa pipe underdrain and pavement base drain num acrylonitrilebutadiene styrene abs pipe numanum corrugated aluminum alloy pipe numanum steel pipe metallic coated numanum polyethylene pe pipe numanum infiltration rate numanum.e perforations numanum.c perforated plastic semicircular pipe numanum pipe length numanum.f plastic pipe numanum.g polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe numanum porous concrete pipe numanum prefabricated pavement base drains numanum size numanum.b strength test numanum.d pits preparation for plants numd pixel specifictions numenum numbnum pk nail construction surveying numj placement of concrete pavements numf embankment numb prefabricated pavement base drain numcnum subbase numd slurry seal numf placing aggregate for sidewalk bed numb anchor bolts cement concrete structures numf bituminous concrete curb nume brick numd box culverts numgnum concrete bearing area of substructures numknum bridge decks numknum patching numknum precast products numc prestressed bridge beams numdnum.e reinforced arches numknum slipform paving method numgnum structures numk superstructures numknum under water numknum embankment structures numt equipment wearing surface bridge deck numanum expansion plates cement concrete structures numf latex modified mortar numc lighting pole anchorage numg metal plate culverts numb plain cement concrete curb numc reinforcement numd for pressure mortaring numb sod numd structure backfill numbnum numt topsoil numb mixture stockpiled numb stockpiled numa wearing surface bridge deck numc plain blasting numc safety numd base course num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num cement concrete curb num gutter num gutter num pavements num rps num concrete mountable curb num mechanical splice system numc neoprene bearing pads num reinforcement bars numanum numbnum plan damage prevention painting steel numanum erosion and sediment control num project files release num qc paving operation numanum numanum traffic control num planing edge numknum plans examination of num intent of num timing traffic signals nume plant botanical num bare root br numanum period of establishment numgnum pit preparation numd placing numgnum replacements numgnum starter numanum.e numgnum.d stock numa watering numgnum bridge beam numa chief engineer numanum general for construction num inspectors authority numenum numenum stock numa planting numg backfill mix nume cleanup numgnum layout numb time restrictions numg plantmixed cement concrete numanum num hma courses standard and rps stone matrix asphalt num superpave mixture num stone matrix ashpalt num fine graded num wma courses standard and rps superpave mixture num plastic cement sampling and testing numdnum.a marking tape nume mesh support silt barrier fence numb plate cut edges numk plates bent numt fabrication of members nums rolling direction nums steel numbnum plug grasses rushes and sedges numanum.d numgnum.a point bearing pile numf pointing brick masonry nume of structures with pressure mortar num pole electrical service numa lighting accessories nume aluminum numc anchor bases numanum numbnum num .
numcnum arms num bases aluminum numcnum breakaway numanum frangible numanum steel numbnum conventional num finish numbnum foundation excavation for pole numb hardware num numh head frame assembly numb high mast num hoist cables numg installation nume latching device numc luminaire ring assembly numd service installation numk shaft numbnum numcnum steel numb winch assembly nume pedestrian numd general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num wood support numf pollution control painting structural steel numanum polyester fiber drawn bituminous concrete curb numc post coating numc polymer water absorbing numgnum polystyrene eps geofoam blocks expanded numa polystyrene preformed cellular numm polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe numcnum polyvinyl acetate mulch binder numbnum polyvinyl chloride pvc conduit numbnum pipe see pipe and pipe underdrain waterstops numcnum pond sedimentation num portable closed circuit television camera numf portable traffic control signal systems pedestal mounted num trailer mounted num post anchor terminals strong numanum breakaway steel num numb num system num terminal wood numd terminal foundation wood nume composite numb corner num end num fence protective numanum temporary numb guide rail numanum num inline anchors strong numanum line num metal median barrier numanum num permanent barricade numa polyester coating numc precast reinforced concrete numanum pull num railing bridge aluminum num steel num rightofway fence numb sign composite numb steel s or w beam numa numb numg numa treated wood num wood numa numa num silt barrier fence numc heavy duty numb steel channel numb bar numa cposts numb guide rail and median barrier num ibeam for guide rail numa square for traffic sign numb structural numanum wood for barricades numanum guide rail numc postclips for traffic signs numb post mounted signs type a num remove num reset num type b num remove num reset num type c num remove num reset num type d num type e num remove num reset num type f num remove num reset num posttensioning numcnum numcnum operations num systems numa timber structures numf post top mount luminaire hps offset numd pot bearings numbnum fabrication of numanum powder composition polyester post coating numc power driven hand tools numc poweroperated mechanical scarifier numb power supply highway lighting nums general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num num solar installation numhnum.a uninterrupted ups numanum numj pozzolan lime num pozzolans numenum num precast casting beds numc cement concrete block numa concrete barrier num blocks num products num evaluation disposition and price adjustment num endwalls num forms numc inlets num junction boxes num manhole sections reinforced concrete num method concrete median barrier construction numc plants concrete products num products marking numd reinforced concrete box culvert num slope wall cement concrete block num top units concrete numd preconstruction conference numa predetermined amount pda water pollution control unforeseen num predetermined pile tip elevation numm preemption acoustic numdnum emergency numgnum global positioning satellitegpsnumdnum optical numdnum railroad numgnum prefabricated pavement base drain numanum preformed cellular polystyrene numm closed cell polyethylene joint filler nume fabric filter drain numa neoprene compression joint seal for bridges num seals numdnum.a strip seals numdnum.a polyurethane foam joint filler numf thermoplastic pavement markings num premolded expansion joint filler num preparation aluminum channels and blanks for permanent barricades numh areas to be protective coated numanum numbnum.a numcnum.a topsoiled numa bearing areas numcnum.b bids num crack seal epoxy injection num field connections numd foundation sidewalk numa galvanized surfaces for painting numbnum plant pits numd shear key joint numdnum shrub bed numc sod placement numc structure for pressure mortaring numa surface see surface preparation preplacement requirements numa numa numa preposttensioning numcnum numcnum prequalification of contractors and subcontractors num metal fabricators numa paint shops numa timber fabricators numc preservative treatment lumber and timber numa numd presplit blasting numanum numfnum pressure jacks numcnum.g.num mortar pointing structures num pressures for numd surfacing structures num relief joint num treatment process lumber and timber numa prestressed concrete beam construction num beams payment of num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num bridge beams num superstructure num protective coating nume prestressing concrete bridge beams numc posttensioning operations nume steel numa pretensioning numcnum numcnum pretreatment preformed thermoplastic pavement markings numb steel post for polyester coating numcnum price adjustment see adjusted payment prime coat bituminous num primer surface tolerant coating systems numdnum.e numdnum.a membrane numc paint numcnum.a numcnum.a zinc chromate numf private facilities and structures on the project num property care of num probe holes caissons numc procedure injection crack seal numd slab stabilization numd procedures delay claims num repair painting steel numanum production blasting numb numg profit numdnum project collaboration center numc control meetings numbnum records num site cleaning num proportioning plant office numanum proposal contents num issuance num protecting covers concrete num protection bituminous surface treatment numd brick masonry numf cold weather cement concrete structures numpnum concrete pavements nump structures nump cool weather cement concrete structures numpnum detectable warning surface numd during temporary suspension of work num ends of pavement numb finished base courses aggregatecement numf cold recycled bituminous nume hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numn normal cement concrete structures numpnum of surface bituminous seal coat numd numd outlet num painted surfaces numf persons during painting numanum prestressing steel numdnum property during painting numanum reinforcement numb storm inlet numc numc numc structure during painting numanum traffic during construction num protective barrier num coating box culverts numm fence num temporary num protective coating adjacent prestressed concrete beams nume cement concrete pavement num precast concrete products numb reinforced concrete structures num steel square posts numbnum provisions buy america numa contractor integrity appendix c responsibility appendix c designated special appendix c general num standard special appendix b pruning nume public legal relations and responsibility to num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num officials liability num property care of num use lands num public works employment verification act num pulling lubricant numc pull post num pulverized agricultural limestone numanum pumped water filter bag num pumping method concrete placement numhnum purity seed numbnum pushbutton pedestrian numbnum q qualification testing nummnum.d qualifications caisson contractor numk quality assurance testing cement concrete numdnum control for contract numanum box culvert numd bridge beam prestressed concrete numb cement concrete numdnum hma courses plant mixed superpave mixture numenum manager precast concrete products numbnum plan for curing precast concrete products num requirements coarse aggregate numa numc fine aggregate numc quantities estimate of interpretation num measurement of num r radio communicatisons antenna numd numd radio communications system nume nume radio subsystem highway advisory num radio outdoor wireless numc numc rail fence numanum guide rail num num metal median barrier numanum num railing bridge aluminum num steel num hand aluminum bridge num steel bridge num pedestrian num railsteel bars numb timber structures numdnum railwayhighway provisions num rain protection against concrete pavements numr raised pavement markers temporary nonplowable numu snowplowable num random material embankment numanum.f stone slope wall num rebuilding piles nume rebuilt miscellaneous structures num reclaimed aggregate material ram hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numb reclaimed asphalt pavement rap hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numanum reclamation full depth num recording cement concrete materials numenum temperature concrete curing numpnum record of curing tempatures numdnum.g.num.c records drilled caissons numj recovery numbnum recycled asphalt shingles numcnum cellulose fiber mulch binder numbnum mixture with wood fiber numbnum concrete coarse aggregate numanum plantmixed bituminous concrete courses num num reduction time numb refinishing party walls nume reflective glass beads num sheeting extruded aluminum channel signs numc flat sheet signs numa numc general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num permanent barricades numf reflectorized pavement markings numk reforestation methods numgnum regulations forest and waterway num rehabilitation concrete pavement nume reinforced concrete box culverts castinplace numknum precast num manhole sections precast num pavement num rps num pipe numanum.a reinforcement adjustment numdnum bars num num caissons num .
numf epoxy coated numg galvanized numh metric si appendix a stainless steel numi structures numbnum uncoated corrosion resistant numj bending and straightening requirements numc cement concrete paving stream beds numb structures numb concrete pavements numh continuously reinforced concrete pavement patching nume fabric bearing pads numc pressure mortar pointing and reinforcing nume field adjustment numc lapping nume mechanical splice system numc placing for mortar pointing and surfacing numb prestressed concrete bridge beams numdnum splicing nume steel num numa laminates bearing pads numb storage numd numb support systems numdnum rejection bridge beams prestressed concrete numd precast concrete block numd seeding and soil numi steel castings numgnum.c structural steel fabricated numenum timber members glued laminated hardwood numenum relaid pipe numk relay traffic signal dial transfer dial transfer numcnum.c heavy duty numcnum.b light duty numcnum.a release from warranty numcnum relief joint pavement num pressure num shoulder num remote monitoring num removal caisson casing numi existing bridges num culverts num pavements numc numc numc signs numc numb subbase numd surface course num falsework cement concrete structures numq forms cement concrete structures numq concrete pavement numm paint unsatisfactory numcnum pavement markings numb num pipe culverts numm shrub numa snow numc tree numa repair bridge deck concrete num galvanize numr plate cut edges numknum procedures painting steel numanum numdnum shotcrete numk replacement damaged vegetation numi pipe culverts numm planting numgnum representative authority num required completion date numa contract provisions federal aid construction general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num contracts appendix c requirements anticollusion numf blasting nume disadvantaged business enterprises appendix c filler metal nummnum.b good faith appendix c groove weld nummnum.c diverse business participation appendix c reset temporary barrier num num numb impact attenuating devices num numb resistance insulation direct buried cable numu pile driving numj responsibility of contractor num for damage claims num to the public num restoration of surface open by permit num of site sign nume shoulder numc restricted performance specifications rps acceptance of material numa determining conformity numbnum hma courses plantmixed fine graded num stone matrix asphalt num superpave mixture num wma courses plantmixed stone matrix asphalt num superpave mixture num plain cement concrete pavements num reinforced cement concrete pavements num tests numa unacceptable material numa restrictions hauling num lateral lane numm temperature waterborne markings nume retained structures by the contractor numc department numb retention period project records num retesting slab stabilization nume retrofit detectable warning surface numc revetment systems concrete block num rhizome roots herbaceous plants numanum.a numgnum.b rightofway fence num num furnishing num right to reject bids numa rigid pavements num rivets nume roadside development num roadway maintenance during construction numb rock barrier num basin numa class size no .
numa construction entrance num embankment material numanum.d numbnum.d energy dissipator numb excavation numb lining numa outlet protection num socket drilled caissons numg rolled beams curving numa rolled erosion control products num roller compacted concrete base course num painting numcnum.b requirements numcnum rolling bituminous seal coat numc surface treatment numc seeded areas numf special num rotating bracket numc rubberized joint sealing material numb numc trough material numg rubber sponge expansion joint filler numb rubbing rails numb rubblizing of concrete pavements num rumble strips bituminous temporary numa numb shoulder num s safety of local traffic nume general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num samples check welded stud shear connectors numenum sampling epoxy resin numbnum fine aggregate numc manufactured sand numanum mortar sand numc natural sand numanum plastic concrete numdnum.a sandblasting num numanum equipment numanum.a sanitary provisions num sawcutting concrete pavement patching numb numb sawing bituminous overlays numb equipment numa scale onsite numb scarification bonded concrete overlay of concretesurfaced pavements numbnum concrete bridge decks num existing shoulder numb schedule cpm numb cpm resource loaded numc narrative numa schedule construction numb num scheduling cooridnator numbnum school zone sign numh scope of work num required changes in numd scratch courses hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numgnum screw lag numd seal coat bituminous num using precoated aggregate num compression joint preformed neoprene for bridges numd num crack epoxy injection num groove numc slurry num seal coatsurface treatment oil chip pavement markings numk sealing abandoned water wells and springs num bituminous overlays numc conduit numanum crack num crossstitching concrete pavement nume detectors numanum joint rehabilitation numanum joints and cracks using asphalt num concrete pavements numn material joint num rings bearing numd seating rubblized concrete pavement numd seats bearing numcnum.h.num second tier subcontractor num sediment basin num sediment trap embankment num riser num sedimentation control geotextiles numc plan num pollution control plans and permits num pond num structures cleaning num seed numb formulas numbnum herbicides numd inoculant numc numd seeding nume dates numa maintenance numj rate numbnum rolling numf soil supplements numa numc tillage numb segments box culvert nume select granular material numrc num selected borrow excavation numc material surfacing num selection of laborers and mechanics num selective control in seeded areas numdnum shrub and tree removal num selector switch photoelectric control contactor numg separation geotextiles numdnum sepration layer geotextile interlayer numenum.a numg asphalt interlayer numenum.b general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num numh service disconnect numdnum electrical numf nume head numdnum poles numa installation numk wire numbnum services by others numdnum settlement of contract numd sewage sludge compost numanum.e numfnum sewer brick numa sexual harassment clause appendix c shadow vehicle numz sharepoint numc shaft drilled caissons numa shale deleterious numcnum material embankment numanum.e shaping existing shoulder numc shear connectors welded studs nume key joints between adjacent box beams numg numd plate timber connectors numbnum sheathing duct numd sheet copper nump lead numr zinc numq sheeting reflective permanent barricades numf white polyethylene numa numb white polypropylene numc shells pile filling with concrete numd thickwall numdnum thinwall numdnum steel for piles numbnum thickwall numbnum.a thinwall numbnum.b shims highway lighting numb shipping bearings bridge numf cable highway lighting nume drainage material numcnum shipment gaskets numa of plants numanum prefabricated pavement base drain numanum.f structural steel fabricated numbb waterstop numa shipping statements numenum numenum shop assembly glued laminated hardwood members numf drawings numd bearings bridge numg box culvert numb bridge beams numb glued laminated hardwood timber members numd highway lighting num posttensioning operations numc structural steel fabricated numc painting structural steel num testing traffic signals numf shored installation numg shoring for excavation numh shotcrete num shoulder relief joint num shoulder restoration numc shoulder rumble strips num disposition of milled material numc equipment numa milling operation numb shoulders concrete num paved type num type numf type nums and type numsp num type num num type num num type num type numf type nums and type numsp num type num num shredded bark numbnum.b shredder vegetation numb shrub bed preparation numc removal selective num sidewalks cement concrete num sieve sizes appendix a sign blanks numa changeable message numb coating treatment numb general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num numb numb conflicting overhead numdd controller numg dynamic message num portable num erection numh existing department removal numh extruded aluminum channel numa num fabrication nume nume flashing warning numi flat sheet num num numb num num aluminum numb num num foundations numg housing numc identification numf internally illuminated numg light emitting diode led blankout numj lighting num num location numb motorist service numf post mounted type a num remove num reset num type b num remove num reset num type c num remove num reset num type d num type e num remove num reset num type f num remove num reset num posts see posts reflective sheeting numc numb numc school zone speed limit numh speed display numaa structure mounted num steel num supports num traffic num control additional numb signal cable numbnum displays numc numb heads num material num signals traffic num temporary numx num silica fume pozzolans num silicone joint sealing material numa sill caps bearing timber structures numcnum silt barrier fence num heavy duty num singlemember arms lighting pole numbnum single plane truss steel sign structure numa site of work examination num size coarse aggregate numc skin patching pavement markings numk slab stabilization num slabjacking num slabs bridge approach num slag blast furnace coarse aggregate numanum granulated coarse aggregate numanum ground granulated blast furnace num steel coarse aggregate numanum sleeper slab numb slide numd sliding surfaces bearing numc slip coefficient bolted connections numjnum.c slipform method concrete median barrier construction numb paving concrete pavements numg slipform paver numgnum slipforming bridge barriers numknum.b slope lines excavation beyond nume pipe temporary num fittings num wall castinplace cement concrete slab num precast cement concrete block num random stone num stone num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num plain numa mortared numb slopes excavation numd numf slot preparation numb slotted drains num slowrelease nitrogen fertilizer numanum slurry seal num pavement markings on numk snowplowable raised pavement markers num snow removal numc sodding num sodium chloride num software numf control numj microcomputer numc soil amendments numf embankment material numanum.a supplements numa numc solar panels numbnum solvent cleaning numbnum sound barriers num soundness coarse aggregate numcnum fine aggregate numcnum test numcnum span steel sign structure box shaped truss numb single plane truss numa trichord truss numb wire traffic signal numg special equipment numcnum provisions designated appendix c examination num specialty items numb standard appendix b supplement antipollution measures appendix c specific equal employment opportunity responsibilities num specific gravity numcnum numcnum specifications conformity with num coordination with drawings num examination num intent of num led and pixel numenum numbnum optical electrical and mechanical numenum other than rps numb numb determination of conformity numbnum speed display signs numaa spherical bearings bridge numcnum.f numanum splice bars numd connections and fittings prefabricated pavement base drain numanum.h splicing cable numg reinforcing steel numc nume wire numg split ring timber connectors numbnum sponge rubber joint material numb spray painting numcnum.a spread footings numenum spreading aggregatebituminous base course numb aggregatecement base course numb equipment slurry seal numd hma course plantmixed stone matrix asphalt numh superpave mixture numh seal coat numc spring boxes num stability of embankment numc stabilization slab num stabilizing around patches concrete pavement numk stainless steel mechanical splice system numc stainless steel material structural steel numanum.g stakes construction surveying numb control num plant numg numgnum wood numgnum standard drawings num pavement markings paint beads numb tape numb special provisions appendix b test sieves appendix a staples general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num erosion control numcnum silt barrier fence numd starter plant numanum.e numgnum.d state contracts offset provision appendix c stenciling numcnum.e final product numdnum steel annealing numw bearings bridge beams numj bridge hand railing num railing num superstructure num carbon numanum castings numg coldformed welded tubing numanum.a channel posts numb cposts numb curb drain numc dowels numh erected numb forgings numfnum highstrength alloy plates quenched and tempered numanum.f highstrength lowalloy structural numanum.c columbianvanadium structural quality numanum.d quenched and tempered numanum.a min .
yield point numanum.e hpiles numc ibeam posts numa identification during fabrication numdd marking numbb normalizing numw pipe numj plates numbnum numanum prestressing numa reinforcement num shafting numfnum shells for piles numbnum thickwall numbnum.a thinwall numbnum.b shipping numbb sign structure num slag coarse aggregate numanum spacer tube numd spotzone maintenance painting num stiffeners fit numu stress relieving numw structural fabricated num numd num shop painting num tubing numanum.a numanum.b numm welded wire fabric num numbnum stiffeners fit numu stockpiled topsoil placing num stockpiling on bridges num stockpiling topsoil num stone backfill for miscellaneous drainage num coarse aggregate numanum matrix asphalt num slope wall num random num storage aggregates numb bearings bridge numcnum.a.num box culvert nume cement numd drainage material numc.num equipment numf material num numf plants numanum temporary numa precast concrete products num prestressed concrete bridge beams numf reinforcement numd numb sod temporary numb steel bridge superstructure numcnum structural steel fabricated numf timber numa timber members glued laminated hardwood numf stored material payment numa storm sewer num straightening metal bridge material numcnum reinforcement numc structural steel fabricated numa strand splices pretensioning numcnum.h.num surfaces numcnum.b vices numcnum.d straw mulch numanum.b stream general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num beds cement concrete paving for num channel slopes numf stress relieving structural steel numw stretcher bar fence num strikeoff cement concrete pavements initial numf final numk concrete pavement patching numh machine method numknum.a manual method numknum.b strikes or labor disputes num stringing strands numcnum.c strip seals preformed neoprene numd structural steel fabricated num numd material num prepayment numanum shop painting num spotzone maintenance painting of existing num structure backfill numbnum foundation drains numd miscellaneous grade adjustment num rebuilt num mounted signs num steel sign num structures num cement concrete num cleaning sedimentation num demolition total or partial num hardwood glulam timber num maintenance during construction numb retained numb numc timber num studs shear connectors nume subbase num open graded ogs numa quality requirements numc subcontract approval nume subcontractors prequalification num subgrade num drains num subletting of contracts num sublots hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numhnum.a submission component item schedule numa submittals numbnum substitutions plants numanum substructure steel bridge contractor numcnum.g.num timber structures numc subsurface drainage geotextiles numb drain outlets num subsystem highway advisory radio num vehicle detector subsystem num ups numd numj pantiltzoom ptz numcnum suitable material embankment numanum excavation numj superpave hma base course standard num wma base course standard num hma binder course rps num wma binder course rps num hma binder course standard num wma binder course standard num hma wearing course rps num wma wearing course rps num hma wearing course standard num wma wearing course standard num finegraded course num thin asphalt overlay courses num mm num superstructure cement concrete numknum contractor numcnum.g.num prestressed concrete bridge num steel bridge num timber structures numd supervision high mast lighting installation numf supplements soil numa supports distance marker num mortar blocks numdnum.a temporary num traffic signal num num wire numdnum.b support systems reinforcement numdnum surety bonds num completion of contract by numb surface applied pavement markings cold plastic numd general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num condition bolted connections numjnum correction concrete pavements numknum flatness determination of numhh preparation asphalt surface nume bituminous concrete numd bonded concrete overlay surfaced pavement numb concrete bridge deck repair numb epoxy protection for structural steel numb numenum painted galvanized surfaces numbnum painting structural steel numb existing numc waterborne pavement markings numd protective coating for reinforced concrete surfaces numanum numbnum.a numcnum.a waterproofing numb wearing surface bridge deck numb profile comparator numcnum seal epoxy injection numb tolerances for base course bituminous cold recycled bituminous numf concrete pavement numo rps concrete pavements numo hma courses plant mixed superpave mixtures numl treatment bituminous num using precoated aggregate num high friction hfst num high load multi rotational bearings numcnum timber nume surfaces reinforced concrete protective coating num surfacing laminated members numd selected material num structures pressure mortar num surge protector microcomputer numbnum traffic signals numcnum.c surplus excavated material numk survey postblast numm preblast numb survey grade global navigation satellite system gnss inspection units numm surveying construction num suspend work authority numb suspension of work temporary numc maintenance and protection num switch load traffic signals numbnum.e numbnum.e numbnum.e system central management numa intelligenttransportation its num radar detection numanum remote monitoring and control num video detection numbnum polymermodified emulsified asphalt paving num systems preemption numc traffic signal num t tack coat bituminous num bridge deck nums construction surveying numa tanbark mulch numanum.a tape bond breaker numc numj numh tapered tube structures numc tax responsibility numb technical representation painting steel numanum technician concrete numdnum telephone dialup communications system numi temperature definitions numpnum heat curving steel numanum preheat and interpass nummnum.e records numpnum restrictions waterborne general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num pavement markings nume temporary air pollution control num baffle wall num bridge and approaches num barrier num num numb reset num num numb structure mounted num numb reset num erosion control products numa fence protective num forms cement concrete structures numhnum highway lighting numn numb impact attenuating devices num reset num nonplowable raised pavement markers numu numb riser pipe assembly num rumble strips bituminous numa numb slope pipe num storage of plants numa suspension of work numc maintenance and protection during num traffic signals numx numb num tendons prestressed concrete bridge beams numn tension wire fence numanum terminal blocks numenum sections alternate numa bridge connection numb flared numc guide rail numanum num terminals insulated locking spade numenum termination clause nume of contract num test camera lowering device cld numbnum cylinders curing cement concrete numdnum.b prestressed concrete numdnum.e.num forms numu factory demonstration numbnum holes caissons numb independent system numcnum load pile numb next gen atms system numcnum of new special equipment numcnum onsite standalone numbnum pile numa system numbnum numday numbnum testing antiskid material numd bearing pads numf bearings bridge nume boltnutwasher assemblies numdnum.d bolts numdnum.a cable highway lighting nume castings steel numgnum cement nume concrete numd quality control numdnum plantmixed numa truckmixed numa volumetricmixed numenum coarse aggregate numb concrete median barrier nume prestressed bridge beam numdnum.a deflection slab stabilization numb nume depth see tests for depth documentation fabricated structural steel numdnum dye penetrant num electrical distribution numj equipment inspection numb numb fine aggregate num friction of highload multi rotational bearings numenum its device numb lighting highway numu sign numm magnetic particle num material num nuts proof load numdnum.b plastic cement numdnum.a polyester post coating numcnum precast concrete products nonself numa self consolidating numanum proof load bearing numenum qualification nummnum.d general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num quality assurance cement concrete numdnum rotationalcapacity boltnut washer assembly numcnum.b seeding numi shop traffic signal numf soundness fine aggregate numcnum straightedge concrete pavements numknum strength pipe underdrain and pavement base drain numanum.d structural steel fabricated numenum numanum full size tests numaa tendons prestressed concrete bridge beam numnnum timber members glued laminated hardwood numenum traffic signals numgnum numj systems num ultrasonic testing of welds num verification numdnum washers numdnum.c welded stud shear connectors numenum testing equipment batching plant numa cement concrete numdnum coarse aggregates numb field laboratory numb fine aggregates numb tests for depth aggregatebituminous base course numh aggregatecement base course numi cold recycled bituminous base course numj hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numm reinforced or plain cement concrete pavements nums rps nums subbase numg tests of material num tether wire traffic signal numh texture diamond grinding concrete pavement numc thermal cutting nump thermal effect pretensioning numcnum.f.num theromoplastic end sections numf thermoplastic pavement markings preformed num thickness gage magnetic dry film numcnum of paint numcnum numdnum thickwall steel shells pile numbnum.a thin particles coarse aggregate numcnum thinwall steel shells pile numbnum.b third party liability num threads bolts and pins numz thrie beam guide rail num tie bars installing numd strap plant numgnum.c wire fence fabric numanum tiebolts longitudinal joint material numb tied connections cement concrete structures nummnum tightening boltnutwasher calibrated wrench numcnum.e direct tension indicator numcnum.g turnofnut numcnum.d tillage seeding numb timber connectors numbnum glued laminated hardwood members num gluelaminated numa glulam structures num piles numa stringers bridge deck numdnum numdnum structural numa structures num time numa clock traffic signal numb extension numa price adjustment inspection facilities numanum numanum microcomputers numanum reduction numb price adjustment microcomputers numanum restrictions planting numg timing plans traffic signals nume timing parameters numh tip elevation pile estimated numl predetermined numm reinforcement pile numbnum toe wall numc toggle and buckle straps numg general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num bolts numb numb tolerance bearing bridge num bridge deck max .
width numenum caissons numa diamond grinding concrete pavement numd metal plate pipes metal plate pipearches and metal plate arches numanum.b neoprene sponge numenum precast concrete products num prestressed concrete members numenum box beams numenum.b ibeams numenum.a pa bulbtee beams numenum.a next beams numenum.c sound barrier erection numenum fabrication numenum structural members laminated timber numgnum surface see surface tolerances surfacing glued laminated hardwood numbnum void forms numenum tooke gage numcnum tooled finish cement concrete numknum.b tooth expansion dam num top units concrete nume precast concrete numd topsoil num excavation numg material num mixture num placing num stockpiling num placing numb stockpiled num preparation of areas to be topsoiled numa spreading numb stockpiling num touch up system epoxy nume traffic accommodation and control num control additional signs numb plan num lines painting numb maintenance during construction num temporary suspension num markings painting numb protection during construction num temporary suspension num signal communications num material num general requirements num material num supports num material num num systems material num num temporary numx numb num signing and marking num training flagger numy its device numd traffic signal system numl trailer numa numc numh transfer of prestress numdnum.h transformers highway lighting numk transient voltage surge suppression tvss numbnum transmitter numb transplanting num backfill mix nume existing plants numf replacement for dead or unhealthy material numgnum.b transportation bituminous material numc cement numc of material num precast concrete products num prestressed concrete bridge beams numg transverse grooving of concrete pavement for retexturing num joints see joint trap sediment embankment num riser num treated wood posts num treatment chemicals glued laminated hardwood numd glued laminated hardwood num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num tree ownership for disposal purposes num removal selective num staking numgnum trimming numc tremie cement concrete numj method concrete placement numhnum trench backfill lighting numc backfill utilities numbnum backfilling pipe culverts numf box installation numg excavation lighting numc pavement base drain numa pipe culverts numb underdrain numa subgrade drains numa trim blasting numa numfnum trimming tree numc trough drain num truck mixed cement concrete numanum num truss arms lighting pole numbnum chords verticals and webbs sign structure numa rods fence num tube steel spacer numd tuber herbaceous plants numanum.b numgnum.b tubing steel numm tubular markers numg numb turned bolts numinum holes for numcnum turnofnut tightening boltnut numcnum.d twistin toggle and buckle straps numg twocoat painted waterproofing numc numrc num u ubolts sign structure numi ultrathin bonded wearing course num ultrathin portland cement concrete overlay num unacceptable material num uncoated corrosionresistant steel reinforcement bars numj underdrain num pipe num unexpected hazardous waste num unexpected residual waste num unforeseen water pollution control num united statesflag vessels use num units of measure numa unsatisfactory paint removal numcnum unsuitable material numk updates numbnum usage volumetric mixed cement concrete numb use of material from within the project num utility infrastructure and utility adjustments damage to numd delay of work numb interfering with contract operations numa adjustments by others numc v value engineering num payment num vegetation maintenance of existing numb numc vehicle detector subsystem num vehicle registration numc vehicle shadow numz vehicular signal heads numa numa venture joint num num verification form numb verification jmf hma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numenum.c wma courses plantmixed superpave mixture numenum.c verification testing cement concrete numdnum vessels united statesflag use num veterans preference selection numa vibrating equipment concrete placing numknum video detection system numbnum void filling slab stabilization numdnum voids numcnum volumetric mixed cement concrete num vtype heating steel numanum.b w general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num wage provisions enhanced minimum appendix c wages responsibility for payment numb wall anchor numc cutoff numc mount luminaire underpass nume panels sound barriers numb posts sound barriers numa slope castinplace cement concrete slab num precast cement concrete block num stone num mortared numb plain numa random num temporary baffle num toe numc warm mix asphalt wma courses plant mixed superpave mixture base course num design num warning lights additional numb warranties traffic signals numh warranty numc warranty bond numb washed gravel numanum.c washers antitheft numjnum highstrength numdnum requirements steel bridge numcnum.c sign structure numi traffic signing numa numf waste municipal num unexpected residual num waste areas num water num absorbing polymer numfnum curing cement concrete structures numpnum.b filter bag pumped num measurement for cement concrete mixes numenum pollution control numb unforeseen num waterblasting num numbnum equipment numanum.a waterborne pavement markings num application rate numc watering planting numgnum waterproofing num at abutments prestressed concrete bridge superstructure numf box culverts numgnum concrete structures numr conditioners applying numc defective work numf limitation of operations numa membrane systems numd numh nonstandard applications nume primers applying numc surface preparation numb waterproof resin sealer numenum waterstops joints material num waterway regulations num numa wave equation analysis piles numgnum wearing surface concrete bridge deck num weather limitations cement concrete placement numf numc ground granulated blast furnace slag used with concrete mixes num hma courses plant mixed superpave mixture numb stone matrix asphalt numb restrictions bridge beams prestressed concrete numdnum.d concrete pavements numb weed seed numbnum weep holes numc weights theoretical metal plate culverts numanum.b welded connections numee field numgnum girders curving numa stud shear connectors nume wire fabric deformed num steel num welding numm fence numb material numt piles numi welds num general index num item section item section gi num change no .
num numee wet material embankments numbnum wheelguards timber structures numdnum white polyethylene sheeting numa burlap backed numb polypropylene fiber backed numc winch assembly high mast lighting nume drive high mast lighting numf wingwalls numj wire connectors nume fabric certification num welded deformed num steel num failure in tendons numcnum ground numbnum guy numf inlet signal head numanum mesh support silt barrier fence numb nuts numenum service numbnum signal nume span numg support systems reinforcement numdnum.b tether numh wiring diagrams field traffic signals nume withdrawal or revision of bids num wood barricade panels numbnume chips mulch numanum.f fiber mixture with recycled cellulose fiber numbnum mulch numanum.c binder numb planks permanent barricades numb posts permanent barricades numanum sign numb treated numanum num preservative glued laminated hardwood numd num stakes erosion control numcnum structural timber numa work additional numb alteration of num area pavement markings numk authority to suspend numb by others numb control of num defective num cement concrete structures numu extra num numc forceaccount numd inspection num performed maintenance of num resumption of numc review and acceptance of numc suspension of numc workers compensation insurance num workers competence of numb working drawings numc bearings bridge numcnum.a.num workmanship iron castings numhnum steel castings numgnum timber structures numb wrap closed joint pipe class num numg open joint pipe class num numf wrapping of the core prefabricated pavement base drain numanum.g z zinc chromate primer numf sheet numq index of changes to pub num num num initial edition index of changes to publication num general the index of changes has been created to assist pub num users in determining the specifics of semiannual changes that have been made since the release of the initial edition .
the index below contains the specifics of all changes which includes where revisions have been made and why .
the change process changes to pub num will be issued biannually .
numbered changes will consist of a transmittal letter with instructions for posting of revisions an updated version of this index and the new pages containing the revisions .
all numbered changes will also be filed electronically in sequential order on the penndot website .
numbered changes will be incorporated into the pub num and filed under the change letters and indices portion of the publication .
hardcopy users must physically post the new pages .
however this process of posting has been completed prior to release on the internet .
the researching of revisions .
it is critical to many users of pub num to be able to determine the point in time revisions were made and what specifically the changes were .
this is particularly important from a contractual perspective when researching specifications that were applicable to projects previously awarded .
to assist in this process users should refer to the change index that follows .
if revisions have been made users can then refer to the specifics found in the initial edition or subsequent numbered change .
change index of revisions through change no .
section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change preface toc num num num num num num num index of changes to pub num num num initial edition section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num num num num app a app b app c gen index index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num index of changes to publication num general the index of changes has been created to assist pub num users in determining the specifics of semiannual changes that have been made since the release of the initial edition .
the index below contains the specifics of all changes which includes where revisions have been made and why .
the change process changes to pub num will be issued biannually .
numbered changes will consist of a transmittal letter with instructions for posting of revisions an updated version of this index and the new pages containing the revisions .
all numbered changes will also be filed electronically in sequential order on the penndot website .
numbered changes will be incorporated into the pub num and filed under the change letters and indices portion of the publication .
hardcopy users must physically post the new pages .
however this process of posting has been completed prior to release on the internet .
the researching of revisions .
it is critical to many users of pub num to be able to determine the point in time revisions were made and what specifically the changes were .
this is particularly important from a contractual perspective when researching specifications that were applicable to projects previously awarded .
to assist in this process users should refer to the change index that follows .
if revisions have been made users can then refer to the specifics found in the initial edition or subsequent numbered change .
change index of revisions through change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change preface toc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num num october num num to revise page numbers and to include new sections num num num num num and num num num num and num num october num num to define dmedmm as district materials engineer district materials manager and to remove reference to publication num bulletin num because it no longer exists .
num numa num october num num to revise the references of forms eddvi and eddvii that were updated to new form numbers which are forms dnum and dnum .
num num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to comply with the cargo act and to remove metric information .
num numcnum and numa num october num num to comply with federal regulations cfrnum and to clarify that mtv is only required when specified .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num numa numbnum num num numb numb numth bulletnumd numb numth bullet numc numd numanum.a numanum.b numanum.c numanum.d numanum num num num numb numrd bullet numc and numd num october num num to include new section num and new section num and a note in the list of price adjustment of bituminous materials to include new sections num num num num and num and sections num and num in information for price adjustment for diesel fuel cost fluctuations to replace aashto t num with reference to ptm no .
num and to make related changes in terminology and language because of the reference replacement to revise section numanum.a to make consistent with the wording used in the rest of section numanum and to remove metric units .
num num numa b c numa b c d e f and numb c d num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num numc num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numi numk and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile to correct a typo and to add the title back to table a .
num numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numcnum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc as a base course on department projects .
num numd num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numf table a numg numgnum and numgnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num and to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on department projects .
num numc num october num num to correct a typo .
num numf num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of ultrathin bonded wearing course on department projects .
num numa num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num nums and numsnum num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc pavement on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on department projects .
num numbnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num new section num october num num to allow the use of longlife concrete pavements llcp on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numl num october num num to correct a typo in a section reference .
num num numcnum and nume num october num num to correct a spelling error and clarify where alternate internet connectivity options will be submitted .
num numanum.d num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numb and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numa numb numa numaf numb and num num october num num to include the use of roller compacted concrete rcc for concrete shoulders .
num numb and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numb numth bullet and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num num october num num to correct a typo and add information that was missed when changes were last made to this section .
num num numcnum table a numanum table b notes numbnum numbnum and numbnum tables f g h i num october num num to limit the aggregate field verification testing to subbase applications under the roadway and shoulders to add a requirement for test results to be provided within num days lot acceptance testing will result in the contractor being paid based on the results of the lot acceptance testing and for minor change like adding table as title and revisions to references in table b .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numcnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa and numd table a num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num num num and numbnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numanum note numb num and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numf numa and numd num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numanum numanum numg and numh num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
num num numg num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numf and numg num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
num numdnum.c num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
num numb num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num app a app b app c gen index general index num october num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num index of changes to publication num general the index of changes has been created to assist pub num users in determining the specifics of semiannual changes that have been made since the release of the initial edition .
the index below contains the specifics of all changes which includes where revisions have been made and why .
the change process changes to pub num will be issued biannually .
numbered changes will consist of a transmittal letter with instructions for posting of revisions an updated version of this index and the new pages containing the revisions .
all numbered changes will also be filed electronically in sequential order on the penndot website .
numbered changes will be incorporated into the pub num and filed under the change letters and indices portion of the publication .
hardcopy users must physically post the new pages .
however this process of posting has been completed prior to release on the internet .
the researching of revisions .
it is critical to many users of pub num to be able to determine the point in time revisions were made and what specifically the changes were .
this is particularly important from a contractual perspective when researching specifications that were applicable to projects previously awarded .
to assist in this process users should refer to the change index that follows .
if revisions have been made users can then refer to the specifics found in the initial edition or subsequent numbered change .
change index of revisions through change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change preface standard special provisions ssps and master construction items that apply to publication num num april num num to revise the instructions on how to access the standard special provisions and master items in ecms toc num num num num num num num and num num april num num to revise page numbers to include new section num revise format of tables and to revise the title of the appendix c table .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num num october num num to revise page numbers and to include new sections num num num num num and num num num num and num num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd and to remove reference to bulletin numspecifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum or federal specification ttpnum as applicable .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num and num num october num num to define dmedmm as district materials engineer district materials manager and to remove reference to publication num bulletin num because it no longer exists .
num num num april num num to define the encountering of unexpected residual or municipal waste during construction .
num numa num october num num to revise the references of forms eddvi and eddvii that were updated to new form numbers which are forms dnum and dnum .
num numanum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numanum num april num num to correct a typo .
num num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to comply with the cargo act and to remove metric information .
num num and num num april num num to revise typos in the titles of the subsections .
num numcnum and numa num october num num to comply with federal regulations cfrnum and to clarify that mtv is only required when specified .
num numb numc numcnum num numdnum num num table b and nume num april num num to define how to address acceptance based on num confidence interval instead of an assumed standard deviation and to adjust the payment for low strength aaaphpc .
num num numa numbnum num num numb numb numth bulletnumd numb numth bullet numc numd numanum.a numanum.b numanum.c numanum.d numanum num num num numb numrd bullet numc and numd num october num num to include new section num and new section num and a note in the list of price adjustment of bituminous materials to include new sections num num num num and num and sections num and num in information for price adjustment for diesel fuel cost fluctuations to replace aashto t num with reference to ptm no .
num and to make related changes in terminology and language because of the reference replacement to revise section numanum.a to make consistent with the wording used in the rest of section numanum and to remove metric units .
num index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numa b c numa b c d e f and numb c d num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num numc num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numi numk and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile to correct a typo and to add the title back to table a .
num numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num major section title num april num num to add the major section title to this section since it is the first section in the num series .
num major section title num april num num to remove the major section title since it no longer is the first section in the num series .
num num num num numa b c num and numanum num april num num to remove information that is covered in section num and to reference section num instead .
num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numcnum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc as a base course on department projects .
num numd num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numf table a numg numgnum and numgnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num and to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numb num april num num to correct a typo .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numo num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num numenum numenum.a.num numenum.d.num numetable a numh numj numanum numcnum and numcnum num april num num to implement the findings of the research report cost benefit analysis of antistrip additives in hot mix asphalt with various aggregates by mandating a minimum dosage of antistrip to all asphalt mixtures and revise the design esal range guidance to districts to allow districts to bump design esal levels in order to enhance asphalt durability .
num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num nump num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on department projects .
num numc num october num num to correct a typo .
num numf num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of ultrathin bonded wearing course on department projects .
num numa num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num nums and numsnum num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc pavement on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on department projects .
num numbnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
num numa numenum.c.num numa numi numj numknum and numknum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd to correct references to other subsections within the section and to correct grammar errors .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of longlife concrete pavements llcp on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numl num october num num to correct a typo in a section reference .
num new section num april num num to allow the use on unbonded concrete overlays on department projects .
num num numf num april num num the change is based on results from a research study performed by the pennsylvania state universitys evaluation of hydraulic plate compactor and discussions with industry .
num numc d f numa and numa b d l num april num num to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numcnum and nume num october num num to correct a spelling error and clarify where alternate internet connectivity options will be submitted .
num numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num numanum.d num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa num april num num to remove metric equivalent for slope .
num numb numanum num num and numi j k l m n num april num num to show that delineators will be paid separately .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numb and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numcnum.a num april num num to revise reference of mtd to lts .
num num num april num num to reference the correct section for slurry seal .
num num numa numb numa numaf numb and num num october num num to include the use of roller compacted concrete rcc for concrete shoulders .
num numb and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numb numth bullet and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num num october num num to correct a typo and add information that was missed when changes were last made to this section .
num num numbnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numcnum table a numanum table b notes numbnum numbnum and numbnum tables f g h i num october num num to limit the aggregate field verification testing to subbase applications under the roadway and shoulders to add a requirement for test results to be provided within num days lot acceptance testing will result in the contractor being paid based on the results of the lot acceptance testing and for minor change like adding table as title and revisions to references in table b .
num numdnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numcnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numbnum num num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard and to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numcnum.a num and num num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd and to add the grade designation to astm anum .
num num and numd num april num num to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numa and numd table a num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num numb table b and numbnum num num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num num nume f num april num num to correctly reference section num which has been revised .
num the whole section num april num num to group rolled erosion control products recps into temporary and permanent recps with the temporary recps further grouped according to functional longevity .
num numc and numa c num april num num to address an additional payment method for tree trimming .
num num and numbnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numanum note numb num and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numenum num and numd num april num num to correctly reference section num which has been revised .
num num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numf numa and numd num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num major section title num april num num to correct the font size of the major section title .
num numa numb numc d e g h j n p numqnum num nums numu v w and nume f g i r num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numk n num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numanum numanum numg and numh num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
num num numanum num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numa num april num num to improve the requirements for demolition plans .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to astm anum and the astms type ts because the standard has been withdrawn .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to astm anum and the astms type ts because the standard has been withdrawn .
num numg num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numf and numg num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numcnum.a numcnum.h numcnum.a num.b num.c numcnum.cnum numcnum.g table a and table b num april num num to remove reference to aashto m num and aashto m num because they have been discontinued and are no longer available and to remove metric equivalent for slope .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numc and numb num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference a federal specification ttpnum .
num numbnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num num numanum numbnum numbnum.a num.b num.a num.b numa numa numb numbnum numc d e and f numa b numa numa numcnum numb numcnum numd e h num and num num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numa b c num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numc numbnum.b .
and numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and to add a new type of glass beads and to add additional material requirements for glass beads .
num numc num.c and numa num num april num num to correct a typo and to revise a reference to section num .
num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numa b numanum.a numanum.a num.c numcnum numcnum.a num.b numcnum.a num.b numcnum numcnum.a num.b numd numdnum num num num num num numdnum numdnum.a num.b num.d numdnum numdnum.b numgnum numsnum numanum.a num.b numanum num num num num num numgnum numjnum numknum nummnum nummnum table nummnum.c.num.c numm table num numq numtnum and numgg num april num num to update fabrication certification categories sbr ibr etc .
to conform to current aisc criteria addition of astm a num hss material removal of withdrawn aashto specification designations addition of provisions for astm a num bolts overhaul of fastener material criteria for clarification and to conform to current aashto penndot and individual component specification requirements to conform to current aashto design criteria regarding limitations for heatinduced horizontal curvature in beams and girders and to correct an existing error in the definition of an equation parameter in section nummnum .
num numdnum.c num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
num numb num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numanum and numbnum num april num num to correct typos .
num nume num april num num to remove reference to withdrawn aashto standards .
num numa and table a num april num num to correct format and to remove reference to a withdrawn astm and replace it with a new astm reference .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num numenum num april num num to correct a typo .
app a app b app c gen index general index num april num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
general index num october num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num index of changes to publication num general the index of changes has been created to assist pub num users in determining the specifics of semiannual changes that have been made since the release of the initial edition .
the index below contains the specifics of all changes which includes where revisions have been made and why .
the change process changes to pub num will be issued biannually .
numbered changes will consist of a transmittal letter with instructions for posting of revisions an updated version of this index and the new pages containing the revisions .
all numbered changes will also be filed electronically in sequential order on the penndot website .
numbered changes will be incorporated into the pub num and filed under the change letters and indices portion of the publication .
hardcopy users must physically post the new pages .
however this process of posting has been completed prior to release on the internet .
the researching of revisions .
it is critical to many users of pub num to be able to determine the point in time revisions were made and what specifically the changes were .
this is particularly important from a contractual perspective when researching specifications that were applicable to projects previously awarded .
to assist in this process users should refer to the change index that follows .
if revisions have been made users can then refer to the specifics found in the initial edition or subsequent numbered change .
change index of revisions through change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change preface standard special provisions ssps and master construction items that apply to publication num num april num num to revise the instructions on how to access the standard special provisions and master items in ecms toc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and dspnum num october num num to revise page numbers to include new section num and dspnum to remove sections num num num num and num and to revise the titles and page numbers of sections num and num .
num num num num num num num and num num april num num to revise page numbers to include new section num revise format of tables and to revise the title of the appendix c table .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num num october num num to revise page numbers and to include new sections num num num num num and num num num num and num num october num num to remove reference about submitting a compact disk bid .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num and num num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd and to remove reference to bulletin numspecifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum or federal specification ttpnum as applicable .
num num and num num october num num to define dmedmm as district materials engineer district materials manager and to remove reference to publication num bulletin num because it no longer exists .
num numa and numd num october num num to remove reference about submitting a compact disk bid .
num num num october num num to remove reference about submitting a compact disk bid .
num num num april num num to define the encountering of unexpected residual or municipal waste during construction .
num numa num october num num to revise the references of forms eddvi and eddvii that were updated to new form numbers which are forms dnum and dnum .
num numanum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numb num october num num to revise the ecms help desk phone number and indicate the help desk is available num hours a day and num days a week .
num numanum num april num num to correct a typo .
num num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to comply with the cargo act and to remove metric information .
num numa numb numbnum numbnum numc numcnum.d numcnum.e numcnum.g numcnum.h numcnum.i numcnum numa and numb num october num num to better utilize asta powerproject for construction schedules and for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num num and num num april num num to revise typos in the titles of the subsections .
num numcnum and numa num october num num to comply with federal regulations cfrnum and to clarify that mtv is only required when specified .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numd num numanum.b and numanum.c num october num num to revise language relating to the blue book to coordinate with changes made to the equipmentwatch website the language related to workers compensation insurance has been expanded to clarify that the policy premium amount and associated payroll basis used in rate computations need only include a contractors fieldbased workforce and to remove reference to sections dealing with marshal asphalt mix design and to reference publication numapproved products for lower volume local roads .
num numb numc numcnum num numdnum num num table b and nume num april num num to define how to address acceptance based on num confidence interval instead of an assumed standard deviation and to adjust the payment for low strength aaaphpc .
num num numa numbnum num num numb numb numth bulletnumd numb numth bullet numc numd numanum.a numanum.b numanum.c numanum.d numanum num num num numb numrd bullet numc and numd num october num num to include new section num and new section num and a note in the list of price adjustment of bituminous materials to include new sections num num num num and num and sections num and num in information for price adjustment for diesel fuel cost fluctuations to replace aashto t num with reference to ptm no .
num and to make related changes in terminology and language because of the reference replacement to revise section numanum.a to make consistent with the wording used in the rest of section numanum and to remove metric units .
num num numb and numd e and f num october num num to remove reference about blasting and reference new section num that has more comprehensive information and specifications on blasting .
num the whole section num october num num the section was completely revised for changes for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num new section num october num num to provide more comprehensive information and specifications on blasting .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num numa numb and numc num october num num for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num numa b c numa b c d e f and numb c d num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num numc num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numi numk and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile to correct a typo and to add the title back to table a .
num numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num major section title num april num num to add the major section title to this section since it is the first section in the num series .
num major section title num april num num to remove the major section title since it no longer is the first section in the num series .
num num num num numa b c num and numanum num april num num to remove information that is covered in section num and to reference section num instead .
num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numcnum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc as a base course on department projects .
num numd num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numf table a numg numgnum and numgnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num and to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numanum numb numc numd nume and numh num october num num for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num numb num april num num to correct a typo .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num numbnum numenum.d.num table b numfnum numfnum.b numf numjnum and numanum num october num num to revise the reference back to section numcnumwhich has been revised and to allow the use of nummm nmas .
num numo num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numenum.d.num table a num october num num to correct typos .
num num numenum numenum.a.num numenum.d.num numetable a numh numj numanum numcnum and numcnum num april num num to implement the findings of the research report cost benefit analysis of antistrip additives in hot mix asphalt with various aggregates by mandating a minimum dosage of antistrip to all asphalt mixtures and revise the design esal range guidance to districts to allow districts to bump design esal levels in order to enhance asphalt durability .
num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num title num numanum numbnum numenum numenum.a numenum.c numenum.d numenum.d.num numenum.d.num table d numg numh numi numj numa numc numinum.a table f numinum.b numinum.c.num numk numanum numanum.b and tables g h and i num october num num to incorporate warm mix asphalt wma technology into stone matrix asphalt sma mixture design .
num nump num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on department projects .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num numa table a numa numb table b and numc num october num num to allow a new tack coat material that contains half of the water that the current aet contains and therefore will cure faster also a non tracking tack coat specification has been added and additional changes to update application rates to account for variable surface textures that are encountered in the field .
num numc numd and numb num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num and reference nummm nmas .
num numc num october num num to correct a typo .
num numf num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of ultrathin bonded wearing course on department projects .
num numa num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num nums and numsnum num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc pavement on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on department projects .
num numbnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
num numa numenum.c.num numa numi numj numknum and numknum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd to correct references to other subsections within the section and to correct grammar errors .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of longlife concrete pavements llcp on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numl num october num num to correct a typo in a section reference .
num new section num april num num to allow the use on unbonded concrete overlays on department projects .
num num numb and numf num october num num for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num numf num april num num the change is based on results from a research study performed by the pennsylvania state universitys evaluation of hydraulic plate compactor and discussions with industry .
num numc d f numa and numa b d l num april num num to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numcnum and nume num october num num to correct a spelling error and clarify where alternate internet connectivity options will be submitted .
num numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num numanum.d num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa num april num num to remove metric equivalent for slope .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numb numanum num num and numi j k l m n num april num num to show that delineators will be paid separately .
num numb and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numcnum.c num october num num to correct an astm reference and to make mtd lts .
num numcnum.a num april num num to revise reference of mtd to lts .
num num numc and numd num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num .
num num num april num num to reference the correct section for slurry seal .
num num numb numc and numd num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num .
num num numa numb numa numaf numb and num num october num num to include the use of roller compacted concrete rcc for concrete shoulders .
num numb and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numb numth bullet and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numa numbnum numbnum numbnum and numc num october num num to better utilize asta powerproject for construction schedules .
num num num october num num to correct a typo and add information that was missed when changes were last made to this section .
num num numcnum table num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num .
num numbnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numcnum table a numanum table b notes numbnum numbnum and numbnum tables f g h i num october num num to limit the aggregate field verification testing to subbase applications under the roadway and shoulders to add a requirement for test results to be provided within num days lot acceptance testing will result in the contractor being paid based on the results of the lot acceptance testing and for minor change like adding table as title and revisions to references in table b .
num numcnum and numenum num october num num to allow the use of antiwashout admixtures on department projects .
num numdnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numcnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numbnum num num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard and to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numcnum.a num and num num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd and to add the grade designation to astm anum .
num num and numd num april num num to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numa and numd table a num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num numb table b and numbnum num num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num num nume f num april num num to correctly reference section num which has been revised .
num the whole section num april num num to group rolled erosion control products recps into temporary and permanent recps with the temporary recps further grouped according to functional longevity .
num numc and numa c num april num num to address an additional payment method for tree trimming .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num and numbnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numanum note numb num and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numenum num and numd num april num num to correctly reference section num which has been revised .
num num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numf numa and numd num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numb num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numanum numcnum and numd num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numanum num october num num to remove the unnecessary soil compaction requirements .
num nume num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numa num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num numa and numk num october num num to add a second type of material to be used for sign coverings to indicated that pavement markings placed at the departments direction and under conditions not meeting section num will be paid by the department to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num and reference num mm nmas .
num major section title num april num num to correct the font size of the major section title .
num numc and numk num october num num to remove redundant references to section numbnum because the referenced section numf also references section numbnum and to reference section num for installing and tightening anchor bolts .
num numa numb numc d e g h j n p numqnum num nums numu v w and nume f g i r num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numk n num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numanum numanum numg and numh num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
num numb num october num num to reference the manufacturers recommendations for road surface preparations when applying preformed thermoplastic pavement markings .
num num numl numknum.a and numi num october num num to allow the use of antiwashout admixtures on department projects .
num numanum num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numa num april num num to improve the requirements for demolition plans .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numb num april num num to remove reference to astm anum and the astms type ts because the standard has been withdrawn .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to astm anum and the astms type ts because the standard has been withdrawn .
num numg num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa and numa num october num num to clarify the definition of a type num repair and to allow the use of bag mix class aaap cement concrete for small quantities .
num numf and numg num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numcnum.a numcnum.h numcnum.a num.b num.c numcnum.cnum numcnum.g table a and table b num april num num to remove reference to aashto m num and aashto m num because they have been discontinued and are no longer available and to remove metric equivalent for slope .
num numc and numb num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference a federal specification ttpnum .
num numbnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numb numc numg numcnum numcnum.a.num numdnum numf and num num october num num to revise language about nonshrink epoxy grout and gaps along elastomeric bearing pads .
num numgnum num october num num to revise the reference back to section numa which has been revised .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numanum numbnum numbnum.a num.b num.a num.b numa numa numb numbnum numc d e and f numa b numa numa numcnum numb numcnum numd e h num and num num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numa b c num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numc numbnum.b .
and numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and to add a new type of glass beads and to add additional material requirements for glass beads .
num numc num.c and numa num num april num num to correct a typo and to revise a reference to section num .
num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
num numa b numanum.a numanum.a num.c numcnum numcnum.a num.b numcnum.a num.b numcnum numcnum.a num.b numd numdnum num num num num num numdnum numdnum.a num.b num.d numdnum numdnum.b numgnum numsnum numanum.a num.b numanum num num num num num numgnum numjnum numknum nummnum nummnum table nummnum.c.num.c numm table num numq numtnum and numgg num april num num to update fabrication certification categories sbr ibr etc .
to conform to current aisc criteria addition of astm a num hss material removal of withdrawn aashto specification designations addition of provisions for astm a num bolts overhaul of fastener material criteria for clarification and to conform to current aashto penndot and individual component specification requirements to conform to current aashto design criteria regarding limitations for heatinduced horizontal curvature in beams and girders and to correct an existing error in the definition of an equation parameter in section nummnum .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numdnum.c num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
num numb num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numbnum numcnum numcnum numcnum numcnum and numb num october num num to be consistent with revised aashto and astm specifications .
num numanum and numbnum num april num num to correct typos .
num nume num april num num to remove reference to withdrawn aashto standards .
num numa and numg num october num num to provide reference to an applicable astm standard to ensure dimensions of bridge bearing pads are measured consistently and accurately .
num numa and table a num april num num to correct format and to remove reference to a withdrawn astm and replace it with a new astm reference .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num num numenum num april num num to correct a typo .
app a app b app c intro to app c dspnum num october num num to list new dspnum enhanced minimum wage provisions on department projects .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change dspnum iii.a num october num num to revise the ecms help desk phone number and indicated the help desk is available num hours a day and num days a week .
dspnum v.a v.b v.c vicnum viii.dnum and viiie num october num num to revise the ecms help desk phone number and indicate the help desk is available num hours a day num days a week and to revise the dbe submission requirements from num days to num days in accordance with fhwa requirements .
dspnum new dsp num october num num to include enhanced minimum wage provisions on department projects .
gen index general index num october num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
general index num april num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
general index num october num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num index of changes to publication num general the index of changes has been created to assist pub num users in determining the specifics of semiannual changes that have been made since the release of the initial edition .
the index below contains the specifics of all changes which includes where revisions have been made and why .
the change process changes to pub num will be issued biannually .
numbered changes will consist of a transmittal letter with instructions for posting of revisions an updated version of this index and the new pages containing the revisions .
all numbered changes will also be filed electronically in sequential order on the penndot website .
numbered changes will be incorporated into the pub num and filed under the change letters and indices portion of the publication .
hardcopy users must physically post the new pages .
however this process of posting has been completed prior to release on the internet .
the researching of revisions .
it is critical to many users of pub num to be able to determine the point in time revisions were made and what specifically the changes were .
this is particularly important from a contractual perspective when researching specifications that were applicable to projects previously awarded .
to assist in this process users should refer to the change index that follows .
if revisions have been made users can then refer to the specifics found in the initial edition or subsequent numbered change .
change index of revisions through change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change preface standard special provisions ssps and master construction items that apply to publication num num april num num to revise the instructions on how to access the standard special provisions and master items in ecms .
toc num num num and num num april num num to revise page numbers to include new section num and to revise the page numbers of sections num num and num .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and dspnum num october num num to revise page numbers to include new section num and dspnum to remove sections num num num num and num and to revise the titles and page numbers of sections num and num .
num num num num num num num and num num april num num to revise page numbers to include new section num revise format of tables and to revise the title of the appendix c table .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num num october num num to revise page numbers and to include new sections num num num num num and num .
num index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num num and num num october num num to remove reference about submitting a compact disk bid .
num num and num num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd and to remove reference to bulletin numspecifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum or federal specification ttpnum as applicable .
num num and num num october num num to define dmedmm as district materials engineer district materials manager and to remove reference to publication num bulletin num because it no longer exists .
num numa and numd num october num num to remove reference about submitting a compact disk bid .
num num num october num num to remove reference about submitting a compact disk bid .
num num num april num num to define the encountering of unexpected residual or municipal waste during construction .
num numa num october num num to revise the references of forms eddvi and eddvii that were updated to new form numbers which are forms dnum and dnum .
num numanum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num num num april num num to indicate that noncompliance with erosion and sediment pollution control plans and permits will result in withholding of payment of estimates for work completed until the corrective action has been taken .
num numb num october num num to revise the ecms help desk phone number and indicate the help desk is available num hours a day and num days a week .
num numanum num april num num to correct a typo .
num num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to comply with the cargo act and to remove metric information .
num numd num april num num to provide liquidated damages for erosion and sedimentation control es noncompliance as specified in section num .
num numa numb numbnum numbnum numc numcnum.d num october num num to better utilize asta powerproject for construction schedules and for compaction control of embankment index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change numcnum.e numcnum.g numcnum.h numcnum.i numcnum numa and numb and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num num and num num april num num to revise typos in the titles of the subsections .
num numcnum and numa num october num num to comply with federal regulations cfrnum and to clarify that mtv is only required when specified .
num num numb table b numdnum .
numdnum table c and numanum.c num april num num to edit the second table a by making it table b and making table b now table c and to correct references to these tables along with corrections that were part of the improved bridge deck revisions and to reference new section num in the price adjustment of bituminous materials list and price adjustment for diesel fuel cost fluctuations .
num numd num numanum.b and numanum.c num october num num to revise language relating to the blue book to coordinate with changes made to the equipmentwatch website the language related to workers compensation insurance has been expanded to clarify that the policy premium amount and associated payroll basis used in rate computations need only include a contractors fieldbased workforce and to remove reference to sections dealing with marshal asphalt mix design and to reference publication numapproved products for lower volume local roads .
num numb numc numcnum num numdnum num num table b and nume num april num num to define how to address acceptance based on num confidence interval instead of an assumed standard deviation and to adjust the payment for low strength aaaphpc .
num num numa numbnum num num numb numb numth bulletnumd numb numth bullet numc numd numanum.a numanum.b numanum.c numanum.d numanum num num num num october num num to include new section num and new section num and a note in the list of price adjustment of bituminous materials to include new sections num num num num and num and sections num and num in information for price adjustment for diesel fuel cost fluctuations to replace aashto t num with reference to ptm no .
num and to make related changes in terminology and language index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change numb numrd bullet numc and numd because of the reference replacement to revise section numanum.a to make consistent with the wording used in the rest of section numanum and to remove metric units .
num num numb and numd e and f num october num num to remove reference about blasting and reference new section num that has more comprehensive information and specifications on blasting .
num the whole section num october num num the section was completely revised for changes for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num new section num october num num to provide more comprehensive information and specifications on blasting .
num num numa numb and numc num october num num for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num numf numg and numd num april num num to include construction requirements for new class num geotextile .
num numa b c numa b c d e f and numb c d num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num numc num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numi numk and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile to correct a typo and to add the title back to table a .
num numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num major section title num april num num to add the major section title to this section since it is the first section in the num series .
num major section title num april num num to remove the major section title since it no longer is the first section in the num series .
num num num num numa b c num and numanum num april num num to remove information that is covered in section num and to reference section num instead .
num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num .
num numcnum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc as a base course on department projects .
num numd num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numf table a numg numgnum and numgnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num and to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numa num april num num to replace type c aggregate for use in subbase with type s aggregate .
num numanum numb numc numd nume and numh num october num num for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num numb num april num num to correct a typo .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num numbnum numenum.d.num table b numfnum numfnum.b numf numjnum and numanum num october num num to revise the reference back to section numcnumwhich has been revised and to allow the use of nummm nmas .
num numo num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num numenum.d.num table a num october num num to correct typos .
num num numenum numenum.a.num numenum.d.num numetable a numh numj numanum numcnum and numcnum num april num num to implement the findings of the research report cost benefit analysis of antistrip additives in hot mix asphalt with various aggregates by mandating a minimum dosage of antistrip to all asphalt mixtures and revise the design esal range guidance to districts to allow districts to bump design esal levels in order to enhance asphalt durability .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numg num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num april num num to give districts another tool for pavement preservation and for applications that a thinner overlay would be applicable .
num numinum.b and table g num april num num to include reference to ptm num and correct typos .
num title num numanum numbnum numenum numenum.a numenum.c numenum.d numenum.d.num numenum.d.num table d numg numh numi numj numa numc numinum.a table f numinum.b numinum.c.num numk numanum numanum.b and tables g h and i num october num num to incorporate warm mix asphalt wma technology into stone matrix asphalt sma mixture design .
num nump num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numenum num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious bituminous pavement systems on department projects .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num the whole section num october num num to remove the section from pub .
num .
it will now be in publication num as ms num .
num numa table a numa numb table num october num num to allow a new tack coat material that contains half of the water that index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change b and numc the current aet contains and therefore will cure faster also a non tracking tack coat specification has been added and additional changes to update application rates to account for variable surface textures that are encountered in the field .
num numc numd and numb num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num and reference nummm nmas .
num numc num october num num to correct a typo .
num numf num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of ultrathin bonded wearing course on department projects .
num numa num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num nums and numsnum num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of roller compacted concrete rcc pavement on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of pervious concrete pavement systems on department projects .
num numbnum num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
num numc num april num num to change the requirements for rapidset concrete patching materials .
num numa numenum.c.num numa numi numj numknum and numknum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd to correct references to other subsections within the section and to correct grammar errors .
num new section num october num num to allow the use of longlife concrete pavements llcp on department projects .
num nums num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numl num october num num to correct a typo in a section reference .
num new section num april num num to allow the use on unbonded concrete overlays on department projects .
num num numanum.a numanum.d.num numanum numanum.c.num anum.d.num anum.e.num anum.f.num anum.f.num anum.g numb numa .numb.numc .numdnumdnum numdnum numf numh numn numnnum .nnum .numnnum numo table d nump and numa num april num num to include group vii pipe joint installation inspection of each material type and other changes .
num numb and numf num october num num for compaction control of embankment and fill subbase subgrade and trench backfill .
num numf num april num num the change is based on results from a research study performed by the pennsylvania state universitys evaluation of hydraulic plate compactor and discussions with industry .
num numb numa and numa num april num num to address pipe joint installation issues and to reference new class num geotextile .
num numc d f numa and numa b d l num april num num to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numcnum and nume num october num num to correct a spelling error and clarify where alternate internet connectivity options will be submitted .
num numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num numanum.d num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa num april num num to remove metric equivalent for slope .
num numf and num num april num num to ensure thermoplastic end sections are only used on outlet ends .
num numanum numanum numanum numc num april num num to modify the departments roadside barrier policy to be in accordance index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change numd numdnum numc numd nume numf numg numo nump and numq with the mash implementation agreement .
num numb numanum num num and numi j k l m n num april num num to show that delineators will be paid separately .
num numb and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numcnum.c num october num num to correct an astm reference and to make mtd lts .
num numcnum.a num april num num to revise reference of mtd to lts .
num num numd and nume num april num num to reference new section num .
num num numc and numd num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num .
num num num april num num to reference the correct section for slurry seal .
num num and nume num april num num to reference new section num .
num num numb numc and numd num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num .
num num numa numb numa numaf numb and num num october num num to include the use of roller compacted concrete rcc for concrete shoulders .
num numb and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numb numth bullet and numa num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num table a num april num num to allow a minimum num elongation for adhesivebacked preformed membrane sheet for bridge decks when fiberglass is used as the reinforcing layer .
num num numa numbnum numbnum numbnum and numc num october num num to better utilize asta powerproject for construction schedules .
num num num october num num to correct a typo and add index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change information that was missed when changes were last made to this section .
num num table b and table c num april num num to add aashto no .
num and no .
num graduations in order to establish quality parameters for finer aggregates that are currently available and to facilitate the new num mm mix type in new section num also to provide requirements for type s coarse aggregate with reference to aashto t num for freezing and thawing of aggregate in water .
num numcnum table num october num num to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num .
num numbnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numcnum table a numanum table b notes numbnum numbnum and numbnum tables f g h i num october num num to limit the aggregate field verification testing to subbase applications under the roadway and shoulders to add a requirement for test results to be provided within num days lot acceptance testing will result in the contractor being paid based on the results of the lot acceptance testing and for minor change like adding table as title and revisions to references in table b .
num numb table a numc numdnum.a numdnum.b numdnum.b.num and numdnum num april num num part of the improved bridge deck revisions .
num numcnum and numenum num october num num to allow the use of antiwashout admixtures on department projects .
num numdnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numcnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa num april num num to correct a typo .
num numbnum num num april num num to remove references to withdrawn index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard and to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numcnum.a num and num num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd and to add the grade designation to astm anum .
num numa numb numa and numb num april num num to remove obsolete references to aashto and replace with references to astms .
num num and numd num april num num to correspond with changes to the standards on manholes .
num numa and numd table a num october num num to remove class num and revise class num .
num numb table b and numbnum num num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num num nume f num april num num to correctly reference section num which has been revised .
num the whole section num april num num to group rolled erosion control products recps into temporary and permanent recps with the temporary recps further grouped according to functional longevity .
num numc and numa c num april num num to address an additional payment method for tree trimming .
num num and numbnum num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numanum note numb num and numb num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num numth bullet and num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numenum num and numd num april num num to correctly reference section num which has been revised .
num num num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numf numa and numd num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numb num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numanum numcnum and numd num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numanum num october num num to remove the unnecessary soil compaction requirements .
num nume num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numa num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa num october num num to provide a more specific reference back to section num which has been revised .
num numh numnd bullet num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num num num numa and numk num october num num to add a second type of material to be used for sign coverings to indicated that pavement markings placed at the departments direction and under conditions not meeting section num will be paid by the department to remove reference to a section dealing with marshal asphalt mix design that will be removed from pub .
num and reference num mm nmas .
num major section title num april num num to correct the font size of the major section title .
num numc and numk num october num num to remove redundant references to section numbnum because the referenced section numf also references section numbnum and to reference section num for installing and tightening anchor bolts .
num numa numb numc d e g h j n p numqnum num nums numu v w and nume f g i r num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numk n num april num num to updaterevise the highway and index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numa num april num num to standardize traffic signal backplates .
num numanum numanum numg and numh num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
num numb num october num num to reference the manufacturers recommendations for road surface preparations when applying preformed thermoplastic pavement markings .
num num numb numknum numpnum numqnum numqnum.c numu and numi num april num num to address rain during bridge deck placement operations and as part of the improved bridge deck revisions and to correct typos .
num numl numknum.a and numi num october num num to allow the use of antiwashout admixtures on department projects .
num numanum num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numa num april num num to improve the requirements for demolition plans .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to astm anum and the astms type ts because the standard has been withdrawn .
num numb num april num num to remove reference to astm anum and the astms type ts because the standard has been withdrawn .
num numg num october num num to revise references to section num andor class num type a and type b geotextile .
num numa and numa num october num num to clarify the definition of a type num repair and to allow the use of bag mix class aaap cement concrete for small quantities .
num numf and numg num october num num to reference ptm no .
num in place of aashto t num .
num numcnum.a numcnum.h numcnum.a num.b num.c numcnum.cnum numcnum.g table a and table b num april num num to remove reference to aashto m num and aashto m num because they have been discontinued and are no longer available and to remove metric equivalent for slope .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change num numc and numb num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference a federal specification ttpnum .
num numbnum num april num num to change innovative and support services division issd to construction and materials division cmd .
num numb numc numg numcnum numcnum.a.num numdnum numf and num num october num num to revise language about nonshrink epoxy grout and gaps along elastomeric bearing pads .
num numgnum num october num num to revise the reference back to section numa which has been revised .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and replace with another aashto standard or astm standard .
num num numanum numbnum numbnum.a num.b num.a num.b numa numa numb numbnum numc d e and f numa b numa numa numcnum numb numcnum numd e h num and num num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numa b c num april num num to updaterevise the highway and sign lighting design and approval process and material specifications .
num numc numbnum.b .
and numa num april num num to remove references to withdrawn aashto standards and to add a new type of glass beads and to add additional material requirements for glass beads .
num numb numanum numanum .numanum .numanum numbnum num april num num to standardize traffic signal backplates to revise reference to bureau of highway safety and index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change and numdnum traffic engineering to bureau of maintenance and operations to revise the wording dampening device to mitigation devise and to reference the standard drawings to correspond with the language in the standard drawings .
num numc num.c and numa num num april num num to correct a typo and to revise a reference to section num .
num numbnum and numbnum num october num num to make updates in regards to radar detection at traffic signals .
num numa b numanum.a numanum.a num.c numcnum numcnum.a num.b numcnum.a num.b numcnum numcnum.a num.b numd numdnum num num num num num numdnum numdnum.a num.b num.d numdnum numdnum.b numgnum numsnum numanum.a num.b numanum num num num num num numgnum numjnum numknum nummnum nummnum table nummnum.c.num.c numm table num numq numtnum and numgg num april num num to update fabrication certification categories sbr ibr etc .
to conform to current aisc criteria addition of astm a num hss material removal of withdrawn aashto specification designations addition of provisions for astm a num bolts overhaul of fastener material criteria for clarification and to conform to current aashto penndot and individual component specification requirements to conform to current aashto design criteria regarding limitations for heatinduced horizontal curvature in beams and girders and to correct an existing error in the definition of an equation parameter in section nummnum .
num numdnum.c num october num num to reference aci num in place of publication num bulletin num .
num numb num october num num to remove the definition of dmedmm since it is now defined in the list of abbreviations in section num .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numbnum numanum numanum and num april num num to revise table a to revise requirements for braces by removing the weight per foot requirement and index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change numbnum the bending moment requirement and to correct a typo .
num numanum and numbnum num april num num to correct typos .
num numcnum numcnum numcnum numdnum numf and numb num april num num to address the specific gravity requirement for filled ptfe by removing the minimum requirement and adding a tolerance to be in accordance with the requirement of aashto lrfd table num to remove reference to a withdrawn astm and a canceled federal specification and to correct some typos .
num numbnum numcnum numcnum numcnum numcnum and numb num october num num to be consistent with revised aashto and astm specifications .
num nume num april num num to remove reference to withdrawn aashto standards .
num numa and numg num october num num to provide reference to an applicable astm standard to ensure dimensions of bridge bearing pads are measured consistently and accurately .
num numa and table a num april num num to correct format and to remove reference to a withdrawn astm and replace it with a new astm reference .
num num num april num num to remove reference to bulletin num specifications for paint and allied materials publication num because it no longer exists and to reference astm anum .
num numcnum num april num num to standardize traffic signal backplates .
num num numenum num april num num to correct a typo .
app a app b app c intro to app c dspnum num october num num to list new dspnum enhanced minimum wage provisions on department projects .
index of changes to pub num num num change no .
num section and portion changed revised w effective dates explanation section part or paragraph change no .
from nature and rationale for change dspnum iii.a num october num num to revise the ecms help desk phone number and indicated the help desk is available num hours a day and num days a week .
dspnum v.a v.b v.c vicnum viii.dnum and viiie num october num num to revise the ecms help desk phone number and indicate the help desk is available num hours a day num days a week and to revise the dbe submission requirements from num days to num days in accordance with fhwa requirements .
dspnum new dsp num october num num to include enhanced minimum wage provisions on department projects .
gen index general index num april num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
general index num october num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
general index num april num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
general index num october num num to revise for revisions made in change no .
num .
