alabama department of transportation standard specifications for highway construction num edition foreword this book has been prepared to provide a compilation of standard specifications for insertion by reference into alabama department of transportation construction contracts .
u.s .
customary and metric si units of measurement are shown in this num edition .
metric units of measurement are shown by the corresponding u.s .
customary units and are enclosed in braces .
the units of measurement either u.s .
customary or metric that are applicable to a construction project shall be those that are shown on the plans or in other contract documents .
the requirements given in these specifications may be revised or amended by supplemental specifications and special provisions that are applicable to a specific contract .
copies of this standard specifications book may be purchased from alabama department of transportation office engineer assistant bureau chief plans and proposals num coliseum boulevard montgomery alabama num book number ____________________________ table of contents division num general provisions num section num definition of terms num section num proposal requirements and conditions num section num award and execution of contract num section num scope of work num section num control of work num section num control of materials num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num prosecution and progress num section num measurement and payment num section num claims num section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num division num earthwork num section num clearing and grubbing num section num closing water wells num section num removal and relocation of structures num section num removal of miscellaneous existing drainage and other facilities num section num removal and reinterment of graves num section num mailbox reset num section num excavation and embankment num section num machine grading shoulders num section num structure excavation and backfill for drainage and minor structures num section num excavation for bridges num section num special protection for rock slopes num section num landslide corrections num section num treatment of lime sinks num section num roadbed processing num section num stabilized roadbed num section num lime stabilized roadbed num section num detour bridges num section num geosynthetics for slope and soft soil reinforcement num section num removal of underground storage tanks and contaminated soil num section num cement mortar flowable backfill num division num bases num section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num section num full depth reclamation with portland cement num section num soil and aggregate materials for miscellaneous use num section num density requirements for compaction num section num drainage plane layer num section num plant mix bituminous base and patb num division num surfacing and pavements num section num bituminous surface treatments num section num slurry seal coat num section num microsurfacing seal coat num section num tack coat num section num joint sealant for hma pavement num section num planing milling of existing pavement num table of contents section num triple layer bituminous surface treatment num section num asphalt pavements num section num polymer modified open graded friction course num section num stone matrix asphalt sma fiber stabilized asphalt concrete num section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num section num scoring bituminous pavement surface num section num soil or aggregate type surface num section num portland cement concrete pavement num section num slabjacking of portland cement concrete pavement num section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num section num cleaning and sealing joints and cracks in concrete pavement num section num grinding concrete pavement surfaces num section num bridge deck thin polymer overlay num division num structures num section num structural portland cement concrete num section num steel reinforcement num section num structure foundations num section num steel piling encasement num section num piling num section num drilled shaft construction num section num abutment and bulkhead anchors num section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num section num timber num section num bridges num section num elastomeric bearings num section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num section num prestressed concrete bridge members num section num waterproofing and dampproofing num section num bridge and sidewalk handrail num section num repair or raising existing bridges num section num steel bridge coating num section num bridge joint seals num section num reinforced concrete box culverts num section num retaining wall num section num roadway pipe culverts num section num corrugated metal structural plate pipe arch pipe and arch culverts num section num slotted drains num section num storm sewers num section num cleaning existing drainage structures num section num side drain pipe num section num relaid pipe num section num roadway pipe rehabilitation num section num trench drains num section num micropiles num section num soil nail retaining wall num section num shotcrete num section num soldier pile retaining wall num section num aggregate foundations num division num incidentals num table of contents section num mobilization num section num field laboratories num section num right of way and land survey markers num section num engineers field office num section num geotextiles in permeable asphalt treated base application num section num pavement and special underdrain num section num pipe underdrain num section num paving geotextiles num section num geotextiles in separation applications num section num aggregate slope protection num section num riprap num section num mortar for masonry num section num rubble masonry num section num brick and concrete block masonry num section num slope paving num section num grouted rubble slope drain num section num soil cement flumes num section num bituminous treated glass fiber flumes num section num concrete sidewalks and driveways num section num pipe culvert end treatments num section num minor structure concrete num section num inlets junction boxes manholes and miscellaneous drainage structures .. num section num resetting gratings and covers for catch basins inlets and manholes num section num curb gutter and combination curb and gutter num section num cable guiderail num section num concrete median strip num section num concrete median and safety barrier num section num guardrail and barrier rail num section num guardrail or barrier rail relocated num section num headlight glare screen num section num chain link industrial fence num section num woven wire fence num section num barbed wire fence num section num fence reset num section num minor utility adjustments num section num water line num section num sanitary sewers num section num natural gas line num section num encasement pipe for utilities num section num topsoil num section num ground preparation vegetation establishment and mowing num section num solid sodding num section num mulching for vegetation establishment num section num rolled and hydraulic erosion control products num section num vines shrubs and tree planting num section num transplanting trees shrubs and vines num section num tree wells and tree root protection num section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num section num pest control num table of contents section num preemergent herbicide treatment num section num postemergent herbicide treatment num section num stormwater turbidity control num section num construction safety fence num section num geometric controls num section num construction fuel cost num division num traffic control devices and highway lighting num section num traffic stripe num section num traffic control markings and legends num section num pavement markers num section num delineators and hazard markers num section num object safety markings num section num mile kilometer posts num section num roadway signs num section num roadway sign relocation and renovation num section num permanent barricade num section num overhead roadway sign structures num section num overhead roadway sign structure renovation and relocation num section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num section num vehicular impact attenuator assembly num section num portable concrete safety barriers and impact attenuators num section num truck mounted impact attenuator num section num traffic signals num section num traffic counting equipment num section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num section num portable sequential arrow and chevron sign unit num section num portable changeable message signs num section num uniformed police officers num section num roadway lighting num section num rehabilitation of existing roadway lighting num section num electrical conduits under roadways num division num materials num section num materials num section num coarse aggregate num section num fine aggregates num section num asphalt materials num section num mineral filler hydrated limecalcium chloride brick and blocks num section num mineral admixtures num section num water num section num air entraining additives num section num chemical admixtures for concrete num section num geotextiles num section num polymer additives for asphalt materials num section num masonry stone num section num riprap materials num section num cement num section num lime for roadbed and base stabilization num section num selected materials for bases num section num granular soil materials num table of contents section num drainage plane materials num section num soil aggregate materials num section num processed reef shell base materials num section num crushed aggregate base materials num section num local sand and sandgravel for miscellaneous construction use num section num processed reef shell num section num concrete curing materials num section num precast concrete products num section num concrete joint fillers joint and cracksealants and waterstop materials .
num section num lumber and timber untreated and treated num section num piling materials num section num steel reinforcement num section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num section num elastomeric bearing materials num section num structural plate for pipe pipearches and arches num section num pipe culvert joint sealers num section num roadway pipe num section num side drain pipe num section num underdrain pipe materials num section num sanitary sewer pipe manholes and appurtenances num section num storm sewer pipe num section num coatings paints enamels and varnishes for metal and wood structures num section num traffic marking materials num section num temporary traffic marking materials num section num roadside improvement materials num section num gas pipe valves and appurtenances num section num utility encasement pipe num section num water pipe fire hydrants valves and appurtenances num section num guardrail and barrier rail materials num section num adhesives num section num fencing materials num section num sign materials num section num delineators and hazard markers num section num pavement markers num section num sign lighting materials and services num section num roadway lighting materials num section num traffic signal equipment num section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num section num definition of terms num division num general provisions section num definition of terms num definitions .
wherever the following terms or abbreviations or pronouns in place of them are used in these specifications or in other contract documents the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows a abbreviations .
aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials adem alabama department of environmental management agc the associated general contractors of america inc. aia american institute of architects aisc american institute of steel construction aldot alabama department of transportation ansi american national standards institute ara american railway association artba american road and transportation builders association area american railway engineering association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects astm american society for testing and materials awpa american wood preservers association aws american welding society awwa american water works association fhwa federal highway administration fss federal specifications and standards general services administration imsa international municipal signal association inc. ite institute of transportation engineers lpa local public agency lvd laboratory vibrated density msdsar materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association sae society of automotive engineers sspc sspc the society for protective coatings ul underwriters laboratories inc. b terms .
acceptance plan .
a prescribed method of sampling measuring and testing together with criteria for the acceptability of a lot of material or construction .
additive .
a substance or agent added in small amounts to a basic ingredient of a mixture prior to mixing .
section num definition of terms num advertisement for bids or notice to contractors .
a public announcement inviting bids for work to be performed or materials to be furnished as required by law .
area .
a subdivision of a region for the supervision of the departments construction and maintenance operations .
area engineer .
the engineer in charge of one of the areas of the state .
article .
an immediate subheading of a section of these specifications consisting of subarticles items subitems andor paragraphs which set forth details and requirements essential or necessary to form the specifications .
specifications are divided into divisions divisions into sections sections into articles articles into subarticles items subitems and paragraphs .
award .
the acceptance by the director of the proposal of the lowest responsible bidder as required by law .
backfill .
material used to replace or the act of replacing material removed during construction also may denote material placed or the act of placing material adjacent to structures .
back slope .
the sloping surface of a cut of which the downward inclination is toward the roadbed .
base .
the layer or layers of specified materials of designed thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a pavement or surface .
bidder .
an individual firm partnership corporation or any acceptable combination thereof submitting a bid for the advertised work .
binder layer .
the lower layer of the surface consisting of a plant mix of graded aggregate and bituminous material .
bituminous concrete .
a designed combination of dense graded mineral aggregate filler and bituminous cement mixed in a central plant laid and compacted while hot .
borrow .
suitable material from sources outside the roadway prism used primarily for embankments .
bridge .
a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water highway or railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than num feet num m between undercopings of abutments or spring lines of arches or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes it may also include multiple pipes where the clear distance between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening .
bridge engineer .
the representative of the chief engineer of the department that is responsible for the supervision of the structural design and analysis of all of the departments transportation related structures .
bridge length .
the length of a bridge structure is the overall length measured along the line of survey stationing back to back of backwalls of abutments if present otherwise end to end of the bridge floor but in no case less than the total clear opening of the structure .
bridge roadway width .
the clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs or guard timber risers .
bypass .
an arterial highway that permits traffic to avoid part or all of an urban area .
section num definition of terms num calendar day .
every day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight sundays and holidays included .
construction change andor work order request .
a written document between the department and the fhwa covering proposed project changes .
construction joint .
a joint made necessary by a prolonged interruption in the placing of concrete .
construction engineer .
the representative of the chief engineer of the department that is responsible for the general administration of the departments contract construction work .
contract .
the written agreement between the state of alabama and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties hereunder for the performance of the prescribed work .
the contract includes the proposal contract forms and contract bonds specifications supplemental specifications special provisions general and detailed plans and notice to proceed also any change orders and supplemental agreements that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized extensions thereof and such other documents as by law or references are made a part thereof all of which constitute one instrument .
contract bid price .
the sum total of the products of the approximate quantities of the items of the work listed in the proposal and the respective unit prices bid in the proposal .
contract bonds .
the approved bonds furnished and executed by the contractor and his surety to guarantee completion of the contract in accordance with its terms .
contract item .
pay item .
a specifically described unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract .
each pay item is numbered and is paid for under the terms of the specification section of the same number .
contract payment bond .
the bond furnished by the contractor and his surety to guarantee payment of the debts covered by the bond .
contract performance bond .
the bond furnished by the contractor and his surety to guarantee performance of the work in accordance with the contract .
contract period or contract time .
the number of work days or calendar days allowed for completion of the contract including authorized time extensions .
in a case where a calendar date of completion is shown in the proposal in lieu of the number of working or calendar days such work contemplated shall be completed by that date .
contract sum or contract amount .
the total contract bid price revised to include changes caused by overruns and underruns in contract items plus the sum of all approved supplemental agreements and force account orders .
contraction joint .
a joint at the ends of a rigid slab to control the location of transverse cracking .
contractor .
the individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof contracting with the state for performance of prescribed work .
controlling items .
the current controlling items or operations includes any feature of the work considered at the time by the engineer as essential to the orderly completion of the work and which if delayed will delay the time of completion of the contract .
county .
the county or counties of alabama in which work herein specified is to be performed .
culvert .
any structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under the roadway .
section num definition of terms num dense graded aggregate .
a wellgraded aggregate so proportioned as to contain a relatively small percentage of voids .
department .
alabama department of transportation as constituted under the laws of alabama for administration of highway work .
detour .
a route provided for traffic to use in lieu of a regular route .
director .
the chief executive officer of the alabama department of transportation as created by law also referred to herein as transportation director .
divided highway .
a highway with separated roadways for travel in opposite directions .
dowel .
a load transfer element usually consisting of a plain round steel bar .
drainage plane .
a plane for internal drainage of the roadbed usually formed by a layer of waterpermeable material .
easement .
a right to use or control the property of another for designated purposes .
embankment .
a structure of soil soilaggregate or broken rock between the embankment foundation and the subgrade .
embankment foundation .
the material below the original ground surface the physical characteristics of which affect the support of the embankment .
employee .
any person working on the project to which these specifications apply and who is under the direction or control of or receives compensation from the contractor or subcontractor .
engineer .
a qualified department staff member designated by the director acting either directly or through his authorized assistants or representatives who is responsible for engineering supervision of construction activities .
equipment .
all machinery and equipment together with the necessary supplies for operation and upkeep maintenance and protection and also tools and apparatus necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work .
existing .
the physical status as of the date of the invitation for bids of any structure base surface subgrade road bridge detour or other unit affected by a particular project or designated highway .
expansion joint .
a joint located to provide for expansion of a rigid slab without damage to itself adjacent slabs or structures .
extra work .
an item of work not provided for in the contract as awarded but found essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract within its intended scope .
extra work order .
a change order concerning the performance of work or furnishing of materials involving extra work .
such extra work may be performed at agreed prices or on a force account basis as provided elsewhere in these specifications .
faulting .
differential vertical displacement of rigid slabs at a joint or crack .
section num definition of terms num flagman .
an individual with a flag stopslow paddle or other approved signaling device whose duty is to signal vehicular traffic to num come to a stop num alter its speed andor course or num receive other instructions with reference to highway routes and their condition .
flexible pavement .
a pavement structure which maintains intimate contact with and distributes loads to the subgrade and depends upon aggregate interlock particle friction and cohesion for stability .
force account work .
work paid for by reimbursing for the actual costs for labor materials and equipment usage incurred in the performance of the work as directed including a percentage for overhead and profit where appropriate .
frontage road .
a local street or road auxiliary to and located generally on the side of an arterial highway for service to abutting property and adjacent areas and for control of access to the highway .
front slope .
the sloping surface of an embankment or roadway side ditch of which the downward inclination is away from the roadbed .
grade separation .
a structure with its approaches which provides for highway traffic to pass without interruption over or under a railway street or another highway .
highway street or road .
a general term denoting a public way for purpose of vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way .
holiday .
see legal holiday .
in place .
a term to denote that the unit price covers compensation for the item complete in place including all costs incidental to procurement handling hauling and processing the item including water as required .
the item will be measured and paid for in the manner provided in applicable sections of these specifications .
inspector .
the engineers authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspection of contract performance .
interchange .
a system of interconnecting roadways in conjunction with one or more grade separations providing for the movement of traffic between two or more roadways on different levels .
intersection .
the general area where two or more highways join or cross within which are included the roadway and roadside facilities for traffic movements in that area .
joint .
a designed vertical plane of separation or weakness .
laboratory .
the testing laboratory of the department or any other testing laboratory which may be designated by the engineer .
legal holiday .
holidays which will be allowed in computing contractors time charges on a working day basis will be limited to the following days sundays new years day robert e. lees martin luther kings birthday the third monday in january george washingtons thomas jeffersons birthday the third monday in february mardi gras day mobile and baldwin counties only confederate memorial day national memorial day jefferson davis birthday independence day labor day columbus day fraternal day the second monday in october veterans day thanksgiving day and christmas day .
all dates for legal holidays will be as prescribed by alabama act num of num .
dates for combined holidays are shown herein .
leveling course .
the layer of material placed on an existing surface to eliminate irregularities prior to placing an overlaying course .
section num definition of terms num load transfer device .
a mechanical means designed to carry loads across a joint .
local road or street .
a street or road primarily for access to residence business or other abutting property .
longitudinal joint .
a joint normally placed between traffic lanes to control longitudinal cracking .
lot .
a uniquely defined quantity of material from a single source or homogeneous segment of construction on which decision is made for acceptance .
major highway .
an arterial highway with intersections at grade and direct access to abutting property and on which geometric design and traffic control measures are used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic .
major item .
any item having an original contract value in excess of num percent of the total contract bid price .
major street .
an arterial highway with intersections at grade and direct access to abutting property and on which geometric design and traffic control measures are used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic .
materials .
any substances specified for use in the construction of the project and its appurtenances .
materials and tests engineer .
the representative of the chief engineer of the department that is responsible for the selection and control of all materials used in the construction the departments transportation structures .
material vendor .
a corporation firm or individual who sells or rents supplies equipment or materials to a contractor or subcontractor or whose materials are prepared away from the construction premises and are delivered in final form to the construction site such delivery being merely incidental to the sale .
material vendor must be a separate legal entity with independent investment in facilities and equipment and an independent business organization and operation exercising a prerequisite degree of independent initiative judgment and foresight .
a corporation firm or individual which establishes a temporary plant or facility of any kind on or near a project for the purpose of furnishing material for that project only will not be considered a material vendor but will be considered a subcontractor as defined in these specifications .
median .
that portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for traffic in opposite directions .
median lane .
a speedchange lane within the median to accommodate leftturning vehicles .
navigable stream .
a stream classed by the u.s. coast guard andor the u.s. army corps of engineers as navigable .
notice to contractors .
see advertisement for bids .
notice to proceed work order .
written notice to the contractor informing him of approval of his contract and notifying him to proceed with the contract work including when applicable the date of beginning of contract time .
original ground .
the ground surface just prior to the initiation of the proposed work .
parking lane .
an auxiliary lane primarily for the parking of vehicles .
section num definition of terms num pavement structure .
the combination of subbase base and surface placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
pay item .
see contract item .
plans .
the contract drawings which show the location character dimensions and details of the prescribed work including layouts profiles cross sections and other details or reproductions thereof .
prime coat .
an application of a low viscosity liquid bituminous material to coat and bind mineral particles preparatory to placing a base or surface course .
professional service .
an individual or firm who provides highly specialized technical or unique functions in areas such as engineering surveying testing inspection certification and environmental remediation .
these services may or may not require professional licensure .
profile grade .
the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the contract .
project .
the specified section of the highway together with all appurtenances and construction to be performed thereon under the contract .
project manager .
the departments onsite representative who is in responsible charge of monitoring the contractors daily activities including the inspection of the work and the estimation of payment quantities .
project number .
a number assigned for convenience to identify the work covered in a project .
proposal .
the offer of a bidder on the prescribed form to perform the stated construction work at the prices quoted .
proposal form .
the prescribed form on which the offer of a bidder is to be submitted .
proposal guaranty .
the cashiers check or bid bond furnished with a bid to assure that the bidder will enter into the contract if his offer is accepted .
questionnaire .
the specified forms on which the contractor shall furnish required information as to his ability to perform and finance the work .
ramp .
a connecting roadway between two intersecting highways generally at a highway separation or a sloping driveway giving access to a highway .
random sample .
a small part of a lot which is used to represent the whole so chosen that each portion of the lot has an equal probability of being selected .
record plans .
reproductions of plans issued to bidders as noted in article num .
recovery time .
recovery time is defined as the time required after the controlling item or items of work have been substantially damaged as a result of conditions and causes beyond the control of the contractor and not due to his negligence or fault to restore the work to the condition existing prior to such damage so that normal operations can be resumed on the contract pay items .
recovery time shall be the number of days required by the contractor working with normal forces to restore the work as described above .
section num definition of terms num region .
a geographic subdivision of the state for the purpose of executing the departments construction maintenance and administrative activities .
there are five regions within the state .
each region is further subdivided into two areas .
region engineer .
the engineer in charge of one of the five regions of the state .
reinforcement .
steel embedded in a rigid pavement slab and in concrete structures to resist tensile stresses and detrimental opening of cracks .
repetition avoidance of .
see article numc .
reprocessing .
the renewal of an existing surface by scarifying remixing with or without additional material and relaying .
resurfacing .
the placing of one or more new courses on an existing surface .
retainage .
the department will not withhold retainage .
retainage is the money belonging to the contractor which was held by the department conditioned on final completion and acceptance of all work in connection with a project or projects by the contractor .
right of way .
a general term denoting land property or interest therein usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes .
rigid pavement .
a pavement structure which distributes loads to the subgrade having as one course a portland cement concrete slab of relatively high bending resistance .
rigid slab .
a section of portland cement concrete pavement bounded by joints and edges designed for continuity of tensile stress .
road .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way .
roadbed .
the graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder .
the top surface of the roadbed is the subgrade .
roadbed material .
the material below the subgrade in cuts and embankments and in embankment foundations extending to such depth as affects the support of the pavement structure .
roadside .
a general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway .
extensive areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
roadside improvement or development .
those items necessary to the complete highway which provide for the preservation of landscape materials and features the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
roadway .
the portion of the highway within the limits of construction .
a highway may have more than one roadway .
seal coat .
a thin treatment consisting of bituminous material usually with cover aggregate applied to a surface course .
the term includes but is not limited to sandseal chipseal slurry seal contrast seal and fog seal .
section num definition of terms num shop drawings .
fabrication plans for any part of the work including but not limited to precast concrete items structural steel items or other metal items and connections thereof which the contractor is required to submit to the engineer .
sidewalk .
that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians .
skew angle skew .
the complement of the acute angle between two centerlines which cross for a structure centerline skew right means the right side of the structure is ahead skew left means the left side of the structure is ahead .
soil survey .
the exploration of the site of the proposed improvements by borings and tests or other methods and the preparations of soil profiles showing the significant layers bedrock water table and other features .
special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications applicable to an individual project .
special provisions shall prevail over standard specifications supplemental specifications and plans .
specifications .
the compilation of provisions and requirements of prescribed work .
specified completion date .
the date on which the contract work is specified to be completed .
speed change lane .
an auxiliary lane including tapered areas primarily for the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through traffic lanes .
stabilization .
modification of soils or aggregates by incorporating materials that will increase load bearing capacity firmness and resistance to weathering or displacement .
standard drawings .
drawings approved for repetitive use showing details to be used where appropriate .
standard specifications .
a book of specifications approved for general application and repetitive use .
state .
the state of alabama the party of the first part to the contract acting by and through the transportation director .
station .
one hundred feet one hundred meters measured horizontally .
street .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way applicable to travel ways in urban areas .
structures .
bridges culverts basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other features which may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classed herein .
subbase .
a layer or layers of specified or selected material or designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base or rigid pavement .
subcontractor .
an individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof who has or have with the written approval of the department contracted with the contractor to execute and perform in his stead any part of the contract as permitted by article num of these specifications .
material vendors as defined herein are not subcontractors .
subgrade .
the top surface of the roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
section num definition of terms num subgrade treatment .
modification of roadbed material by stabilization .
substructure .
all of that part of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames including backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
superintendent .
the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
superstructure .
all that part of a structure above and including the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and top of footings of rigid frames excluding backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
supplemental agreement .
a written agreement with the contractor covering changes in the plans specifications or quantities or any combination thereof within the scope of the contract and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes .
supplemental specification .
approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications .
surety .
the corporation partnership or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor licensed under the laws of alabama .
surface .
one or more layers of a material designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
the top layer is generally called the wearing layer and the lower layer the binder layer .
surface treatment .
one or more applications of bituminous material and cover aggregate or thin plant mix on an old pavement or any element of a new pavement structure .
tack coat .
an application of bituminous material to an existing surface to provide bond with a superimposed course .
temporary structure .
any structure required to maintain traffic during construction of the work which will be dismantled if required when the work is completed .
through highway .
every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right of way and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right of way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign when such signs are erected .
through street .
every street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right of way and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets is required by law to yield right of way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign when such signs are erected .
tie bar .
a deformed steel bar or connector imbedded in the concrete across a joint to prevent separation of abutting slabs .
traffic lane .
the portion of a traveled way for movement of a single line of vehicles .
transportation director .
see director .
traveled way .
the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
section num proposal requirements and conditions num typical section .
that cross section established by the plans which represents in general the lines to which the contractor shall work in the execution of his contract .
work the work .
work shall mean the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
working day daytime work .
any calendar day from midnight to midnight exclusive of saturdays and legal holidays as defined herein on which the contractor could proceed with construction operations for a period of six hours or more with the normal working forces engaged in performing work on the controlling item or items of work which normally would be in progress at that time will be classified as a working day .
saturdays and legal holidays on which the contractor elects to work for a period of four hours or more will be classified as a working day .
working day nighttime work .
where nighttime work is required or allowed by the engineer .
any num hour period from noon to noon on which the contractor could proceed with nighttime construction operations for a period of six hours or more with the normal working forces engaged in performing work on the controlling item or items of work which normally would be in progress at that time will be classified as a working day .
saturdays and legal holidays on which the contractor elects to work for a period of four hours or more will be classified as a working day .
working drawings .
erection plans falsework plans framework plans cofferdam plans or any other supplementary plans or similar data which the contractor is required to submit to the engineer .
c general terms .
num .
no direct payment without extra compensation and subsidiary obligation .
compensation shall be included in other items of work other pay items for work where it is shown that no direct payment will be made for the work or that the work shall be done without extra compensation or the work shall be a subsidiary obligation of other items of work .
num .
avoidance of repetition .
wherever the terms contemplated or required directed authorized considered necessary permitted approved .
suitable unacceptable designated or terms of like import are used in these specifications they shall be construed to mean to or by the engineer or director unless the contract or context clearly indicates otherwise .
section num proposal requirements and conditions num notice to contractors advertisement .
a general .
bids will be invited in a notice to contractors advertisement .
the advertisement will contain the date time and place of opening bids a description of the work contract time a stipulation as to the character and the amount of the proposal guaranty and instructions to the bidders for obtaining access to plans and specifications .
b adjustment of bid quantities .
the quantities shown in the notice to contractorsare to be considered as approximate only and may be amended in the proposal to include additional quantities or additional items or to decrease quantities or to exclude items of work before bids are to be received .
this listing of quantities and pay items is to advise prospective bidders informally as to the type of work and approximate quantities involved .
section num proposal requirements and conditions num num qualification of bidders .
a prequalification .
proposal forms will be issued only to prospective bidders who have qualified with the department and have a valid certification of qualification as required by state law .
all applicants for qualification shall submit under oath a complete confidential statement equipment questionnaire and experience questionnaireon forms that will be furnished by the department upon request .
to insure sufficient time for consideration the applicant shall properly complete and submit the forms at least num calendar days prior to the date of opening bids on which the applicant desires to submit proposals .
forms received at a later date will be considered whenever practicable .
if the applicant is a corporation organized in a state other than alabama it shall furnish a certificate from the secretary of state showing that it is qualified to transact business in alabama .
a bid for a num state funded project will not be accepted from a corporation organized in another state if the bidder does not submit a valid certificate of existence issued by the alabama secretary of state .
a bid will be accepted from a corporation organized in another state for a federally funded project but award of the contract is contingent upon receipt of the certificate of existence from the alabama secretary of state .
a prospective bidder will not be prequalified who has a corporate officer director or principal owner who is a corporate officer director or owner of another person which is presently disqualified by the department .
a prospective bidder will also not be prequalified who is an affiliate of a person that is presently disqualified by the department .
for the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply an affiliate shall be defined as any person that controls is controlled by or is under common control with another person .
a person shall be defined as an individual a corporation a partnership an association a joint stock company a trust or any unincorporated organization .
control shall be defined as the ownership directly or indirectly of num or more of the voting securities of a person or if the person is not a corporation an ownership interest directly or indirectly of num or more of the person .
b disqualification .
the department reserves the right to disqualify or refuse to issue a proposal to a prospective bidder for the following reasons num .
lack of competency or adequate machinery plant or other equipment as revealed by the required financial statement and experience questionnaires .
num .
uncompleted work which in the judgment of the department could hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work if awarded .
num .
failure to pay or satisfactorily settle all bills due for labor and material on contracts in force at the time of issuance of proposals .
num .
failure to comply with any prequalification requirements of the department .
num .
default as defined in article num under a previous contract .
num .
actions in bidding or subcontracting which have the effect of limiting competition and violating the competitive bid process or if any partner association member corporate official or individual owner respectively of any bidder submitting a bid has been convicted or entered a guilty plea in any legal jurisdiction of the united states or any of the various states of federal or state crimes that involve the restraint of trade or limiting competition in any manner .
num .
suspension or debarment by the federal highway administration of the prospective bidder or any partner association member corporate official or individual owner of the bidder .
num .
upon issuance to the contractor of two warning letters for dbe violations during any successive num month period .
dbe violations apply on a companywide basis and not for a particular project .
num .
when the prospective bidder was the prime contractor and did not use his companys forces to perform at least num of the work .
num .
disqualification for unsatisfactory progress as defined in subarticle nume .
num .
being an affiliate of a person who is disqualified .
num .
becomes insolvent or commits any act of insolvency .
section num proposal requirements and conditions num num .
failure to reimburse the department in accordance with the requirements for payment given in these specifications notwithstanding acceptance of the project or maintenance thereof .
disqualification for reasons num through num num and num will be for an indefinite period of time .
the status of disqualification will be reviewed if requested in writing by the disqualified firm .
any subsequent review of the status of disqualification will not be done until six months after the preceding review .
disqualification for reason num will be for an indefinite period of time with a minimum time of disqualification equal to the period of time of suspension or debarment by the federal highway administration .
after the minimum time of disqualification has passed the status of disqualification will be reviewed if requested in writing by the disqualified firm .
any subsequent review of the status of disqualification will not be done until six months after the preceding review .
disqualification for reason num will be removed immediately upon receipt of proof that the progress of the work is acceptable or that the project has been completed .
disqualification for reason num will remain in effect until the prospective bidder causing the disqualification of the affiliate has been requalified .
disqualification for reason num will remain in effect until the contractor and surety provide documentation to the satisfaction of the aldot that the contractors solvency has been restored .
disqualification for reason num will be removed immediately upon receipt of satisfactory payment from the contractor .
disqualification applies to bidding as a prime contractor or performing work in any role or capacity on an aldot project .
c requalification .
if a prospective bidder is disqualified from bidding for reasons num through num num and num given in subarticle numb it will be requiredto again prequalify under the provisions of subarticle numa above .
when requalified the qualification will be issued subject to continued examination and evaluation of the contractors performance .
the contractor will be in probationary status for a period of one year following the requalification .
if during the period of probation the contractor is disqualified under any of the provisions of these specifications the department may suspend the contractors right to requalify for a minimum period of one year .
num contents of proposal form .
a general .
the department will furnish bidders a blank proposal form showing the location and description of the work contemplated the approximate estimate of the various quantities of the pay items of the work to be performed and materials to be furnished and the amount of the proposal guaranty .
the proposal form may also contain supplemental specifications special provisions and requirements that vary from or are not included in thealabama department of transportation standard specifications .
all papers bound with or attached to the proposal form are a necessary part thereof and must not be detached or altered .
the plans specifications and other documents designated in the proposal form shall be a part of the proposal whether attached or not .
the prospective bidder shall pay the department the fee set for each copy of the proposal form and each set of plans .
b corrections .
corrections and minor changes in the proposal form or plans may be put into effect by telegram certified letter express type mail or other computer media from the office engineer bureau notifying all prospective bidders to whom proposal forms have been previously issued .
num interpretation of quantities in bid schedule .
the quantities appearing in the bid schedule are approximate only and are prepared for the comparison of bids .
payment to the contractor will be made only for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or materials furnished in accordance with the contract .
the scheduled quantities or work to be done and materials to be furnished may each be increased decreased or omitted as provided herein .
section num proposal requirements and conditions num num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work .
before submitting a proposal bidders shallcarefully examine the site of the proposed work the general and local conditions the proposal form standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions and the bid bond form .
the submittal of a proposal shall be an acknowledgment that the bidder has made these examinations and accepts without conditions or exceptions all requirements and circumstances under which the work must be performed .
adjustments or compensation will not be allowed for losses caused by failure to comply with this requirement .
boring logs and other records of subsurface investigations are available for inspection by bidders .
this information was obtained and is intended for state design and estimating purposes only .
it is made available to bidders so that they may have access to the identical subsurface information available to the state .
the bidder is solely and exclusively liable for the accuracy of this information if it is used in any way in the preparation of the bid or the prosecution of the work .
this information shall not be a substitute for personal investigation interpretations and judgment of the bidders .
the state disclaims responsibility and liability for any opinions conclusions interpretations or deductions that may be expressed or implied in any of the information presented or made available to bidders .
the bidder shall be fully responsible for interpretations and conclusions made from all available information .
num preparation of proposal .
a proposal form .
the bidders proposal mustbe submitted by either one of the following procedures num .
the submittal of the complete original proposal form the bid item sheets generated by the computer file furnished by the department and a bidder furnished digital storage media containing the computer file downloaded from the departments website with the bidders prices or num .
the submittal of the complete original proposal form directly to the department and the submittal of the bid through the departments approved internet bidding service provider .
proposal forms are numbered serially and are not transferable .
unless otherwise provided in the proposal joint venturers may submit a proposal for a joint venture of qualified bidders on a proposal form issued to one of them provided each venturer has taken out a proposal and provided the proposal is signed by each coventurer .
if the joint venturer chooses to submit a bid utilizing the departments approved internet bidding service provider the joint venturer must request and receive approval for the joint venture .
the joint venturer will be assigned a contractor identification number prior to the submittal of a bid .
b details .
all bids shall be submitted using a computer bid system prescribed by the department via either bidder furnished digital storage media cdrom dvdrom or usb flash drive or the departments approved internet bidding service provider .
bids submitted using any other form format or means will be rejected .
the digital storage media used to submit the bid shall become the property of the state of alabama .
where alternate designs are provided by the plans and proposal the bidder shall enter prices only on the items for the design alternate that will be most economical for the bidder to construct and other bid items that will be common for all alternates .
if any item on the proposal form permits a choice between alternate specified types of materials the bidder shall indicate by a check mark the type of material the bidder proposes to use .
if more than one type or none is checked the department will make the selection .
any interlineation erasure or other alteration of a figure shall be initialed by the signer of the proposal .
the department will check the extension of each item given in the proposal and correct all errors and discrepancies .
in case of a discrepancy between a unit bid price and the extension amount the unit price shall govern .
the sum of the extension amounts will be the contract bid price .
a pay item may be shown with a maximum allowable amount for the bid .
the bidder shall enter an amount for the bid that is equal to or less than the maximum allowable amount .
if the bid entered is greater than the maximum allowable amount the department will adjust the bid price to the maximum allowable amount for that item and recalculate the total bid amount .
section num proposal requirements and conditions num a pay item may be shown with a minimum required amount for the bid .
the bidder shall enter an amount for the bid that is equal to or greater than the minimum required amount .
if the bid entered is less than the minimum required amount the department will adjust the bid price to the minimum required amount for that item and recalculate the total bid amount .
c signing .
the bidders proposal must be signed with ink by the individual by one or more members of the partnership by one or more members or officers of each firm representing a joint venture or by one or more officers of a corporation or by an agent of the contractor legally qualified and acceptable to the state .
if the proposal is made by an individual the individuals name must be shown by a partnership the name of each partnership member must be shown as a joint venture the name of each member or officer of the firms represented by the joint venture must be shown by a corporation the name of the corporation and of its corporate officials must be shown .
each bidder submitting a bid utilizing the departments approved internet bidding service provider agrees that its digital signature constitutes an original signature .
the proposal bid bond if bid bond is tendered shall be properly signed by the bidder and the surety .
d collusion .
bidders will be required to execute a collusion affidavit conforming to the requirements of the laws and regulations cited in article num .
if prior to the award the low bidder fails to execute the collusion affidavit the bid will be rejected and the bid bond will be forfeited .
if there is any reason for believing that collusion exists among the bidders any or all proposals may be rejected and those participating in such collusion may be barred from submitting bids on the same or other work with the department until they have been reinstated as a qualified bidder .
only the affidavit form provided in the proposal will be acceptable .
e computer bidding .
the bidder shall use a bidding software program prescribed by the department .
it is the bidders responsibility to gain access to computer equipment that will run the prescribed software program .
the bidder may choose to download the computer file and any addenda from the departments website or the bidder may choose to utilize the departments approved internet bidding service provider to access the computer file and addenda .
if the bidder chooses to download the computer file from the departments website and submit the bid using a digital storage medium then the software program prescribed by the department shall be used to prepare the bid and to print the official bid item sheets for submittal with the proposal form .
if the bidder chooses to utilize internet bidding the computer file is available at the departments approved internet bidding service providers website .
the only entries permitted into the computer program when preparing the bid will be the unit or lump sum prices for itemsbid .
the program will perform all extensions of the unit or lump sum prices calculate the total bid and print a complete set of bid item sheets including the total bid price and bid item signature sheet .
each bid item sheet will contain a check identification id located in the bottom right corner of each bid item sheet corresponding to the check id in the computer bid file .
bid item sheets generated from the computer program shall be printed on num x num inch num mm x num mm paper .
this set of bid item sheets generated from the software program prescribed by the department along with a complete proposal package will constitute the official bid .
the computer generated bid item signature sheet and proposal shall be properly signed and delivered to the department in accordance with article numc signing and article num delivery of proposals .
onlybid item sheets printed from a software program prescribed by the department will be accepted for the official bid .
failure to use and submit these bid item sheets will result in the bid being rejected .
bidders who choose to utilize internet bidding shall submit the bid as a computer file including a digital signature through the departments approved internet bidding service provider .
all provisions of subarticles a through d of this article will apply to the preparation of bids that are submitted on computer program generated bid item sheets .
any necessary changes to section num proposal requirements and conditions num entries on the computer program generated bid item sheets shall be made in accordance with subarticle b of this article .
a digital storage medium containing the computer file downloaded from the departments website with the bidders prices shall be submitted with the proposal unless the bidder chooses to use the departments approved internet bidding service provider in which case the submittal of a digital storage medium is not required .
in case of a discrepancy between the unit or lump sum prices submitted on the program printed bid item sheets and those contained in the computer file returned to the department the unit or lump sum prices submitted on the program printed bid item sheets shall prevail in all cases .
failure to submit a properly signed bid item signature sheet shall result in the bid being rejected .
failure to submit a bid item sheets other than the bid item signature sheet will result in the bid being considered irregular in accordance with article numa .
in the event a bid item sheet is missing from the proposal the department may replace this sheet with a copy produced from the computer file submitted with the proposal .
the department is not responsible for delay in completion of or failure to timely submit a bid due to an alleged website failure or failure of any service associated with the departments approved internet bidding service provider .
num irregular proposals .
a general .
proposals will be considered irregular and may be rejected if they contain any omissions alteration of form additions not called for incomplete bids includes failure to enter a unit bid price on a bid item or in the case of an alternate the alternate being bid by the contractor interlineations erasures or alterations not initialed by the person signing the proposal inconsistent proposal control numbers on each computer bid item sheet and signature sheet or other irregularities of any kind .
proposals may be rejected at any time prior to the execution of the contract by the director .
any bidder using the same or different names for submitting more than one proposal upon any project will be disqualified from further consideration on that project .
evidence that any bidder is interested as a principal in more than one proposal for work contemplated for example bidding in a partnership as a joint partnership or association and as a partnership association or individuals will cause the rejection of any such proposal .
a bidder however may submit a proposal as principal and as a subcontractor to some other principal or may submit a proposal as a subcontractor to as many other principals as he desires and by so doing will not be liable to disqualification in the intent of these specifications .
b unbalanced bidding .
in order that no party of the contract will be financially hurt over changes in the estimated quantities a proposal may be rejected if any of the unit prices are obviously unbalanced .
the department will decide whether any unit prices are unbalanced either excessively above or below a reasonable cost analysis value determined by the engineer particularly if these unbalanced amounts are substantial and contrary to the interest of the department .
num combination bids .
a combination bidding num .
bidders statement of intent to submit a combination bid .
a bid will be considered as a combination bid for two or more projects if the bidder notifies the department in writing of the intent to submit a combination bid .
the bidder shall submit a written statement that the bid will be either an all or none combination bid a reduction in unit price combination bid a total dollar amount combination bid or a total number of contracts combination bid .
num .
all or none combination bid .
the bidder shall clearly designate the proposals that are being combined in a bid that is being submitted as an all or none combination bid .
the department will evaluate all bids on these proposals and make awards based on the bids that are most advantageous to the state .
num .
reduction in unit price combination bid .
section num proposal requirements and conditions num the bidder shall clearly designate the proposals that are being combined in a bid that is being submitted as a reduction in unit price combination bid .
the bidder shall clearly stipulate the reduction that will be made in the unit price of one or more of the items in any or all of the proposals if awarded the combination .
the bidder will not be permitted to make a reduction in any unit price that is fixed by the department .
the department will select the individual or combination bids that are most advantageous to the state .
num .
total dollar amount combination bid .
the bidder shall clearly designate the proposals that are being combined in a bid that is being submitted as a total dollar amount combination bid .
a bidder shall clearly stipulate that the bid is for designated projects but requests to be awarded work that will not exceed a designated total dollar amount .
the department will select the proposals that are most advantageous to the department within the designated total dollar amount .
num .
total number of contracts combination bid .
the bidder shall clearly designate the proposals that are being combined in a bid that is being submitted as a total number of contracts combination bid .
a bidder shall clearly stipulate that the bid is for designated projects but requests to be awarded work that will not exceed a designated number of contracts .
the department will select the proposals that are most advantageous to the department within the designated total number of contracts .
num .
submittal of written statement of notification of combination bid .
regardless of the form of the submittal of the bid paper computer printout internet etc .
the bidder shall notify the department in writing of a bid that is being submitted as a combination bid .
the written notification must be received in the office of the departments office engineer assistant bureau chief for plans and proposals prior to the opening of bids for a bid to be evaluated as a combination bid .
the written notification shall be enclosed in the sealed bid package envelope or transmitted by facsimile to the number shown on the proposal cover sheet .
the contractor shall be responsible for verifying that the facsimile has been received by the department prior to the opening of bids .
the letter of notification of a combination bid shall num .
be addressed to the transportation director num .
describe the type of combination bid all or none reduction in unit price etc .
num .
be dated no later than the date set for bid opening num .
be written on the bidders letterhead num .
be signed by a person authorized to sign contracts for the bidder num .
contain a list of the project numbers included in the proposed combination bid .
num .
unacceptable combination bids .
a combination bid in which the bidder proposes that a lump sum be deducted from the final estimate is unacceptable .
a combination bid in which the bidder proposes that a reduction in prices be made on a percentage basis is unacceptable .
unacceptable proposals for combination bids will be considered irregular by the department and will be rejected .
b city and county financed projects .
combination bids will not be accepted on any project or projects wholly or partially financed by a city unless all of the projects in the combination bid are city financed projects located in the same city .
combination bids will not be accepted on any project or projects wholly or partially financed by a county unless all of the projects in the combination bid are county financed projects located in the same county .
num proposal guaranty .
no proposal will be considered unless accompanied by a cashiers check drawn on an alabama bank or a bid bond of the prescribed form made payable to the alabama department of transportation in the amount indicated in the notice to contractors .
the cashiers check shall have the name of the company submitting the bid and the project number on the check .
num delivery of proposals .
each proposal for each contract shall be placed together with the proposal guaranty in a sealed envelope on the outside of which is written in large letters proposals for highway work and so marked as to indicate the project number the county or counties in which the work is located and the name of section num proposal requirements and conditions num the bidder .
proposals will be received in the office of the departments office engineer assistant bureau chief for plans and proposals at the alabama department of transportation building in montgomery alabama unless otherwise provided until the hour and date set in the notice to contractors for the opening thereof .
no proposal will be considered which has not been received prior to the hour and date set for the opening of bids .
proposals received after that time will be returned .
for bidders who choose to use the departments approved internet bidding service provider the preceding is applicable with the exception that the bid sheet component of the proposal will be held at the department approved internet bidding service providers secure location .
this bid sheet will be transmitted to the department at the hour and date specified in the notice to contractors .
num withdrawal or revision of proposals .
a bidder may withdraw or revise a proposal after it has been deposited with the department provided the request for such is received by the department in writing or by telegram before the time set for opening proposals .
prior to the time set for opening proposals a bidder who chooses to use the departments approved internet bidding service provider may withdraw and revise a bid an unlimited number of times without notification or approval by the department .
no proposal can be withdrawn modified or corrected after the hour set for opening such proposals .
num public opening of proposals .
proposals will be publicly opened and bid totals read aloud at the place time and date indicated on the notice to contractors advertisement .
bidders or their authorized agents are invited to be present .
num multiple bids .
in the event that a bidder submits a bid utilizing a digital storage medium and paper submittal and also submits a bid for that proposal utilizing the departments approved internet bidding service provider the internet bid will be accepted as the sole and exclusive bid .
num familiarity with laws and ordinances .
a general .
bidders shall familiarize themselves with and shall comply with all federal and state laws and local laws ordinances and regulations which may directly or indirectly affect the work or its prosecution persons engaged in or employed on the work and the equipment and tools used in the work .
no adjustments or compensation will be allowed for losses caused by failure to comply with this requirement .
num .
contractors licensing for num state funded projects .
each bidder shall enter the general contractors license number issued by the state licensing board on each submitted bid .
space is provided on the cover sheet of the proposal for the license number .
failure to enter the bidders license number on the bid submittal will result in the rejection of the bid .
num .
contractors licensing for projects funded with federal monies .
prior to being awarded a contract bidders on projects that are partially or wholly funded with federal monies shall submit a copy of their license issued by the state licensing board for general contractors .
bidders may satisfy this requirement by placing a copy of the license into the proposal of each submitted bid .
num .
bidders responsibility .
it is the bidders responsibility to provide proof of being licensed by the state licensing board for general contractors .
failure to do so may result in the rejection of a bid .
num .
codes .
attention is directed to titles num and num code of alabama num also title num u.s. code and amendments thereto to the date of the contract .
b labor rates .
attention is called to the fact that the wage rates listed in the proposal are minimum required rates .
bidders therefore should investigate and determine the prevailing local wage rates which for certain classes may be higher than the listed minimum rates .
under no condition shall the contractor pay less than the listed minimum rate but it may be necessary in some cases to pay more in order to secure the labor .
section num award and execution of contract num the bidders should investigate and the contractor shall abide by any orders issued by the wage adjustment board or any other federal agency having jurisdiction over wage rates .
num material guarantee .
the successful bidder may be required to furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of any or all materials to be used in the construction of the work together with samples which samples may be subjected to the tests provided for in these specifications to determine their quality and fitness for the work .
section num award and execution of contract num consideration of proposals .
after the proposals are opened and read they will be compared on the basis of the summation of the products of the approximate quantities shown in the bid schedule multiplied by the unit bid prices .
the results of such comparisons will be available to the public .
in the event of a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions the unit bid price shall govern .
the right is reserved to reject any or all proposals to waive technicalities or to advertise for new proposals if in the judgment of the awarding authority the best interest of the department will be promoted thereby .
a proposal will not be considered unless signed by the bidder or his authorized agent and accompanied by cashiers check or properly signed bid bond as required by law .
for the purposes of section num if the final calendar day specified falls on a weekend or holiday the next business day will be the final calendar day .
num award of contract .
a general .
the award of the contracts if to be awarded will be made within num calendar days after opening of proposals to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose proposals comply with the requirements of section num and the invitation to bid notice to contractors .
should no award be made within the num days all proposals will be rejected unless the successful bidder agrees in writing to a stipulated extension in the time limit for award .
the successful bidder will be notified by confirmed facsimile or letter mailed to the address shown on his proposal that his bid has been accepted and that he has been awarded the contract .
after the opening of bids on work involving federal funds the award of the contract to the low bidder will be contingent upon said low bidder obtaining a license from the state licensing board for general contractors in accordance with the existing state laws .
b bidder low on more than one contract .
should any responsible bidder be low on more contracts or work than he is qualified to handle under his certificate of qualification issued by the department the state reserves the right to select from his submitted proposals those for award to him which are most advantageous to the state .
his other submitted proposals will not be considered in making the awards .
c award based on bidders net worth and contracting capacity .
the award of the contract will be made in consideration of the bidders net worth and the dollar value of the bidders contracting capacity in accordance with the legal requirements for public work .
the bidders contracting capacity is indicated on the face of the bidders prequalification certificate .
the dollar value of the contracting capacity of a joint venture is the combined dollar value of the contracting capacity of each coventurer .
prior to the award of a contract to a joint venture a letter shall be submitted to the department by the joint venture in which is given an approximate percentage of the work that is assigned to each coventurer .
this letter shall be signed by the same individuals that signed the joint ventures bid proposal and shall be notarized .
the approximate percentages of participation shall be rounded to the nearest num with no coventurer being assigned less than num of the work .
section num award and execution of contract num after the award of a contract to a joint venture the dollar value of outstanding work in that contract will be assigned at the designated percentages to each coventurer in determining the remaining contracting capacity of each coventurer .
d alabama immigration law by signing this contract the contracting parties affirm for the duration of the agreement that they will not violate federal immigration law or knowingly employ an unauthorized alien within the state of alabama .
furthermore a contracting party found to be in violation of this provision shall be deemed in breach of the agreement and shall be responsible for all damages resulting therefrom .
the contractor shall submit a certificate of compliance form to the department for each contract prior to award .
this form must have an original signature and the project will not be awarded without the form .
the certificate of compliance form is available on aldots website httpwww.alletting.dot.state.al.us and shall be furnished to the alabama department of transportation by the apparent low bidder within ten num days of the letting at the following address alabama department of transportation bureau of office engineer contractsadministrative section num coliseum boulevard room enum montgomery alabama num num cancellation of award .
the director reserves the right to cancel the award of any contract at any time before the execution of the said contract by all parties without any liability against the state .
the director may also reject the bid of the lowest bidder if any of the conditions for disqualification noted in article num are found to exist at any time prior to the execution of the contract by all parties .
the director may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder when it is determined to be in the best interest of the state .
num return of proposal guaranties .
all proposal guaranties except those of the num lowest bona fide bidders will be returned without undue delay after proposals have been checked tabulated and the relation to the proposals established .
the proposal guaranty of the num lowest bona fide bidders will be returned as soon as the contract bonds and the contract of the successful bidder have been properly executed and approved .
when the award is deferred for a period of time longer than num calendar days after the opening of the proposals all proposal guaranties except those of the potentially successful bidders will be returned .
should no award be made all guaranties will be returned .
should the successful bidder agree in writing to a stipulated extension in the time limit for award the director may at his discretion permit the successful bidder to substitute a satisfactory bidders bond if a cashiers check was submitted with his proposal as a proposal guarantee .
the director reserves the right to return all proposal guaranties by registered mail and his responsibility shall end upon the mailing thereof .
num requirements of contract bonds .
a performance bond .
the bidder to whom the award is made shall within num calendar days after the prescribed forms have been presented to him for signature i.e .
after date of award furnish and file with the transportation director an acceptable surety bond on the form included in the proposal in an amount equal to num percent of the contract bid price of the contract as awarded .
said bond shall be furnished by a surety company qualified and authorized to make such bonds in the state of alabama and countersigned by an authorized agent resident in the state who is qualified to execute such instruments .
the bond shall have attached thereto power of attorney of the signing official unless such power of attorney is already on file in the office of the department .
in case of default on the part of the contractor all expense incident to ascertaining and collecting losses suffered by the state under the bond including engineering direct administration and legal services shall be charged against the contract bond for performance of the work .
b labor materials services insurance feed stuffs or supplies bond .
in addition thereto the bidder to whom the award is made shall within the same num calendar days execute and file with the director an acceptable surety bond payable to the state in an amount not less than num percent of the contract bid price with the obligation that the section num award and execution of contract num contractor shall promptly make payment to all persons furnishing him or them with labor materials feed stuffs services insurance bond or supplies for or in the prosecution of the work and for the payment of reasonable attorneys fees incurred by successful claimants or plaintiffs in suits on said bond .
c continuous bond coverage .
surety bonds shall continue to be acceptable to the director throughout the life of the contract .
in event the surety executing the bonds although acceptable to the director at the time of execution of the contract subsequently becomes insolvent bankrupt unreliable or otherwise unsatisfactory due to any cause which becomes apparent after the directors initial acceptance of the bonds then the director will require that the contractor replace the bonds with like bonds drawn on a surety company which is acceptable to the director .
in such event all costs of the premium for the new bonds will be borne by the contractor .
d performance of surety .
the department will not accept bonds from a surety that has failed to perform in accordance with the terms of any bond that the surety has submitted to the department .
prospective bidders will be informed in the notice to contractors that a suretys bonds are unacceptable .
num execution of contract .
the contract shall be executed by the bidder to whom award is made on the form included in the proposal and returned to the director with satisfactory contract bonds within num calendar days after the prescribed forms have been presented to him for signature i.e .
after date of award .
should extenuating circumstances prevail the director may grant an extension in time not exceeding five calendar days for the return of the contract and bonds as provided herein and in article num .
num approval of contract .
a period of num calendar days will be allowed for execution of the contract by the director and approval of same by the governor after its presentation by the successful bidder unless the successful bidder agrees in writing to a longer period .
no contract is binding upon the state until it has been executed by the director and approved by the governor of the state .
the date of the final execution of the contract shall be the date on which it is signed by the governor .
num failure to execute contract .
if the successful bidder is awarded the contract and fails to execute the contract including furnishing acceptable contract security the bidder will be subjected to the following actions .
the director will obtain liquidated damages for the bidders default .
the amount of the damages will be the smaller of two possible amounts .
the first possible amount is the total amount of the proposal guaranty .
the second possible amount is the difference between the amount of the contract as awarded and the amount of the total bid of the next lowest responsible bidder .
the damages will be recovered from the bidders cashiers check guaranty or from the principal or the sureties if the guaranty is a bid bond .
the director will return the proposal guaranty intact to the estate of the deceased successful bidder in the event of the death of the successful bidder on the date of the opening of the bids or the death of the successful bidder during the following number of days allowed for the execution of the contract .
the defaulted bidder will be prohibited from participating in any manner in the original contract and will be prohibited from participating in any manner in any portion of that contract that may be removed and put into other contracts .
these prohibitions shall apply to any other name under which the same person affiliate individual partnership company firm corporation association cooperative or other legal entity may be operating in which the principal owners are involved .
the prohibitions shall be work will not be allowed as a subcontractor or in any other capacity or role on the project .
bidding will not be allowed on the original contract if it is readvertised for letting .
bidding will not be allowed on any subsequent contract which contains any portion of the original contract .
section num scope of work num section num scope of work num intent of contract .
the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion of the work described .
the contractor shall furnish all labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the plans specifications and terms of the contract .
when item numa geometric controls is included on the plans and in the proposal the contractor shall also furnish all geometric controls see section num .
special provisions covering any special conditions materials or construction not covered on the plans or in these specifications will be included in the bidders proposals or in supplemental agreements .
num alterations of plans or character of work .
a general .
the engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
such changes in quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered .
if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding anticipated profit will be made to the contract .
if the cost of the work does not change then the adjustment will be zero .
the basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable .
if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the contract .
the term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances num when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or num when a major item of work as defined elsewhere in the contract is increased in excess of num percent or decreased below num percent of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of num percent of original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num percent to the actual amount of work performed .
changes in quantities for the items of unclassified excavation muck excavation borrow excavation pipe underdrain extra concrete and steel reinforcement for structure foundations piling bituminous plant mix leveling and widening material and bituminous material used in plant mix bases and pavements disposal of hydrocarbon contaminated soil underground storage tank ust removal and removing and disposing ust contents shall be excluded in determining increases and decreases under the provisions of this paragraph since it is understood that these items can not be accurately determined before the work is done .
no claims shall be made by the contractor for any anticipated profits because of any such alteration or by reason of any variation between the approximate quantities and the quantities of work as done .
no allowance will be made on an item for which a fixed price is set in the proposal .
payment for work occasioned by changes or alterations will be made in accordance with the provisions set forth under article num .
if the altered or added work is of sufficient magnitude as to require additional time in which to complete the project such time adjustment may be made in accordance with the provisions of article num .
section num scope of work num under no circumstances shall alterations of plans or of the nature of the work involve work beyond the termini of the proposed construction except as may be necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
b changed or differing site conditions .
during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before they are disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
upon written notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and if he determines that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of his determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
the contractor shall carry on the work promptly and diligently pending a decision .
any adjustment in compensation because of such change or changes will be made in accordance with the provisions of article num .
any adjustment in contract time because of such change or changes will be made in accordance with the provisions of article num. c claims .
if the contractor does not agree with the departments decision concerning his request for extra compensation he may file a claim following the procedures outlined in section num claims .
num extra work .
a general .
the contractor when so directed in writing shall perform extra work for which there is no quantity or unit price in the contract and is deemed necessary or desirable in order to complete fully the work as contemplated .
such work shall be performed in accordance with the specifications and as directed and will be paid for as provided under subarticle numb .
b supplemental agreement or force account order required .
before any such extra work is started a supplemental agreement shall be executed describing the kind location and estimated quantities of the extra work to be done and specifying the unit prices or lump sum agreed upon or a written order shall be issued for the work stating that compensation will be on a force account basis .
however in an emergency the engineer may direct the immediate start of the extra work by letter containing this information .
such letter shall be superseded later by a supplemental agreement or force account order .
if satisfactory unit prices or lump sum can not be agreed upon the director may require that the extra work be performed on a force account basis as outlined in subarticle numb or he may direct that one or more of the items of the proposed extra work be omitted from consideration and performed by other agents .
num maintenance of traffic and sequence of construction .
a general .
num .
provision for traffic .
no highway or section of highway or bridge shall be closed to traffic and no construction operations that will for any reason render the roadway generally unsuitable for use of the traveling public shall be started until adequate provisions have been made to detour or bypass the traffic in safety and comfort .
special reference is made to article num public convenience and safety and such is approved in writing by the engineer .
num .
pipelines and public utilities .
the contractors attention is directed to the possible existence of pipe lines or other public utilities which may be buried within the limits of the work or adjacent thereto and which may or may not be shown on the plans .
he shall be responsible for and shall take all section num scope of work num necessary precautions to protect and preserve any and all such existing drains sewers pipes conduits and other underground structures or parts thereof which may be affected by his operations on the work and which in the opinion of the engineer may be properly continued in use without any changes .
he shall assume full responsibility for reimbursing the owners for any damage or injury to properties or interference with their service which may result from any of his operations or negligence during the period the contract is in force .
also he shall be responsible for any damage to utilities above ground regardless of their location where such damage results from any of his operations or his negligence .
attention is directed to subarticle numb .
the contractor shall repair replace relocate extend reconstruct or make any other change in any subsurface sewer or drain encountered in the prosecution of the work and unless otherwise provided in the contract the cost of replacing or restoring or connecting any such sewer or drain substantially to its original location when incidental to the construction shall be included in the contract unit prices for various pay items .
num .
mail delivery .
where mail delivery service is to be maintained during construction mailboxes within the limits of operations shall be removed by the contractor before work is begun and set temporarily where they will be accessible both to the mail carrier and the patron .
as soon as the state of the work permits and the engineer directs all mailboxes shall be reset by the contractor in permanent locations in compliance with u.s .
postal service regulations .
mailboxes or supports that have been damaged by the contractor shall be replaced at his expense .
the cost of removing andor temporarily resetting mailboxes shall be included in the prices bid for the various pay items of work and no direct payment will be made for this work .
unless item numa mailbox reset is included on the plans or in the proposal no direct payment will be made for permanently resetting mailboxes .
num .
lighting for nightime operations .
when the contractor performs any operations after daylight hours he shall provide and maintain at his expense sufficient artificial lighting to permit proper construction and inspection .
b signs and warning lights .
all signs barricades etc .
used along the project shall be in accordance with the provisions of part num of the mutcd the plan details and the following posts shall be appropriately sized for the sign of either timber treated or painted of not less than num inch by num inch num mm x num mm nom .
cross section or metal min .
num lbs .
num kg u channel or equivalent so spaced to rigidly support the sign .
all signs barricades drums or other devices intended for use in controlling traffic shall be in accordance with the requirements of part num of the mutcd and the detailed plans with reflectorization as noted therein .
reflectorization shall be accomplished using materials meeting the requirements of article num .
all barricades drums signs and other devices shall be kept clean legible and in their proper position at all times .
damaged defaced or dirty barricades drums signs and other devices shall be repaired or replaced immediately .
the engineer will insure compliance by periodic inspections and require replacements or repair as deemed necessary .
in addition to the requirements of article num where particular hazardous conditions exist or traffic volumes warrant or where there is serious interference from extraneous light sources and a reflectorized sign is not likely to be effective the engineer may require any or all signs and barricades to be illuminated .
illumination of signs barricades etc .
shall be accomplished by the use of num watt or greater incandescent or equivalent fluorescent electric light bulbs shielded to protect the driver from glare and so located that the sign shape and message is clearly visible to the driver .
street or highway lighting by itself is not regarded as meeting illumination requirements .
c sequence of construction .
unless otherwise provided by plan details or special provisions included in the contract the sequence of construction for the project shall be the contractors provided the following requirements are met to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num .
provides for the orderly construction of the project within the time limit provided by the contract .
section num scope of work num num .
provides for the preparation of any bridge sites as a first order of work .
num .
provides for handling of traffic through the work in accordance with the details noted in subarticle d of this article .
num .
provides for the working out of minor drainage problems and details of temporary or permanent access as they are encountered .
num .
provides for the continuous prosecution of all paving work through the final wearing layer once planing milling operations surface treatment operations or paving operations have begun .
d handling of traffic .
unless otherwise provided the contractor shall keep the road open to all traffic while performing the required improvements .
the contractor shall keep the portion of the project being used by public traffic whether it be through or local traffic in such condition that traffic will be adequately accommodated .
he shall provide and maintain in a safe condition temporary approaches or crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages and farms .
where so provided on the plans or approved by the engineer the contractor may bypass traffic over an approved detour route .
the traffic control plan tcp has been developed by the engineer in accordance with part vi of the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd .
the contractor shall furnish erect and maintain barricades warning signs delineators flagmen and pilot cars in accordance with the tcp .
the tcp will be revised as directed by the engineer if there is a need for traffic control that is not shown on the tcp .
the need for maintaining the flow of traffic may cause the restriction of the movement and operation of the contractors construction equipment .
flagmen shall be furnished without additional compensation to direct traffic and protect the work as noted in section num .
construction adjacent to existing pavement will require the use of portable barricades drums signs vertical sign panels delineators or other approved traffic control devices .
posts used for traffic control device supports shall be appropriately sized for the intended purpose and uniform in shape and color throughout the project .
the above traffic control devices shall be supplemented as necessary with warning lights of the kind and type indicated by plan details the proposal or as directed by the engineer .
in addition when deemed necessary by the engineer special warning lights shall be used on equipment working adjacent to traffic lanes to warn traffic .
these special warning lights shall be either all purpose num sealed beams revolving types of at least num inches num mm in height or electronic strobe beacons .
these lights shall be amber or orange colored and mounted so as to be readily seen by traffic at a safe distance .
num blank .
num final cleaning up .
upon completion and before work will be finally accepted and final payment made the contractor shall perform the following work num he shall clear and remove from the right of way and adjacent areas not owned by him all falsework equipment surplus and discarded materials temporary structures rubbish debris and all other objectionable litter and dispose of them in a satisfactory manner .
num he shall not remove barricades warning and direction signs until directed by the engineer .
num he shall remove from the site of other operations such as pits quarries stream channels structures sites and storage yards all weeds portions of trees discarded materials machinery temporary structures and equipment and dispose of them in a satisfactory manner .
depositing such material on abutting property or adjacent to the right of way with or without the consent of the property owner will not be accepted as satisfactory disposal .
however he may be allowed temporarily to store equipment surplus material usable forms etc .
in a neat manner on a wellkept site near the right of way .
num he shall restore in an acceptable manner all property public and private damaged incident to the prosecution of the work and shall leave the right of way and sites of structures in a neat and presentable condition satisfactory to the engineer .
num maintenance of roads and detours .
a general .
the contractor shall maintain at his expense except as explicitly outlined in this article all detours and haul roads and all roads streets bridges and intersections within the project limits .
section num scope of work num this includes but is not limited to haul roads and detours constructed by the contractor for his convenience .
it also includes damage to the road street or structure caused by the contractors equipment .
the contractor shall regulate his loads as required by article num and he and his surety shall be responsible for any specific damage that may result to the road street or structures from failure to observe regulations governing traffic thereon or for negligence on his part .
the contractor shall perform required repairs without delay otherwise the state or county will perform the repairs and the cost thereof will be deducted from amounts due on the contract .
the contractor and his surety shall indemnify and hold harmless the state the director and the engineer for damages arising from the use of roads and streets in the performance of the contract .
b detours .
detours designed by the engineer and constructed in an acceptable manner shall be maintained by the contractor with payment made under the appropriate pay items or as extra work unless the state elects to perform the maintenance instead .
roads designated as detours by the plans or the engineer shall be maintained as outlined in this paragraph .
c haul roads .
unless the plans designate otherwise the contractor may use any state road as a haul road with the maintenance performed as specified in subarticle numb above as long as his loads are regulated as specified in subarticle numa above .
should the contractor wish to use a county road or city street as a haul road he shall meet with the local governing body review the condition of the facility and reach an agreement as to the maintenance thereof .
no payment will be made for such maintenance or restoration thereof .
d roads and bridges .
existing roads and bridges which have not been constructed or overlaid by the contractor shall be maintained by the state unless the contractor is directed to make repairs with payment to be made as specified in subarticle numb .
num value engineering .
a purpose and scope .
value engineering ve applies to cost reduction proposals that are initiated developed and submitted in writing by the contractor to the department for modifying the plans the specifications or other contract requirements .
this applies only to a proposed change which is identified as a value engineering proposal at the time it is submitted to the department .
ve proposals are those which would require a change in the contract and would result in a net savings over the contract cost without impairing essential functions and characteristics of the project including but not limited to service life reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance desired aesthetics and safety .
the intent of this provision is for the department to share with the contractor any cost savings generated on a project as a result of a proposal or proposals offered by the contractor and approved by the department .
the purpose is to encourage the use of the contractors ingenuity and experience in arriving at alternate lower cost construction methods than those reflected in the contract documents by the sharing of savings resulting therefrom .
ve proposals based solely on deleted pay items will not be considered .
nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the department to consider or approve a ve proposal submitted hereunder however if a ve proposal is approved by the department the net savings resulting from the proposal will be shared by the department and contractor on a num basis .
b submittal of proposal .
as a minimum the following materials and information shall be submitted with each ve proposal plus any additional information requested by the department num .
a statement that the proposal is being submitted as a value engineering proposal .
num .
a description of the difference between the existing contract requirements and the proposed change and the comparative advantages and disadvantages of each including considerations such as service life economy of operations ease of maintenance desired appearance and safety .
section num scope of work num num .
a complete detailed cost analysis indicating the final estimate costs and quantities to be replaced by the proposal the new costs and quantities generated by the proposal and the cost effects of the proposed changes on operational maintenance and other considerations .
num .
plans specifications and recommendations as to how the ve proposed changes are to be accomplished .
num .
a statement of the deadline for issuing a change order adopting the proposed change to obtain the maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the contract noting any effect on the contract completion time or delivery schedule .
num .
a description of any previous use or testing of the proposal on another department project or elsewhere and the conditions and results therewith .
if the proposal was previously submitted on another department project indicate the date project number and the action taken by the department .
num .
ve proposals may be submitted only by the prime contractor .
subcontractors may not submit a proposal except through the prime contractor .
num .
six complete copies of all submittal data included in a ve proposal shall be submitted to the departments project manager .
all copies of the proposal will be forwarded through the area office to the construction engineer for further handling .
c conditions for consideration of proposal .
num .
the contractor is cautioned not to base any bid prices on the anticipated approval of a ve proposal and to recognize that a proposal may be considered but not approved .
in the event of rejection of the proposal the contractor shall complete the contract in accordance with the plans and specifications at the contract prices bid .
num .
the department will not be liable to the contractor for failure to accept or act upon any ve proposal submitted nor for any delays to the work attributable to any such proposal .
num .
the contractor shall absorb all costs incurred in preparing a ve proposal for submission to the department including the cost of final plan revisions .
the department will bear the cost of reviewing and administering the ve proposal .
num .
until a proposal is approved by supplemental agreement the contractor shall remain obligated to the terms and conditions of the existing contract .
num .
all ve proposals whether approved or not approved by the department for use on a referenced project become the property of the department and shall contain no restrictions imposed by the contractor on their use or disclosure .
the department shall have the right to use duplicate and disclose in whole or in part any data necessary for the utilization of the proposal .
the department retains the right to utilize any accepted proposal or part thereof on any other or subsequent projects without any obligation to the contractor .
this provision is not intended to deny rights provided by law with respect to patented materials or processes .
num .
the proposal shall not be experimental in nature but shall have been proven to the departments satisfaction under similar or acceptable conditions on another project or location .
num .
proposed changes in the basic design of a bridge or pavement type or which require different rightofway limits will not normally be considered as an acceptable ve proposal .
items of work which are specifically excluded from value engineering by the plans will not be considered as a ve proposal .
num .
if a supplemental agreement has not been executed by the date upon which the contractors proposal specifies that a decision should be made or such other date as the contractor may subsequently have specified in writing such proposal shall be deemed rejected .
num .
if additional information is needed to evaluate proposals such information shall be provided in a timely manner .
failure to do so will result in rejection of the proposal .
num .
if a ve proposal is accepted in whole or in part such acceptance will be by a contract supplemental agreement .
the supplemental agreement will incorporate the necessary changes in the plans and specifications to permit the proposal or any part of it accepted to be put into effect .
if there is to be an extension or reduction in contract time the supplemental agreement will so note .
if the approval of the department is conditional the supplemental agreement will specify the conditions .
section num control of work num num .
the department will be the sole judge as to whether a proposal qualifies for consideration and evaluation .
it may reject any proposal that requires excessive time or costs for review evaluation andor investigations or which is not consistent with the departments design policies and basic design criteria for the project .
d value engineering payment .
if a ve proposal is approved by the department the changes and payment therefore will be authorized by a supplemental agreement .
reimbursement to the contractor will be made as follows num .
the changes shown on the ve proposal will be incorporated into the contract through plan revisions changes in the quantities of unit bid items newly agreed price items or by force account as appropriate in accordance with the specifications .
num .
the cost of the revised work will be paid for directly as determined from the above mentioned changes .
in addition to such payment the department will pay to the contractor by a separate lump sum item an amount equal to onehalf of the savings as reflected by the difference between the cost of the original contract work and the cost of the work performed under the approved ve proposal .
payments will be made on monthly estimates based on the estimated savings generated by the approved ve proposal .
the amount to be paid on these estimates will be a percentage of the total estimated savings in proportion to the amount of the ve proposal work performed during that month .
upon completion of all work included in the ve proposal the final total savings will be determined by comparing the cost of the work based on the original contract quantities and the cost of the actual ve work performed .
the final payment for work performed under the ve proposal will make any necessary corrections in previous payments to reflect a total payment of num of the generated savings to the contractor .
num .
the contractors costs for development design and implementation of the ve proposal are not eligible for reimbursement .
num .
the contractor may submit ve proposals for an approved subcontractor but if the proposal is approved the reimbursement will be made by the department to the contractor .
num .
payment will be made under item number numa value engineering proposal no .
______ per lump sum section num control of work num authority of the engineer .
the engineer will decide all questions which may arise as to the quality and acceptability of materials furnished and work performed and as to the rate of progress of the work all questions which may arise as to the interpretation of the plans and specifications all questions as to the acceptable fulfillment of the contract on the part of the contractor .
the engineer shall have the authority to withhold further payment or to suspend the work wholly or in part due to failure of the contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the workmen or the general public failure to carry out provisions of the contract failure to carry out orders for such periods as he may deem necessary due to unsuitable weather for conditions unsuitable for prosecution of the work or for any other condition or reason deemed to be in the public interest .
num plans and drawings .
a plans .
each sheet of the record set of plans except cross section sheets will be stamped record plans and will be signed and dated by a representative of the department .
the contractor will be furnished a copy of the record set of plans .
the contractor shall have at least one set of construction plans available on the construction site whenever work in being performed .
the general details of construction and the location where the work is required will be shown on the plans .
the basis of payment for construction will also be shown on the plans .
roadway plans will have a title sheet alignment profile typical cross section and other information applicable to the work .
details will also be given for highway lighting signals utility section num control of work num relocation and other work associated with roadway construction .
structural plans bridges culverts pipes retaining walls etc .
may be included in the roadway plans .
the contractor shall supplement the construction plans with drawings for fabrication shop drawings and construction methods working drawings .
shop drawings and working drawings shall be submitted as a part of the verification that the materials and methods selected by the contractor for fabrication and construction will be in accordance with the requirements given in the contract and will not be detrimental to the quality of completed roadway facility .
b shop drawings .
num .
preparation of drawings .
when shown as a contract requirement the contractor shall prepare and submit shop drawings for approval .
shop drawings shall be the proposed fabrication details for structural members and components .
shop drawings for structural steel members and components shall be prepared on num inch num mm x num inch num mm size plan sheets .
shop drawings for structural members other than structural steel shall be prepared on num inch num mm x num inch num mm size plan sheets or with prior approval of the bridge engineer on num inch num mm by num inch num mm sheets .
the contractor shall carefully verify and shall become fully responsible for the correctness of all dimensions other than the principal controlling dimensions shown on the plans .
the contractor shall immediately advise the engineer of any errors or discrepancies that are found during the preparation of the drawings .
all drawings shall be clear and complete .
the signature of the preparer shall be shown on all drawings .
any details not sufficiently shown on the plans will be furnished by the engineer upon request by the contractor .
num .
submittal .
shop drawings shall be submitted by the contractor to the bridge engineer for review and approval .
two copies shall be submitted for an initial review .
at the completion of the initial review one copy will be returned to the contractor that will be marked no exceptions taken or marked with corrections to be made .
resubmittals of two copies will be required until the drawings are marked no exceptions taken .
num .
distribution of drawings for structural steel .
after the contractor receives the no exceptions taken copy of the drawings the original drawings shall be submitted to the bridge engineer with one copy .
the original drawings will be stamped approved and returned to the contractor for the production of sets of copies for distribution .
the contractor shall submit four copies of the approved and stamped drawings for distribution .
additional copies may be submitted for distribution if requested by the contractor .
revisions of the shop drawings after approval shall be made on the original drawings .
all revisions shall be clearly noted and dated on the drawings .
the revise original and one copy shall be submitted to the bridge engineer for approval .
the approved revised originals will be returned to the contractor .
the contractor shall submit four copies of the revised original for distribution .
the contractor shall submit one set of satisfactory reproducibles mylar or equal of the final approved shop drawings .
the reproducibles shall be delivered to the bridge engineer at the completion of the fabrication work .
num .
distribution of drawings for members other than structural steel .
after receiving the approved copy of the drawings the contractor shall submit ten copies of the approved drawings for distribution by the department .
additional copies may be submitted for distribution if requested by the contractor .
num .
time allowed for review .
ten calendar days shall be allowed for each review of each set of drawings containing five sheets or less and two days shall be allowed for each sheet of each set of drawings containing more than five sheets .
section num control of work num if the review is not completed within the number of days allowed and the delay is not the fault of the contractor the delay will be considered for an extension of contract time .
num .
approval .
the approval of drawings will not release the contractor from being solely and fully responsible for the accuracy of the drawings .
extra work that may result from errors in the shop drawings shall be done without additional compensation .
num .
beginning fabrication upon approval .
fabrication shall not begin until the drawings have been approved .
there will be no compensation for or acceptance of structural members and components that are fabricated prior to approval of the drawings .
c working drawings .
num .
preparation of drawings .
the contractor shall prepare and submit working drawings to supplement the plans .
working drawings shall be prepared to provide a complete illustration of the construction methods and materials proposed for use by the contractor .
design calculations shall be submitted with the drawings .
the signature seal and date of signature shall be placed on all details and design calculations by a professional engineer that is licensed in the state of alabama and not employed by the aldot .
working drawings and design calculations shall be submitted for num .
cofferdams sheeting and shoring near a railroad track num .
cofferdams where cofferdam and pumping is required num .
structural steel girder erection plans for continuous span bridges num .
temporary bracing to provide stability for bridge girders num .
stayinplace bridge deck forms num .
falsework for bridge deck overhangs portion of deck outside of exterior girders num .
falsework for bridge bent caps num .
proposed temporary bridges num .
temporary steel sheet pile walls num .
falsework for the support of the top slab of cast in place concrete culverts num .
proposed placement of cranes on bridges num .
construction loads on bridges .
working drawings and design calculations shall be submitted for any other construction process where noted on the plans or shown to be required in these specifications .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for all of the costs of unacceptable construction work whether or not working drawings are submitted for the construction procedures and temporary materials that affect the quality of construction .
num .
submittal .
six copies of working drawings and design calculations shall be submitted by the contractor to the construction engineer .
the drawings and calculations shall be submitted well in advance of the point in time when the work will be performed .
working drawings for work on or over the railroad rightofway must have the approval of the railroad company before the work will be allowed to begin .
the contractor shall submit four extra sets of drawings and design calculations for use by the construction engineer in obtaining a review by the railroad company .
the contractor shall make the submittal far enough in advance of the need for the work to begin so that the railroad company will have ample time to review the drawings and design calculations .
working drawings and design calculations that have been submitted and distributed to aldot construction personnel by the construction engineer may be resubmitted for another project provided all requirements are identical in nature to the previous project .
the resubmittal of working drawings and calculations shall be signed sealed and dated again by the professional engineer that originally sealed the drawings .
the professional engineer shall clearly indicate on the drawings and calculations that the resubmittal is applicable to the new work .
num .
distribution .
the drawings and design calculations will be checked for completeness .
the drawings will be distributed to aldot construction personnel for inspection of the work .
the section num control of work num distribution of the drawings will not release the contractor and the professional engineer from being solely and fully responsible for the accuracy and adequacy of the drawings .
extra work that may result from errors in the working drawings and design calculations shall be done without additional compensation .
num .
beginning work shown on working drawings .
construction shall not be performed on any item of work for which working drawings are required until the engineer receives the drawings for inspection of the work .
there will be no compensation for work that is performed prior to the point in time that aldot personnel have the drawings for use in inspecting the construction work .
d compensation for drawings .
there will be no direct payment for the preparation and submittal of shop drawings working drawings and design calculations .
the cost of the drawings and calculations shall be included in the contract unit prices for the items of work .
num conformity with plans and specifications .
all work performed and all materials furnished shall be in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown on the plans or indicated in the specifications .
in the event the engineer finds the materials furnished work performed or the finished product not within reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced he shall then make a determination if the work shall be accepted and remain in place .
in this event the engineer will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification which will provide for an appropriate adjustment in the contract price for such work or materials as he deems necessary to conform to his determination based on engineering judgement .
where definite tolerances are specified in the contract such tolerances shall fix the limits of reasonably close conformity .
where tolerances are not specified in the contract the engineer will determine the limits of reasonably close conformity in each individual case and his decision shall be final and conclusive and mutually accepted by all parties .
in the event the engineer finds the materials furnished work performed or the finished product are not within reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications the work shall be removed and replaced or otherwise satisfactorily corrected by and at the expense of the contractor .
num coordination of plans specifications and special provisions .
a general .
these specifications the supplemental specifications the plans special provisions and all supplementary documents are essential parts of the contract and a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
they are intended to be complimentary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
in case of discrepancy calculated dimensions unless obviously incorrect shall govern over scaled dimensions .
supplemental specifications shall govern over the standard specifications .
plans shall govern over standard specifications and supplemental specifications .
special provisions shall govern over standard specifications supplemental specifications and plans .
b errors .
the contractor shall not take advantage of any apparent error or omission in the plans or specifications .
in the event the contractor discovers such an error or omission he shall immediately notify the engineer .
the engineer will then make such corrections and interpretations as may be deemed necessary for fulfilling the intent of the plans and specifications .
num cooperation with utilities and nonhighway public facilities .
it will be the states duty to notify in writing all utility owners or other parties affected of the date they may begin adjustments of their facilities .
the state will endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of public or private utilities or other appurtenances within or adjacent to construction limits made as soon as practicable .
the owners or operators of private or public utilities shall have access to the work for the installation adjustment or repair of main line and service facilities .
all frames of openings for valves manholes catch basins or other fixtures encountered in areas to be covered by a pavement shall be adjusted to the proper elevation before the pavement is placed .
the contractor shall coordinate his activities with those of utility owners while utility adjustments are being made .
copies of utility agreements will be made available for the contractors inspection at the section num control of work num alabama department of transportation area offices .
the contractor shall investigate conditions of existing utilities prior to submitting his bid for the purpose of coordinating the work to the greatest extent possible .
the contractors attention is directed to any utilities that may be involved on this project and are designated in the plan assembly .
in any event it shall be the contractors responsibility to determine the exact location of all existing utilities whether shown on the plans or not .
the relocation andor adjustments of said utilities have been authorized and utility facilities have been cleared or adjusted however should additional points of conflict occur they will of necessity be performed during the construction operation .
cooperation between the contractor and the utility companies shall be expected in accordance with this article .
any existing underground utilities whether indicated on the plans or not that have been abandoned by the utility companies within the limits of construction that require removing shall be removed by the contractor .
any material removed in this manner shall become the property of the contractor .
disposal of said material shall be at his discretion outside of the rightofway limits .
cost of such work shall be paid for under applicable contract items of work or as extra work as outlined in article num .
num cooperation by the contractor .
a general .
the contractor will be supplied with a minimum of two sets of approved plans and contract assemblies except standard specifications including special provisions .
the contractor shall purchase any required standard specifications from the department .
one set of approved plans and one copy of the contract assembly including the standard specifications shall be kept available on the work at all times .
the contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate the progress thereof and shall cooperate with the engineer his inspectors and other contractors in every way possible .
b contractors superintendence and supervision .
the contractor shall have on the work at all times as his agent a competent superintendent capable of reading and speaking english and capable of thoroughly understanding the plans and specifications .
the superintendent shall be thoroughly experienced in the type of work being performed and will receive instructions from the engineer or his authorized representatives .
the superintendent shall have full authority to execute orders or directions of the engineer without delay and to promptly supply such materials equipment tools labor and incidentals as may be required .
joint venture contractors shall have one such superintendent for all ventures .
such superintendents shall be furnished irrespective of the amount of work sublet and shall have full authority over all subcontract work .
num cooperation between contractors .
a general .
the department reserves the right at any time to contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work covered by the contract .
when separate contracts are let within the limits of any one project each contractor shall conduct his work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
contractors working on the same project shall cooperate with each other as directed .
each contractor involved shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with his contract and shall protect and save harmless the department from any and all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delays or loss experienced by him because of the presence and operations of other contractors working within the limits of the same project .
the contractor shall arrange his work and shall place and dispose of the materials being used so as not to interfere with the operations of the other contractors within the limits of the same project .
he shall join his work with that of the others in an acceptable manner and shall perform it in proper sequence to that of the others .
the engineer is empowered to regulate and coordinate the stages or progress of construction or items of work of the respective contractors to affect necessary cooperation and satisfactory performance and completion .
the engineers decision shall be binding in any dispute involving the work arising between contractors .
section num control of work num b right of way for structure contractor .
except as provided in subarticle a above the structure contractor shall have available for his operations and storage the right of way between abutments and for a distance of up to num feet num m unless otherwise shown on the plans back of the face of each abutment of each proposed structure along the main road depending upon site conditions .
in the case of an underpass structure the structure contractor will have the use of the right of way for a distance of up to num feet num m unless otherwise shown on the plans on each side of the centerline of the structure depending upon site conditions .
he shall provide a minimum num foot num m vertical and num foot num m horizontal clearance through the falsework of such structure for movement of construction equipment .
he shall keep open and not interfere with roadways or detours for public travel .
he shall have right of access to each structure along the roadbed location or other portion of the right of way and shall not be barred from such access by operations of other contractors .
he shall not by his operations bar passage of other contractors between sections of their work beyond each end of a structure .
num construction stakes lines and grades .
a for projects containing item numa geometric controls the following shall apply the furnishing of construction stakes lines and grades shall be as outlined in section num. b for projects not containing item numa geometric controls the following shall apply num .
determination of lines and grades .
the engineer will set construction stakes for the contractor establishing all the lines grades and measurements necessary for the proper prosecution of the work .
the location alignment .
and elevation of all parts of the work will be established by the engineer but the contractor shall assume full responsibility for construction to the alignment elevations and dimensions as indicated by the stakes andor plans .
these stakes and marks shall constitute the field control by and in accordance with which the contractor shall govern and execute the work .
for all work the engineer will furnish the contractor all lines elevations and bench marks needed to lay out the work correctly .
no work shall be done without lines and grades having been given by the engineer .
for control of elevations of base and pavement layers the contractor will be furnished one set of control elevation stakes .
these stakes will be set on grade at intervals of not more than num feet num meters along and near each side of each roadbed and at other points as needed for accurate grade control .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to obtain from this one set of control stakes the proper elevations for each layer of subbase base and pavement .
num .
contractors responsibility for stakes .
the contractor shall be responsible for the preservation of all stakes and marks .
if in the opinion of the engineer any of the construction survey stakes or marks have been carelessly destroyed or disturbed by the contractor the cost to the state of replacing them will be charged against him and will be deducted from the payment for the work .
num .
furnishing stakes templates etc .
the contractor shall furnish free of charge all stakes templates and other materials necessary for marking and maintaining points and lines given and shall furnish the engineer such incidental labor as he may require in establishing points and lines necessary to the prosecution of the work to satisfactory completion .
num inspectors assistants and representatives .
a general .
the engineer may appoint such inspectors assistants or representatives as he deems necessary and they shall be granted full access to the work and to the mills and factories in which material is being prepared for use under the contract .
in county aid work the engineer may appoint the county engineer as his representative on the work .
section num control of work num b duties of the inspector .
inspectors will be authorized to inspect all work done and materials furnished .
such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used .
the inspector will not be authorized to alter or waive the provisions of the contract .
the inspector will not be authorized to issue instructions contrary to the plans and specifications or to act as foreman for the contractor however he shall have the authority to reject work or materials until any questions at issue can be referred to and decided by the engineer .
num inspection of work .
a access to the work for inspection by the engineer .
all materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the engineer .
the engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the contractor as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection .
if the engineer requests it the contractor at any time before acceptance of work shall remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as may be directed .
after examination the contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standard required by the specifications .
should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable the uncovering or removing and replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed will be paid for as extra work but should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good the parts removed will be at the contractors expense .
when any unit of government political subdivision utility company or railroad corporation is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by this contract its respective representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
such inspection shall in no sense make any unit of government political subdivision utility company or railroad corporation a party to this contract and shall in no way interfere with the rights of all parties .
b failure of the engineer to discover and reject defective materials and work .
the contractor shall bear the costs of replacing defective materials and work including the occurrence of the engineer failing to promptly discover and reject defective materials and work .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work .
all work which does not conform to the requirements of the contract will be considered as unacceptable work .
unacceptable work whether the result of poor workmanship use of defective materials damage through carelessness or due to any other cause shall be removed immediately and replaced in an acceptable manner .
work done contrary to the instructions of the engineer work done beyond the lines shown on the plans work performed without sublet approval by the engineer if the work is performed by forces other than the contractors forces or any extra work done without authority will be considered as unauthorized .
if the quality of the unauthorized work is acceptable to the engineer the work may be left in place without payment .
if the quality of the unauthorized work is unacceptable the work shall be removed and replaced .
upon failure on the part of the contractor to comply forthwith with any order of the engineer made under the provisions of this article the engineer will have authority to cause unacceptable work to be remedied or removed and replaced and unauthorized work to be removed and to deduct the costs from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
continued failure on the part of the contractor to comply shall be considered sufficient cause for the director to declare the contract in default and to proceed to have the work completed in accordance with article num .
num oversizeoverweight vehicle permit and load restrictions .
a oversizeoverweight vehicle permit .
an oversizeoverweight vehicle permit may be required for moving oversized and overweight loads .
the vehicle permit office of the aldot should be contacted to obtain information concerning the special requirements such as police escorts for moving these loads .
section num control of work num b load restrictions .
the contractor shall comply with all legal load restrictions in the hauling of materials on public roads beyond the limits of the project .
in the hauling of materials on city streets or county roads it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to regulate his loads so that damage does not occur regardless of the legal or posted load limit .
maintenance of public roads shall be as outlined in article num .
a special permit will not relieve the contractor of liability for damage which may result from the moving of material or equipment .
within the project limits loads shall be so regulated that damage will not occur to base or pavement layers and structures but in no case shall loads exceed the legal load limit unless permitted in writing by the engineer under special conditions .
no loads will be permitted on base pavement or structures before the expiration of any required curing period .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage by his hauling and other construction equipment within the project limits .
gross weight mass tickets for loads delivered to the project will be verified by the engineer that all loads incorporated in the project are within the legal load limit .
required information for verification will be secured at the time of delivery however verification of weights masses may be made at any time during the course of the project .
loads over the legal load limit and which have been incorporated in the project by the contractor will not be paid for as outlined in the last paragraph of this article .
on loads of materials not accompanied by a gross weight mass ticket the contractor shall furnish upon request of the engineer the tare weight mass of any truck delivering such materials to the project .
these truck tare weights masses along with appropriate volumes and conversion factors will be used by the engineer in determining approximate quantities of materials which may be hauled to the project and still remain within the legal load limit .
at such times as the engineer feels that the legal load limit is being exceeded he will order the contractor to verify the weight mass of designated loads at an approved truck scale .
loads over the legal load limit which are incorporated into the project by the contractor will not be paid for as outlined in the last paragraph in this article .
no payment will be made for any materials placed in the project for which the delivered gross weight mass exceeds the legal load limit .
no payment will include the total amount of the delivered load at the full contract unit price for the item of work under which the material is used .
num maintenance of the work .
a general .
the contractor shall maintain the work during construction until the entire project is completed and accepted .
this maintenance shall constitute continuous and effective work prosecuted day by day with adequate equipment and forces to the end that the roadway or structures are kept in satisfactory condition at all times .
in the case of a contract for the placing of a course upon a course or subgrade previously constructed the contractor shall maintain the previous course or subgrade during all construction operations .
the contractors attention is directed to article num for maintenance of roads and detours and compensation thereof .
b compensation .
all cost of maintenance work during construction and before the project is accepted shall be included in the unit prices bid on the various pay items and the contractor will not be paid an additional amount for such work .
num failure to maintain work .
if the contractor at any time fails to comply with the provisions of article num the engineer will immediately notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of such notice the engineer may immediately proceed to maintain the project and the entire cost of this maintenance will be deducted from monies due or to become due the contractor on his contract .
section num control of work num num acceptance .
a construction acceptance inspection .
whenever the engineer considers the work provided for and contemplated by the contract is nearing completion or within two weeks of written notice of presumptive completion of the entire project by the contractor the area operations engineer and all pertinent personnel such as area construction project county transportation and maintenance personnel fhwa county municipal or other owner representatives as applicable will inspect all the work in the contract .
the contractor should not presume completion of the entire project until permanent vegetation is established .
if the area operations engineer finds that the work has not been satisfactorily completed at the time of such inspection the contractor will be advised in writing as to the work to be done or the particular defects to be remedied to place the work in condition for acceptance for maintenance purposes .
the contractor will have a maximum of four weeks to correct and complete the items listed .
time charges should resume if the work is not completed in the four weeks .
b partial acceptance for maintenance .
when requested by the contractor in writing the engineer may consider accepting a portion of the contract for maintenance prior to all items of work being completed .
this will apply to specific items or operations of being restricted by seasonal limitations or check periods in accordance with numc or num or work as directed by the engineer .
all other contract items of work shall be satisfactorily complete .
the engineer will notify the contractor that they will assume maintenance of specific items or operations of work and will also indicate which items are not accepted .
the partial acceptance letter to the contractor should also detail the disposition of time charges for the remaining work .
additional costs for completing the remaining items of work as a consequence of a partial acceptance such as traffic control and remobilization shall be borne by the contractor .
partial acceptance shall in no way void or alter any terms of the contract .
once the remaining items of work have been satisfactorily completed the engineer will accept the portion of work and assume maintenance of the project henceforth .
c final acceptance .
num .
general .
upon due notice from the contractor of presumptive completion of the remaining items of work in subarticles a and b above the area operations engineer and all pertinent personnel will make an inspection .
if all construction provided for and contemplated by the contract is satisfactorily completed that inspection shall constitute the final inspection .
num .
vegetation bonds .
when directed by the engineer the contractor shall provide a vegetation bond covering sustained growth of established or planted vegetation .
the bond shall be of sufficient value to cover all costs associated with the replanting or reestablishment of the vegetation should it become necessary .
the dollar amount of the bond shall be the costs for the labor materials and equipment required for traffic control temporary erosion and sediment control and permanent vegetation establishment .
the period of time covered by the bond will not be required to be greater than num months unless shown otherwise on the plans .
vegetation bonds should not be used as a substitute for established vegetation of a permanent species .
num .
acceptance for maintenance .
upon satisfactory completion of the work as noted in item numcnum above the area operations engineer will notify the construction engineer that the contractor has completed all work required by the contract .
after the construction engineer has concurred with the area operations engineers recommendation the construction engineer will advise the contractor in writing that the work has been accepted and the department will assume the maintenance thereof subject to the record check of materials and workmanship .
num .
npdes termination within num days of acceptance for maintenance the engineer will request npdes permit termination as outlined in subarticle nume .
the contractor shall be responsible for stormwater runoff control on the project until the storm water permit is terminated or num calendar days after the engineers request for termination has been processed whichever is section num control of materials num less .
the contractor is also responsible for correcting problems associated with onsite erosion and offsite sedimentation deposition during this time .
num .
contractors advertisement of completion .
the contractor immediately after receiving notice of acceptance for maintenance shall give notice of said completion by an advertisement for a period of four successive weeks in some newspaper in general circulation published within the county in which the project is located .
if the project is located in more than one county an advertisement shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation published within each county in which the project is located .
proof of publication of said notice shall be made by the contractor to the director by affidavit of the publisher .
if a newspaper is not published in a county where work is done the notice may be given by posting at the court house for num days and proof of same shall be made by the probate judge or sheriff and the contractor .
num .
written notice of final acceptance .
after completion of all requirements noted in this article and article num the engineer will process the final estimate for payment .
at this time the construction engineer will give the contractor written notice that the project is completed and will specify that date as final acceptance .
num claims for adjustments and disputes .
claims shall be handled as provided in section num claims .
section num control of materials num source of supply and quality requirements .
a general .
attention is directed to section num materials which includes additional specifications for materials .
the materials furnished for use in the work shall be new unused materials unless otherwise specified meeting all quality requirements of the contract .
in order to expedite the inspection and testing of materials the contractor shall notify the engineer of his proposed sources of materials prior to delivery .
at the option of the engineer materials may be approved at the source of supply before delivery is started .
if it is found after trial that sources of supply for previously approved materials do not produce uniform and satisfactory products or if the product from any source proves unacceptable at any time the contractor shall furnish acceptable materials from other approved sources .
the engineer shall have the right to reject the entire output of any source from which he finds it is impracticable to secure a continuous flow of uniformly satisfactory materials .
num .
federal participating projects .
a .
steel and iron products .
steeliron materials from the initial melting and mixing of these materials and all manufacturing processes including the stage of applying a coating to these materials epoxy coating galvanizing painting or any other coating that protects or enhances the value of the coated material that are permanently incorporated into the completed project shall be produced domestically in the united states its territories or possessions .
if any part of the project defined by and including the nepa document is funded by federalaid then the entire project must meet the buy america provisions including utility relocation reimbursements for federalaid funds authorized after october num num .
if the dollar amount of the foreign source steeliron is less than num or num of the contract amount whichever is greater the foreign source steeliron can be used in the project .
the contractor shall provide certification that the steeliron is domestically produced .
b. convict produced materials .
section num control of materials num materials produced after july num num by convict labor are prohibited from being incorporated in the work unless such materials have been produced by convicts who are on parole supervised release or probation from a prison or produced in a qualified prison facility and the cumulative annual production amount of such materials for use in federalaid highway construction does not exceed the amount of such materials produced in such facility for use in federalaid highway construction during the nummonth period ending july num num .
qualified prison facility means any prison facility in which convicts during the nummonth period ending july num num produced materials for use in federalaid highway construction projects .
c. cargo preference act .
materials or equipment that are acquired solely for a federalaid project must comply with the requirements of num cfr num .
clauses num cfr numab are hereby incorporated into these specifications by reference .
num .
nonfederal participating projects .
on projects financed entirely by the state of alabama or any political subdivision thereof the alabama legislature has passed acts that require the exclusive use of american materials products and supplies as follows a .
steel products .
the content of alabama code section num is as follows a any contractor for a public works project financed entirely by the state of alabama or any political subdivision thereof within this state shall use steel produced within the united states when specifications in the construction contract require the use of steel and do not limit its supply to a sole source under subsection f of section num .
if the awarding authority decides that the procurement of the above mentioned domestic steel products becomes impractical as a result of a national emergency national strike or other cause the awarding authority shall waive the above restriction .
b in the event the contractor violates the domestic steel requirements of subsection a and domestic steel is not used there shall be a downward adjustment in the contract price equal to any realized savings or benefits to the contractor .
b. nonsteel materials supplies and products .
the content of alabama code section num is as follows a the awarding authority contracting for a public works project to be financed entirely by the state of alabama or any political subdivision of the state shall stipulate or cause to be stipulated in the contract a provision whereby the person firm or corporation undertaking the project agrees to use in the execution of the contract materials supplies and products manufactured mined processed or otherwise produced in the united states or its territories if the same are available at reasonable and competitive prices and are not contrary to any sole source specification implemented under subsection f of section num num. b in the event the contractor breaches the agreement to use domestic products and domestic products are not used there shall be a downward adjustment in the contract price equal to any realized savings or benefits to the contractor .
c. sole source reference alabama code subsection numf .
in the rare case that a sole source material is required from a nondomestic source the department will make the determination of what the contractor will be required to furnish .
b clearances and acknowledgments for the use of offsite areas .
num .
types of regulatory clearances and acknowledments .
the regulatory clearances and acknowledgements shown in the following table are required for material pits waste areas haul roads material stockpiles long term equipment parking areas and other offsite areas selected by the contractor to utilize in the construction of the project .
regulatory clearances and acknowledgments for the long term use of offsite areas section num control of materials num num .
applicable construction stormwater discharge permitting from the alabama department of environmental management .
num .
historical and archeological clearance from the alabama historical commission .
num .
written acknowledgement from the u.s .
fish and wildlife service that there will be no adverse affect on endangered and threatened species protected under the endangered species act .
num .
written acknowledgement from a professional biologist that wetlands will not be adversely affected .
num .
submittal of copies of regulatory clearances and acknowledgments .
the contractor shall submit copies of clearances and acknowledgements as verification that regulatory authorities are aware of the offsite activity and that the activity will not adversely impact natural resources .
clearances and acknowledgements will not be required for offsite areas used for short term parking staging or material stockpiling where the activity does not require clearing or grading .
only a copy of applicable adem permitting will be required for offsite areas commercially owned and operated by a third party that is not an aldot contractor or subcontractor .
c operation of offsite pits and waste areas .
the operations of any material pit or waste area shall be so conducted that it will blend into the surrounding landscape .
pit sites and waste areas shall be dressed to obliterate any unsightly appearance and treated in such a manner that erosion will not occur and result in the pollution of the watershed area .
in general sources will not be permitted at locations where resulting scars are visible from any highway .
however when approved adequate space for conservation of existing natural screenings or to permit the installation of screen planting between the road surface and the disturbed area shall be provided .
the contractor shall accept full responsibility for the quality of the materials used .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with the owners of the materials pay the purchase price or royalty directly to the owners and bear all the expense of procuring and delivering the materials complete in place including cost of ingress and egress and including the cost of opening developing and operating such sources .
if the contractor submits a written request to the department asking that the department run samples or analyses on the materials the department may at its option run such samples or analyses but a charge will be made for the tests and the cost deducted from the next monthly estimate due the contractor .
where access to a material source or waste area requires removal of fencing the removal and replacement of fence together with the protection of any livestock affected shall be the responsibility of the contractor without direct compensation .
use of existing public roads for hauling materials to be used in the work shall be governed by article num. d blank .
e blank .
f use of materials with special acceptance requirements .
the alabama department of transportation maintains several lists of materials sources and devices which have undergone some form of preliminary evaluation .
these lists are established both as reference for contractors and as methods to eliminate some of the lengthy time delays required in evaluating certain products .
each list is unique in requirements and job control acceptance .
users of these lists should read all requirements carefully before using products on them .
when materials or products shown on these lists are used they shall be selected from the most current applicable list at the time of installation regardless of the materials and products that may have been shown on the lists prior to the date of installation .
these lists are published in the departments manual material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements msdsar which is available on the departments website .
the lists are not a blanket approval and do not relieve the contractor of the responsibility of furnishing quality materials .
the project manager will inspect the material and if doubt exists section num control of materials num job control samples will be taken .
if these job control samples indicate failing test results one of the following actions will be taken depending on the detrimental effects to the project num .
previously installed materials may be ordered replaced with passing materials at no cost to the department .
num .
previously installed materials which are of a temporary nature may be left in place with the contractor maintaining the failing materials for the duration of their use at his expense .
num .
previously installed materials may remain in place with an agreed price reduction .
after failing job control results are received no further installation of the failing material will be allowed and a determination will be made by the department as to the removal of the product from the list .
the lists are established and maintained by the individual sections within the department of transportation who are primarily concerned with the products .
lists are divided into five general categories of similar requirements .
they are num .
qualified sources of materials num .
approved materials num .
qualified materials num .
approved traffic control devices and materials num .
qualified traffic control devices and materials the alabama department of transportation product evaluation board has final authority for addition or removal of products from these lists .
the bureau of materials and tests duplicates and disseminates these lists .
general information concerning materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements is contained in aldotnum .
information concerning items on these lists or how to get an item onto one of these lists may be obtained by contacting alabama department of transportation bureau of research and development num coliseum boulevard montgomery al num num num num samples tests cited specifications .
a general .
all material used in the work shall be inspected tested and approved by the engineer inspection and testing shall be in accordance with the current departmental testing manual .
any work in which untested materials are used without approval or written permission of the engineer shall be performed at the contractors risk .
materials found to be unacceptable and unauthorized will not be paid for and if directed by the engineer shall be removed at the contractors expense .
the engineer may permit use prior to sampling and testing of certain materials accompanied by a signed materials guaranty on the form furnished by the department guaranteeing the material conforms to departmental specifications .
such material may be tested at any time and if found unsatisfactory shall be removed and replaced with satisfactory material at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer reserves the right to refuse permission for use of materials on the guaranty basis at any time .
the contractor shall furnish the department free of charge ample quantities of such samples as are necessary or required by the engineer to test adequately any and all materials .
any damage caused by inplace testing when such is specified shall be repaired by the contractor without additional compensation .
samples will be taken by or under the supervision of a representative of the engineer .
required or designated tests will be made by and at the expense of the state unless otherwise noted on the plans or in the specifications in accordance with the most recent standard interim or tentative standard methods of aldot aashto astm or f.s.s .
in force and on file with the department at the date of advertisement for bids indicated date of adoption notwithstanding except where standard or special drawings are included in the plans .
then the aashto astm or f.s.s .
in effect on the date of the latest revision to the drawing shall govern .
section num control of materials num b plant inspection .
the engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the source .
manufacturing plants may be inspected periodically for compliance with specified manufacturing methods and material samples will be obtained for laboratory testing for compliance with materials quality requirements .
this may be the basis for acceptance of manufactured lots as to quality .
in the event plant inspection is undertaken the following conditions shall be met num .
the engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the contractor and the producer with whom he has contracted for materials .
num .
the engineer shall have full entry at all times to such parts of the plant as may concern the manufacture or production of materials being furnished .
num .
if required by the engineer the contractor shall arrange for an approved building for the use of the inspector such building to be located conveniently near the plant independent of any building used by the material producer and conforming to requirements of article num .
num .
adequate safety measures are to be provided and maintained .
it is understood that the department reserves the right to retest all materials prior to incorporation into the work which have been tested and accepted at the source of supply after the same have been delivered and to reject all materials which when retested do not meet the requirements of these specifications or those established for the specific project .
c supply of tested materials .
the contractor shall regulate his supply so that at all times there will be a sufficient quantity of tested and accepted materials on hand to prevent any delay to the work .
num field laboratories .
a general .
the laboratories furnished for use shall be roofed insulated and weather tight with suitable operational airconditioning and heating facilities for yearround use .
each unit shall be wired for electrical service and in addition the following minimum requirements are applicable to the particular type of laboratory required .
compensation for the field laboratories shall be in accordance with section num. b base soil and structure laboratories .
this type laboratory shall contain not less than num square feet num square meters of floor space minimum width num feet num m with a num foot num m minimum ceiling height and shall contain suitable work benches and drawers .
the laboratory shall be portable and shall be independent of other buildings or office space used by the contractor .
it shall have not less than two windows and one outside door both of which shall be screened and of adequate size to facilitate ventilation of the unit .
location of the laboratory shall be as directed by the engineer .
in addition each unit shall be provided with the following equipment num .
double sink with running water minimum num gallon num liter supply .
num .
lights when requested by the engineer .
num .
three laboratory burners one combined unit or separate gas type shall have minimum capacity to supply the burners five working days .
num .
laboratories for use at rock crushing operations shall also include an approved mechanical shaking machine for screening samples and shall have power for operating the machine .
cabinets and shelving shall be provided as appropriate .
c concrete plant laboratories .
concrete plant laboratories shall contain not less than num square feet num square meters of floor space .
these laboratories shall have a minimum width of not less than num feet num m with a num foot num m minimum ceiling height and shall contain suitable work benches and drawers .
a waiver of the num foot num m width requirement may be granted for mobile trailer type laboratories after an inspection of the labs suitability has been made and approved .
the laboratory may be a portable a permanent or a partitioned portion of a permanent structure provided it meets the requirements of these specifications .
the unit shall be independent of plant storage office space etc .
and shall have one private entrance door that can be secured .
the laboratory shall be located as directed by the engineer with window space suitable to the engineer for periodic section num control of materials num observation of plant operations .
all outside windows and doors shall be screened .
in addition each shall be provided with the following equipment num .
single sink with running water minimum num gallon num liter supply .
num .
one laboratory burner or oven .
num .
lights .
num .
shelves and cabinets shall be provided as appropriate .
d asphalt plant laboratories .
asphalt plant laboratories shall contain not less than num square feet num square meters of floor space and shall be of sufficient size to allow the required independent laboratory equipment to be used simultaneously by the contractor and the state .
these laboratories shall have a minimum width of not less than num feet num m with a num foot num m minimum ceiling height and shall contain suitable work benches and drawers .
a waiver of the num foot num m width requirement may be granted for mobile trailer type laboratories after an inspection of the labs suitability has been made and approved .
the laboratory may be a portable a permanent or a partitioned portion of a permanent structure provided it meets the requirements of these specifications .
the unit shall be independent of plant storage office space etc .
and shall have at least one private entrance door that can be secured .
the laboratory shall be located as directed by the engineer with window space suitable to the engineer for periodic observation of plant operations .
in addition each shall be provided with the following equipment num .
single sink with running water minimum num gallon num liter supply .
num .
one laboratory burner or oven .
num .
lights .
num .
shelves and cabinets shall be provided as appropriate .
num .
all asphalt plant laboratories shall be equipped with an exhaust fan sufficiently sized and located to effectively clear the laboratory of smoke and fumes in a reasonable in the judgment of the engineer amount of time .
all asphalt laboratories shall also be equipped with all applicable equipment listed in aldotnum .
num contractors statement of material sources .
before work on any contract is started the contractor may be required to furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of any or all materials proposed to be used in the construction of the work together with samples which may be subjected to the tests provided in the contract to determine their quality and fitness for the work .
num handling and storage of materials .
a handling materials .
all materials shall be handled in such a manner as to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
aggregates shall be transported from the storage site to the work in tight vehicles so constructed as to prevent loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring in order that there may be no inconsistencies in the quantities of materials intended for incorporation in the work as loaded and the quantities as actually received at the place of operations .
b storage of materials .
materials shall be so stored as to assure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
stored materials even though approved before storage may again be inspected prior to their use in the work .
stored materials shall be located so as to facilitate their prompt inspection .
approved portions of the right of way may be used for storage purposes and for the placing of the contractors plant and equipment but any additional space required therefor must be provided by the contractor at his expense .
private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written permission of the owner or lessee and if requested by the engineer copies of such written permission shall be furnished him .
all storage sites shall be restored to their original condition by the contractor at his expense .
this shall not apply to the stripping and storing of topsoil or to other materials salvaged from the work .
num unacceptable materials .
all materials not conforming to the requirements of the specifications shall be considered as unacceptable and all such materials will be rejected and shall be removed immediately from the site of section num control of materials num the work unless otherwise instructed by the engineer .
no rejected material the defects of which have been corrected shall be used until approval has been given .
in case of failure by the contractor to comply promptly with any order by the engineer to remove rejected materials the engineer shall have authority to have such rejected materials removed by other means and to deduct the expense of such removal from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
num department furnished material .
the contractor shall furnish all materials required to complete the work except those specified to be furnished by the department .
material furnished by the department will be delivered or made available to the contractor at the points specified in the special provisions .
the cost of handling and placing all materials after they are delivered to the contractor shall be considered as included in the contract price for the item in connection with which they are used .
the contractor will be held responsible for all material delivered to him and deductions will be made from any monies due him to make good any shortages and deficiencies from any cause whatsoever and for any damage which may occur after such delivery and for any demurrage charges .
num rights in and use of materials found on the right of way .
the contractor upon his written request and written approval of the engineer may use on the project sand gravel rock or other materials determined suitable by the engineer as may be found in the limits of the regular excavation .
the engineer will make a study of the contractors request and shall submit to the contractor a written statement of the guidelines under which the request is approved .
this statement shall include a detailed analysis of the pay item or items under which the contractor will receive payment for the work performed .
the intent is not to preclude payment for both the item of removal and the item under which the materials are used if in the opinion of the engineer payment under both items are justified but to allow the department to share in any savings realized by the contractor in the use of such materials .
the contractor shall not excavate or remove any material from within the highway location that is not within the grading limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines without written authorization from the engineer .
any coal or other valuable mineral found within the construction limits as defined by the slope and grade lines considered to be unsuitable for reuse on the project shall be removed by the contractor .
in no case shall any coal or other mineral be removed from outside the slope lines or below subgrade except that removed as unsuitable material as directed by the engineer not to exceed num inches num mm below subgrade unless otherwise shown by plan details or with written authorization of the transportation director .
the contractor shall assume full responsibility and liability for insuring that any legal rights due the holder of the mineral rights are satisfied prior to the disposition of any mineral .
by agreement with the owner of the mineral rights the contractor may dispose of this material by direct sale and payment of royalty to the owner or by stockpiling for immediate removal by the owner .
the contractor shall hold the state harmless in all matters pertaining to the disposition of any mineral .
num quality control and quality assurance qcqa requirements for hot mix asphalt hma pavement .
a general .
the following modifications apply only to the materials and work performed under sections num num num num and num .
in all cases the departments testing will be separate from the contractors testing and both shall be conducted by certified technicians .
all quality control aspects of this provision shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
quality control is defined as the activities that are related to the production of hot mix asphalt pavement which meet all the requirements of the specifications including mix design process control testing sampling and acceptance testing when so designated by the department for determination of pay factors and necessary adjustments to the production process .
all quality assurance aspects of this provision shall be the responsibility of the department and will be accomplished in the following ways section num control of materials num num .
by conducting assuranceverification testing on a random basis of independent samples obtained by the department at a frequency of one or more per day num .
by periodically observing tests performed by the contractor num .
by monitoring required contractor control charts exhibiting test results of control parameters .
all superpave gyratory compactors shall have their angle of gyration verified by the engineer following the procedure in aashto t num standard method of test for evaluation of superpave gyratory compactor sgc internal angle of gyration using simulated loading .
this includes all design quality control and quality assurance sgcs .
the compactors shall tilt the specimen molds at an average internal angle of num num mrad num num degrees .
b quality control .
the contractor shall provide and maintain a quality control system that will provide reasonable assurance that all materials products and completed construction submitted for acceptance conform to contract requirements whether manufactured or processed by the contractor or procured from subcontractors or vendors .
quality control managers laboratory technicians and roadway technicians will be certified by the department as outlined in aldot num certification requirements for hot mix asphalt technicians .
this quality control system shall conform to aldotnum quality control and quality assurance procedures and responsibilities for asphalt plant mix production .
the sampling and testing frequencies shall conform to the requirements given in table num for a pay item when the accumulated amount of asphalt mix placed for that pay item exceeds num tons num metric tons .
the accumulated amount of asphalt mix shall be the current total amount of asphalt mix that has been placed beginning from the start of construction .
the sampling and testing frequencies given in table num may be waived by the area materials engineer and the asphalt mix may be accepted by visual observation for a maximum accumulated asphalt mix placement quantity of num tons num metric tons or less for any individual pay item .
the engineer will record the results of the acceptance of the asphalt mix on form bmtnum if sampling and testing is not required .
table i section num e and num mixes sampling and testing requirements for qcqa projects control parameter sample size sampling methods sampling location testing methods aldot testing frequency contractor testing frequency num .
asphalt content aldot sample num lb num kg split into num equal samples aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum or aashto t num num per day per lot num per num tons num .
mixture gradation contractor sample num lb num kg split into num equal samples aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum aashto t num num per day per lot num per num tons num .
asphalt draindown num lb num kg aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aashto t num as required as required see aldotnum quality control and quality assurance procedures and responsibilities for asphalt plant mix production .
if the test results are out of specification tolerance on two consecutive tests for the same size sieve production shall cease until proper plant adjustments are made .
beginning each production day no sample for acceptance purposes shall be taken prior to the production of num tons .
if the random number selected falls within the first num tons the sample shall be taken from the first loaded truck following the truck containing the fiftieth ton produced .
one sample for each num tons num metric tons for section num mixes .
note the testing increment shall have a num ton buffer between each increment .
under aashto t num mixture calibration shall be used .
the ignition furnace shall be equipped with an internal weighing system with microprocessor control where sample weight mass and percent weight mass loss is computed and produced on hardcopy output .
section num control of materials num table i contd .
section num mixes stone matrix asphalt sampling and testing requirements for qcqa projects control parameter sample size sampling methods sampling location testing methods aldot testing frequency contractor testing frequency num .
asphalt content aldot sample num lb num kg split into num equal samples contractor sample num lb num kg split into num equal samples aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum or aashto t num num per day per lot num per num tons num .
maximum specific gravity aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aashto t num flask determination with dry back num per day per lot num per num tons num .
air void content vma aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum aldotnum num per day per lot num per num tons num .
mixture gradation aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum aashto t num num per day per lot num per num tons num .
retained tensile strength note the tsr test is not required for any pay item less than a full lot .
num lb num kg aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum num set of num for the first full lot num tons num metric tons and num set of num for the next num tons num metric tons and num set of num for each additional num tons num metric tons or portion thereafter num set of num for the first full lot num tons num metric tons and num set of num for the next num tons num metric tons and num set of num for each additional num tons num metric tons or portion thereafter num .
mat density aldotnum roadway aldotnum aldotnum as per contractors qc plan aldotnum aldotnum aashto t num method a aashto t num aashto t num num lane feetlift num lane mlift num .
clay content adequate quantity aashto t num aggregate stockpiles aashto t num as required as required num .
asphalt draindown num lb num kg aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aashto t num as required as required see aldotnum quality control and quality assurance procedures and responsibilities for asphalt plant mix production .
if the test results are out of specification tolerance on two consecutive tests for the same size sieve production shall cease until proper plant adjustments are made .
cores shall be taken by the contractor and the density will be determined by the department .
beginning each production day no sample for acceptance purposes shall be taken prior to the production of num tons .
if the random number selected falls within the first num tons the sample shall be taken from the first loaded truck following the truck containing the fiftieth ton produced .
the sample shall be one set of three marshall samples or one set of two gyratory samples .
note the testing increment shall have a num ton buffer between each increment .
when slag is used as an aggregate in the mixture four marshall samples or three gyratory samples shall be compacted .
the test result the furthest away from the average of the four test results shall be discarded and the remaining three test results shall be averaged for use in the computation of air voids .
under aashto t num mixture calibration shall be used .
the ignition furnace shall be equipped with an internal weighing system with microprocessor control where sample weight mass and percent weight mass loss is computed and produced on hardcopy output .
section num control of materials num table i contd .
section num mixes superpave sampling and testing requirements for qcqa projects control parameter sample size sampling methods sampling location testing methods aldot testing frequency contractor testing frequency num.asphalt content aldot sample num lb num kg split into num equal samples contractor sample num lb num kg split into num equal samples aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum or aashto t num num per day per lot num per num tons num .
maximum specific gravity aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aashto t num flask determination with dry back num per day per lot num per num tons num .
air void content vma aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum aldotnum aldotnum num per day per lot num per num tons gmm nd as needed num .
mixture gradation dust to asphalt ratio aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum aashto t num num per day per lot num per num tons num .
retained tensile strength note the tsr test is not required for any pay item less than a full lot .
num lb .
num kg aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldotnum num set of num for the first full lot num tons num metric tons and num set of num for the next num tons num metric tons and num set of num for each additional num tons num metric tons or portion thereafter num set of num for the first full lot num tons num metric tons and num set of num randomly for the next num tons num metric tons and num set of num for each additional num tons num metric tons or portion thereafter num .
mat density aldotnum roadway aldotnum aldotnum as per the contractors qc plan aldotnum aldotnum aashto t num method a aashto t num aashto t num num lane feetlift num lane mlift num .
fine aggregate angularity faa note the faa test is not required for any pay item less than a full lot .
adequate quantity to run aashto t num method a or astm c nummethod a aashto t num loaded truck aashto t num method a or astm c num method a num for the first full lot num tons num metric tons and num for the next num tons num metric tons and num for each additional num tons num metric tons or portion thereafter num for the first full lot num tons num metric tons and num randomly for the next num tons num metric tons and num randomly for each additional num tons num metric tons or portion thereafter num .
clay content adequate quantity aashto t num stockpile aashto t num as required as required num .
asphalt draindown num lb numkg aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aashto t num as required as required num .
split tensile x num lb .
num kg aashto t num aldotnum loaded truck aldot num report the unconditioned sample for split tensile na num for the first full lot and num randomly for each additional num tons thereafter section num control of materials num table i contd .
section num mixes superpave sampling and testing requirements for qcqa projects see aldot num quality control and quality assurance procedures and responsibilities for asphalt plant mix production .
in virgin mixes the sample may be taken from the cold feed conveyor .
if the test results are out of specification tolerance on two consecutive tests for the same size sieve production shall cease until proper plant adjustments are made .
cores shall be taken by the contractor and the density will be determined by the department .
beginning each production day no sample for acceptance purposes shall be taken prior to the production of num tons .
if the random number selected falls within the first num tons the sample shall be taken from the first loaded truck following the truck containing the fiftieth ton produced .
the sample shall be one set of two gyratory samples .
note the testing increment shall have a num ton buffer between each increment .
when slag is used as an aggregate in the mixture three gyratory samples shall be compacted .
the test result the furthest away from the average of the three test results shall be discarded and the remaining two test results shall be averaged for use in the computation of air voids .
under aashto t num mixture calibration shall be used .
the ignition furnace shall be equipped with an internal weighing system with microprocessor control where sample weight mass and percent weight mass loss is computed and produced on hardcopy output .
x testing in accordance with the requirements given in section num is only required for job mix formulas that have greater than num rap .
mix shall be tested by an aashto accredited laboratory .
c quality assurance .
num .
acceptance procedures .
all materials will be evaluated for acceptance and payment through the departments acceptance procedures specified herein .
the department will be responsible for determining the acceptability and pay factor of the construction and materials incorporated therein .
the department will utilize the contractors qc system test results for liquid asphalt binder content and laboratory compacted air void content for pay purposes except where a .
the departments quality assurance testing as described in item num below and subarticle num does not validate the quality of the material .
b. qc sampling and testing was not performed in accordance with specified procedures .
the department will determine the sample locations .
the sampling and testing frequencies shall conform to the requirements given in table num for a pay item when the accumulated amount of asphalt mix placed for that pay item exceeds num tons num metric tons .
the accumulated amount of asphalt mix shall be the current total amount of asphalt mix that has been placed beginning from the start of construction .
the sampling and testing frequencies given in table num may be waived by the area materials engineer and the asphalt mix may be accepted by visual observation for a maximum accumulated asphalt mix placement quantity of num tons num metric tons or less for any individual pay item .
the engineer will record the results of the acceptance of the asphalt mix on form bmtnum if sampling and testing is not required .
all conforming and nonconforming inspections and test results will be monitored in accordance with aldotnum and shall be recorded on approved forms and charts which shall be kept up to date and complete and shall be available at all times to the department during the performance of the work .
only those tests designated by the department in advance as acceptance tests will be utilized in the computation of pay factors .
test properties shall be charted on forms that are in accordance with the applicable requirements of the department .
a copy of each chart and form to be used by the contractor will be furnished by the department .
the contractor shall furnish his own supply of the charts and forms .
the contractor or producer may design their own forms and charts however these must be approved by the engineer prior to their use .
a lot is normally defined as num tons metric tons for section num num and num mixes and num tons metric tons for section num mixes consisting offour qc test sets of laboratory tests liquid asphalt binder content and laboratory air voids or gradation unless specifically stated otherwise in this item or elsewhere in the specifications.a lot will usually consist of at least four density tests however a lot may have fewer than four density tests .
the engineer will round a testing increment or a lot to the nearest truckload of material .
a lot lasting longer than thirty calendar days or a lot with inactivity for longer than num calendar days will be terminated .
mix produced after the completion of the last full lot a terminated lot and small production projects will be evaluated and pay factors computed and may be accepted on the basis of less than four laboratory tests liquid asphalt binder content and laboratory air voids or gradation .
section num control of materials num each lot will be accepted on the basis of the actual number of test sets run for that lot .
if the production process is considered out of control any individual test result for asphalt content gradation single sieve or air voids has a pay factor equal to num computed from the num test row in table ii and table iii or the num test column in table vi of subarticle num whichever is appropriate production shall be suspended and corrections made as outlined in subarticle num .
gradation pay factors are normally computed on each screen tested and then averaged however if any individual screen has a pay factor of num before being averaged with the other screens the process is considered out of control .
the contractor may voluntarily terminate a lot when the pay factor will be less than num when calculated using the one test row of table ii and table iii and the one test column of table vi in section num .
if the contractor terminates a lot production shall be suspended and corrections made as outlined in subarticle num .
the voluntary termination of a lot may only be done once per pay item per project .
all sampling testing and computations for a lot will be completed and pay factors provided the contractor as soon as possible .
all sampling and testing of materials including frequency of samples and tests for the contractors quality control and the departments verification shall be performed in strict conformance with the departments testing manual as modified in table i .
this manual available on the aldot internet site contains guidance for sampling and testing procedures from aashto astm and aldot procedures .
num .
acceptance or rejection .
the decision of the engineer will be final as to the acceptance rejection or acceptance at an adjusted payment of each lot .
rejected lots shall be removed at no cost to the department and replaced at the contract unit bid price .
num .
sampling of lots and sublots .
it is the intent of these specifications that each lot for mixture testing and each sublot for mat density testing will meet specification requirements at the time of initial evaluation .
no resampling or retesting other than referee testing described below will be allowed .
the department will however perform at least one liquid asphalt binder content one maximum specific gravity one mixture gradation and one set of laboratory compacted samples for air void content tests per day per lot as specified in table i to verify the contractors test results .
if the contractor is not required to perform a test that day the tonnage calculated by the random number is not reached the department will not run a verification test .
the department will perform a verification test for each lot even where there is more than one lot per day .
the contractor will be notified by the engineer at the point in production to procure mixture acceptance samples .
the contractor shall sample the mixture and split it into two samples the contractors primary sample and a referee sample .
the portions of mixture for the referee sample shall be bagged labeled and stored for testing if required .
all referee samples will be kept by the department until they are tested if required .
the contractor shall obtain a verification testing sample from each lot each day for testing by the department .
the verification testing samples shall be taken at locations directed by the engineer .
these locations will be different from the contractors mixture acceptance sample locations .
the contractor may take half of each sample for verification testing .
the department will compare the verification sample to the closest in tonnage contractors primary sample .
the sampling of hot mix asphalt is outlined in aldotnum forms and examples for sampling and computing pay factors for hot mix asphalt .
num .
testing and lot verification .
air voids shall be computed on the contractors sample by using the running average of the contractors last four maximum specific gravities .
if slag is used as an aggregate in the mixture the running average of the contractors four most recent determinations for the bulk specific gravity of the compacted mixture shall be used in the computation of the air voids for the contractors sample .
the calculation of the running averages of both maximum specific gravity and bulk specific gravity shall start with the first lot .
the test strip is independent of the lots .
air voids shall be computed on the departments sample by using the departments individual maximum specific gravity and bulk specific gravity .
the department and the contractor shall compare test results with each other for the above section num control of materials num mentioned testing increments .
if there are no differences or if the differences are within the tolerances listed in tables v or vi section num for each parameter no further testing and analysis will be necessary and the contractors test values will be used in the computation of the appropriate lot pay factor .
if the contractors air voids do not compare with the departments test results the contractor shall recompute test results using the individual maximum specific gravity for that particular testing increment and recompare with the verification test result .
if the results compare within the tolerances in table v section num using the individual maximum specific gravities no further testing will be required and the contractors running average of the last four maximum specific gravities will be used to compute air voids for pay factor determination .
also if the contractors air voids do not compare with the departments test results and the contractor is using slag as an aggregate the contractor shall recompute test results using the individual bulk specific gravity for that particular testing increment and recompare with the verification test result .
if the results compare within the tolerances in table v section num using the individual bulk specific gravity no further testing will be required and the contractors running average of the last four bulk specific gravities will be used to compute air voids for pay factor determination .
if the results of the departments verification test and the contractors test do not compare within the tolerances in tables v or vi section num but yield the same pay factor for the lot when the departments result is substituted for the contractors result no further testing will be required .
where the contractors test results and the departments test results do not compare and can not be resolved by the above mentioned methods but the pay factor dispute is between num and num the contractor may elect to accept the num pay factor and waive referee testing .
when differences between test results of the verification samples are not within the tolerances listed in tables v or vi section num and can not be resolved by the above mentioned methods referee testing will be required .
all referee samples will be tested by the bureau of materials and tests central laboratory num fairground road montgomery al num .
the bureau of materials and tests central laboratory is an aashto accredited laboratory see aashto r num recommended practice for establishing and implementing a quality system for construction materials testing laboratories .
num .
referee testing a .
laboratory all testing increments of the referee samples for the entire lot shall be tested in the bureau of materials and tests hot mix laboratory forthe pay factor parameters liquid asphalt binder content laboratory compacted air voids or gradation in question .
the contractors results using the individual air voids and maximum specific gravities will be compared to the bureau of materials and tests results using materials and tests individual bulk and maximum specific gravities for each testing increment in the lot .
when the contractors results and the bureau of materials and tests results are within the tolerances listed in tables v or vi section num the contractors results will be used .
when the contractors results are not within the tolerances listed in tables v or vi section num the bureau of materials and tests central laboratory results will be used for final pay factors .
the bureau of materials and tests central laboratory will record the contractors field results and the central laboratorys results of the parameters in question on form bmtnum .
for each testing increment these results either the contractors or the bureau of materials and tests will be used in the computation of the appropriate lot pay factor .
should differences between test results that are not within the tolerances listed in table v or vi section num for liquid asphalt binder content air voids or gradation continue for two consecutive days operations shall be halted until testing discrepancies can be resolved .
the bureau of materials and tests will monitor testing procedures by department and contractor technicians until consistent test results are achieved .
section num control of materials num b. cores if the contractor believes that the core density values determined by the state are in error the contractor shall notify the area materials engineer in writing that referee testing is requested .
using the original cores the area will again determine the densities of the cores in question using a technician different from the technician who originally determined the core density .
if these new densities result in a different pay factor the new pay factor shall be applied to the tonnage in question this may increase or decrease the contractors pay adjustment .
num .
adjusted payment for deficiencies .
the payment for each lot will be adjusted on the basis of acceptance test results in accordance with the requirements given in this section .
accurate records shall be kept of the quantity tonnage of plant mix in each lot .
pay factors shall be determined for each lot from the values given in tables ii iii iv and vi section num in accordance with the following pay factor for mix num mix num mix num mix num air voids na na table ii table iii asphalt content table ii table ii table ii table iii mat density na na table iv table iv gradation na table vi na na the lowest numerical pay factor in a lot will be applied to the contract price for the total tonnage metric tonnage in the lot .
this will result in an adjustment to the compensation for the lot that will be shown in a separate line item on the payment estimates .
pay factors above num will not be applied to mixes that are tested on fewer than three characteristics or when there are less than four laboratory tests percent liquid asphalt binder and laboratory air voids or gradation per characteristic it is not necessary to obtain four roadway densities to obtain a pay factor above num .
when the pay factor is calculated to be greater than num a pay factor of num will be applied .
pay factors above num will not be applied to mixes where the roadway density requirement has been lowered below num. d adjustment period .
during startup operations an adjustment period test strip as described below shall be required when producing a new job mix formula .
the purpose of the adjustment period will be to permit the contractor to adjust his production process and for contractor qc personnel and aldot qa personnel to calibrate and coordinate their testing procedures .
the contractor has the option of running a test strip or waiving the test strip if the proposed job mix formula has been produced satisfactorily on previous projects .
the waiver of a test strip shall be in writing to the project manager and the area materials engineer prior to any production and placement of the previously produced job mix design .
the contractor assumes the risk of milling and relaying unacceptable mix with no additional compensation if the test strip is not utilized .
a test strip of not more than num tons num metric tons shall be constructed .
if the placement of a test strip is not completed the same day it is begun the contractor shall construct a new test strip .
production shall stop until the contractor has completed one liquid asphalt binder content one air void content and four mat density tests for mixes other than num and num .
for num and num mixes the contractor shall complete one liquid asphalt binder content and one gradation .
the pay factors for liquid asphalt binder content air void content and gradation will be calculated using the one test row of table ii and table iii and the one test column of table vi and the pay factor for mat density will be calculated using the four test column of table iv in section num .
the production point at which the mix shall be sampled shall be determined by the contractor .
this sample does not have to be randomly selected but should be representative of the mix produced .
contractor mat density tests shall be performed with nondestructive density testing devices meeting the requirements of section num which have been calibrated for the layer being placed according to aldotnum aldotnum or section num .
the contractor shall cut cores at these locations and immediately turn the cores over to the department for density measurements and determination of the pay factor .
the department will conduct the same tests for verification at the same time the contractor is conducting his tests .
if a pay factor of less than num is obtained using the one test row of table ii and table iii and the one test column of table section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num vi and using the four test column of table iv in section num a second test strip consisting of num tons num metric tons shall be constructed .
if a pay factor of less than num is obtained using the one test row of table ii and table iii and the one test column of table vi and using the four test column of table iv in section num in the second test strip additional num ton num metric ton test strips shall be constructed until pay factors are equal to num at which time production can begin .
a test strip is determined to be complete when the results of the tests are known .
the engineer may require any test strip to be removed and replaced at no cost to the department if the pay factor determined from the four test row for mat density or the one test row for other tests is num .
for actual payment purposes a pay factor of num will be used for all first and second test strips allowed to remain in place .
pay factors will be applied to the third and all subsequent num ton test strips at the average of the computed rate using the one test row and num .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num laws to be observed .
the contractor shall keep fully informed of all federal and state laws all local laws ordinances and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority which in any manner affect those engaged or employed on the work or which in any way affect the conduct of the work .
he shall at all times observe and comply with all such laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees and shall protect and indemnify the state and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree whether by himself or his employees .
the contractor shall provide for the safety of his employees and the public along with protection of property in the performance of the work .
particular reference is made to the federal occupation safety and health act title num cfr part num published december num num and all applicable amendments for construction work and part num published may num num and all applicable amendments for general industry standards for those materials not covered in part num which is a condition of the contract and shall be a condition of any subcontract entered into pursuant thereto .
all ocean shipping of materials and products used on federalaid highway projects shall comply with the requirements of part num title num cfr .
the prime contractor shall submit copies of all commercial ocean bills of lading to the maritime administration in washington at the following address chief division of national cargo mar num maritime administration num numth street s.w .
washington dc the contractors letter of transmittal shall show his address the project number project location and the type materials involved .
num permits licenses and taxes .
the contractor shall procure all permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
num patented devices materials and processes .
if the contractor employs any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright he shall provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the state any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device material or process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify the state for any costs .
expenses and damages which it may be obliged to pay by reason of an infringement at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the work .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit .
the right to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the highway or street or to grant permits for same at any time is hereby expressly reserved by the department for the proper authorities of the municipality in which the work is done .
when an individual firm or corporation is authorized through a duly executed permit from the department the contractor shall allow parties bearing such permits and only those parties to make openings in the highway .
when ordered by the engineer the contractor shall make in an acceptable manner all necessary repairs due to such openings and such necessary work will be paid for as extra work or as provided in these specifications and will be subject to the same conditions as original work performed .
num federal aid participation .
when the united states government participates in the cost of the work covered by the contract the work shall be under the supervision of the state but subject to the inspection and approval of the proper officials of the united states government and in accordance with the applicable federal statutes and rules and regulations made pursuant thereto reference title num u.s. code as amended .
such inspection shall in no sense make the federal government a party to this contract and will in no way interfere with the rights of either party hereunder .
the contractor and subcontractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this contract .
the contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of num cfr num in the award and administration of usdot assisted contracts .
failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the aldot deems appropriate .
num sanitary health and safety provisions .
the contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat sanitary condition such accommodations for the use of his employees as may be necessary to comply with the requirements of the state and local board of health or of other bodies or tribunals having jurisdiction .
attention is directed to federal state and local laws rules and regulations concerning construction safety and health standards .
the contractor shall not require any worker to work in surroundings or under conditions which are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to his health or safety .
num public convenience and safety .
a care of traffic .
the contractor shall at all times conduct his work so as to insure the least possible obstruction to traffic .
the safety and convenience of the general public and residents along the highway shall be provided for by the contractor as specified under article num .
the contractor shall have no greater length or amount of work under construction than he can prosecute properly with due regard to the rights of the public .
the contractor shall immediately clean up any spillage resulting from hauling operations along or across any public traveled way .
the contractor shall notify the engineer before starting any construction work that might inconvenience or endanger traffic and shall make such arrangements for the safety and convenience of traffic as may be required by the engineer .
b general public .
in general vehicles of the traveling public shall have preference over those of the contractor to the end that vehicles of the traveling public shall not be unduly delayed for the convenience of the contractor .
when so directed the contractor shall station flagmen whose sole duties shall consist of directing traffic safely and expeditiously through or around the work .
materials and equipment on the right of way shall be so placed as to insure minimum danger to the traveling public .
where traffic passes through construction a suitable width shall be maintained level and smooth to provide satisfactory passage .
this width shall be watered or treated with dust control agents as directed to prevent dust nuisance .
soil aggregate aggregate or other suitable material shall be spread where and as directed by the engineer to facilitate movement of traffic over soft portions of this width .
traffic shall be maintained over or around structures and culverts .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num c cooperation with fire department .
the contractor shall arrange his work so that there will be no undue or prolonged blocking of business establishments .
fire hydrants shall be kept accessible at all times .
in the absence of local ordinances no obstruction shall be placed within num feet num m of a fire hydrant .
the contractor shall notify the chief of the fire department in writing num hours before it becomes necessary to block a cross street .
d compensation .
the contractor shall comply with all the requirements for public safety and convenience listed in this article without extra compensation except for the items of temporary surface material section num which shall be paid for at the contract unit price or as extra work if the contract does not contain unit prices for these items .
num railwayhighway provisions .
a notification .
no work of any character shall be commenced on the railroad right of way until the railroad company has been duly notified by the contractor in writing with a copy forwarded to the engineer of the date he proposes to begin work and until an authorized representative of the railroad company is present unless the railroad company waives such requirement .
b inspection by railroad company .
all changes in approved plans and all work performed by the contractor involving railroad crossings shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the chief engineer of the railroad company or his authorized representative .
any precautions considered necessary by said chief engineer to safeguard the interests of the railroad company shall be taken by the contractor without extra compensation .
the state shall not be held responsible for delay to the contractors work due to any delay in securing such approval of construction features or changes therefrom and any additional cost incurred by the contractor due to such delay shall be considered as completely covered by the contract unit prices for the various items of work involved in the contract .
for such delays working days will not be charged on working day contracts and appropriate time extensions will be granted for contracts on a calendar day or date basis .
if work remains to be completed after the expiration of contract time the contractor shall reimburse the department for all of the costs charged by the railroad company for the inspection and monitoring of the remaining work .
c temporary grade crossing .
the contractor shall make all arrangements with railway companies for the establishment of any temporary crossing to be used by the contractor for transporting materials and equipment across their tracks .
permission for such a crossing must be obtained from the railway engineer prior to establishment of the crossing .
all costs for installation maintenance any necessary watching and flagging thereof and the removal shall be borne by the contractor .
the contractor shall so plan his work so as not to delay railroad company operations .
num construction over or adjacent to waters of the united states .
a general .
section num of the federal water pollution control act of num sets forth certain restrictions and requirements for materials placed in waters of the united states that are applicable to construction over or adjacent to waters of the united states .
the department will obtain any special permits necessary for the construction of the project within the scope of the design details of the contract plans and the specifications for the project .
generally compliance with the above law can be accomplished by following the plan details along with adhering to the specification requirements of articles num num num num num and section num utilizing the methods outlined in section num .
the contractor will be required to operate within the limits of any special permit issued for the construction work on a project .
attention is directed to the fact that construction methods or work in the flood plain area varying from plan details specifications and permit proposed strictly for the convenience of the contractor will require additional permit clearance .
any additional clearance permit etc .
necessary to comply with the above noted laws shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num and clearance for such work must be in the engineers hands before he will allow such work to proceed .
b work over navigable waters .
in addition to the provisions of subarticle a above all work over or on navigable waters shall be so conducted that free navigation of waterways will not be interfered with and that the existing navigable depths will not be impaired except as allowed by permit issued by the u.s. coast guard andor u.s. army corps of engineers as applicable .
the department will obtain the necessary permit for the construction of the project within the scope of the design details shown by the plans any special conditions will be noted on the plans or included in the contract documents .
should the contractor for his convenience wish to use construction methods or perform work outside of the scope of the permit obtained by the department he shall be solely responsible for obtaining any additional work permit from the appropriate authority .
c special conditions should the required work be permitted under a us army corps of engineers nationwide permit or individual permit the contractor shall abide by all the applicable requirements for each type of permit .
both types of permits are subject to the general requirements given in num cfr part num nationwide permit program .
a copy of the permit and its requirements will be included in the construction best management practices plan cbmpp and made available for review during the project advertising period .
a copy may be obtained from the aldot office engineer and the successful bidder will be given a copy .
num barricades and warning signs .
the contractor shall provide erect and maintain all necessary barricades suitable and sufficient lights danger signals signs and other traffic control devices shall provide qualified flagmen where necessary to direct traffic and shall take all necessary precautions for the protection of the work and safety of the public .
highways or parts of the work closed to traffic shall be protected by effective barricades obstructions shall be delineated suitable warning signs shall be provided to properly control and direct traffic .
all signs barricades etc .
shall be reflectorized in an approved manner and if directed by the engineer supplemented with warning lights or illumination to increase their effectiveness .
the contractor shall erect warning signs in advance of any place on the project where operations may interfere with the use of the road by traffic and at all intermediate points where the new work crosses or coincides with an existing road .
such warning signs shall be placed and maintained in accordance with the plans furnished .
no signs barricades lights or other protective devices shall be dismantled or removed without permission of the engineer .
all barricades warning signs lights temporary signs and other protective devices shall conform with the mutcd .
num use of explosives .
a general .
it is the intent of this article to provide general guides for the handling and use of explosives .
the contractor shall use all precaution control and safety features outlined by this article as well as any additional requirements felt necessary to insure the safety of life or property in the area of operations .
b control .
when the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work the contractor shall use the utmost care not to endanger life or property .
blasting operations shall be performed under the most skilled supervision .
where necessary and at any point of special danger the contractor shall use suitable mats or other approved methods to smother his blast .
no loaded hole shall be left unattended .
where blasting is to be done in streams the contractor shall notify the conservation department sufficiently in advance to permit onthesite observation by conservation department personnel at the time of the blast .
where blasting is performed in urban areas or areas that are heavily populated extreme care shall be taken to minimize the amount and degree of ground vibration noise overpressure and flying debris .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num c storage of explosives .
all explosives shall be stored in a safe manner in compliance with local state and federal laws and ordinances .
d warning of blasting .
the contractor shall warn each utility company having structures in proximity to the blasting area of his intentions to use explosives .
such warning shall be sufficiently far in advance of blasting to enable the company to protect its property .
such warning however shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for any damage resulting from blasting .
the contractor shall erect suitable signs on all roads in the immediate vicinity of blasting operations warning of blasting activity .
the signs shall also include warning that all portable radio transmitters should be turned off while in the vicinity .
if required the contractor shall control traffic by use of flagmen and guards in the danger zone of blasting .
in all urban areas and other heavily populated areas when designated by the plans or proposal the contractor or his insurer shall conduct a preblast survey of all structures to determine the existing or preblasting condition such survey being a written description with special emphasis on defects and documented with appropriate photographs .
this survey is intended to serve as a basis of comparison for any postblast claims that may arise .
the contractor or his insurer shall obtain the services of a competent vibration or seismologist consultant to conduct both blast noise vibration and overpressure surveys at periodic intervals during the progress of the blasting operations .
it is the intent of this section to serve as protection to the contractor to minimize the postblast claims and not to require unwarranted work .
the contractor shall use every precaution available and practical to minimize ground vibration noise and overpressure .
the contractor and his surety shall indemnify and save harmless the state the director and all its representatives from all claims for damages arising out of the use transportation or storage of explosives .
num protection and restoration of property landscape and utility facilities .
a property and landscape .
the contractor shall not enter upon private property for any purpose without permission first being obtained from the owners and lessees .
the contractor shall be responsible for preservation of all public and private property utilities monuments highway signs etc .
on or adjacent to the highway .
he shall not remove injure or destroy without proper authority trees or plants that are shown on the plans or ordered by the engineer to remain on or adjacent to the right of way .
the contractor shall protect from disturbance all land markers until an authorized agent has witnessed or referenced the locations and shall not move them until directed .
the contractor shall notify the engineer immediately upon discovery of artifacts or other articles of possible archeological value revealed by his operations and shall carefully preserve them and prevent disturbance of the site until the engineer has had opportunity to arrange appropriate disposal .
highway signs and markers shall be carefully removed as the grading operations progress and stored in a manner to keep them clean and dry .
when the work affects the foundation support of any building along the work the contractor shall give property owners and lessees direct and sufficient notice to support such buildings .
the contractor and his surety shall hold the state the county the municipality the director and the engineer harmless from any damage resulting from undercutting any such buildings .
the contractor shall be solely and exclusively responsible for any and all restoration repair or replacement of public and private property due to caused by or as a result of any act omission negligence or misconduct of the contractor .
the contractor shall provide an appropriate remedy as approved by the engineer .
failure on the part of the contractor to satisfy the requirements given in this subarticle shall result in the engineer affecting an appropriate remedy at the contractors expense .
b utilities .
num .
where the contractors operations are adjacent to utilities or other property damage to which might result in expense loss or inconvenience work shall not be begun until all arrangements necessary for property protection has been made .
the contractor shall be responsible to the owners and operators of such property for any damage loss or inconvenience .
he and his surety shall defend any suits actions or claims of any section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num character brought due to injuries or damages resulting from performance of the work under this contract .
if required by the director he shall furnish a certificate of his public liability and property damage insurance to each utility company or individual owning or operating any of the properties affected in the guarantee of this responsibility .
num .
the contractor shall cooperate with the owners of any utilities in their removal and rearrangement operations so that the utility companies may conduct their operations in a reasonable manner with a minimum of duplication of the work and interruption of services .
the contractor will be furnished by the department information that is reasonably available in regard to existing or proposed new utilities but the accuracy of such information is not guaranteed by the department .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to secure information necessary for proper handling and coordination of utility work .
he shall give at least num hours written notice to owners or operators of all properties that may be affected by his operations before beginning such operations .
he shall not hinder or interfere with utilities in protection or operations of the properties .
when such properties are endangered the contractor at his own expense shall maintain flagmen or watchmen and other necessary precautions to avoid interruption of service or danger to life or property .
he shall promptly replace restore or make good in an acceptable manner any injury or damage caused by his operations .
num .
in event of interruption to water or utility services as a result of the contractors operations he shall notify promptly the proper authority and cooperate with the said authority in restoration of service as promptly as possible .
num woodland protection conservation abatement of water pollution and quarantine regulations .
the contractor shall comply with all regulations of the state fire marshal conservation department forestry department or regulatory body governing the protection of forests and other conservation areas and the carrying out of work within such areas and shall observe all laws and regulations with respect to the performance of work in such areas .
he shall keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of all construction camps stores warehouses residences sanitary facilities and other structures in accordance with the requirements of the forest or conservation supervisor .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to contact the local representatives of the alabama department of agriculture and industries and the u.s. department of agriculture in order to advise himself his agents and his employees regarding quarantined areas and quarantine restrictions affecting his organization while operating within from or through such areas .
special attention is directed to soil andor machinery treatment which may be required when operating in from or through quarantined areas .
a list of agents of these two departments will be furnished the contractor upon request prior to beginning of his construction or maintenance operations .
the state will not be liable for any additional compensation for extra costs arising from quarantine restrictions or penalties .
the contractors attention is directed to the requirements for stormwater management as noted in article num along with the taking of all reasonable precautions to prevent and suppress fires and other detrimental items which may be caused by construction operations .
this includes protecting streams lakes and reservoirs from contamination by siltation or other harmful materials and the use of conservation practices of the conservation services by the contractor his employees and subcontractors during the work which will include but are not limited to the following a diligently undertake precautions for the prevention of and for suppressive action in the event of fire resulting from highway construction .
this will require the contractor to num .
comply with all state laws rules and regulations for prevention and suppressive action for forest fires .
num .
prepare and submit to the department a fire prevention and control plan .
the fire prevention and control plan must be on file and in effect before work on the item of clearing and grubbing will be permitted .
num .
comply with the fire plan noted in item num above .
when a burn permit is required the permit number shall be provided to the engineer prior to performing the burning operation .
b unmerchantable material including tops branches etc .
may be disposed of by piling and burning as directed .
alternate methods of disposal including any of the following methods or section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num combinations of methods lop and scatter chip broadcast burn remove pile only must be approved in advance by the engineer .
c protect and preserve the soil and vegetative cover and scenic and aesthetic values on the right of way and on adjacent lands so far as practical and consistent with the construction operation and maintenance of the highway .
an allowable disturbance of soil and vegetation cover outside the construction limits may be shown on the plans .
the contractors proposed disturbance of soil and vegetation cover outside of the construction limits will only be allowed upon written approval of the engineer .
d the contractor shall be responsible for the prevention and control of soil erosion and gullying within the right of way covered by the project and the lands immediately adjacent thereto as a result of the road construction and shall revegetate with grass or other herbaceous plants ground where the soil has been exposed .
slopes in channel changes on all branches and creeks shall be seeded and fertilized above the water line and in no case will the toe of fill slopes be allowed to fall within stream or creek channels unless adequate slope protection is placed in accordance with plan details or as directed by the engineer .
all soil left within the right of way shall be leveled off andor dressed out and seeded or sprigged in a manner that will permit healing of ground surface and present a pleasant appearance .
e construction operations shall be planned and conducted in such a manner so as to prevent when necessary and otherwise minimize pollution of streams lakes and reservoirs with sediment or other harmful material used in the construction of the project .
f waste loose soil or other materials removed from the roadway or channel changes shall not be deposited in live streams .
depositing material into the streams or stream channel where it would be washed away by high stream flows will not be permitted .
surplus material may be deposited only in disposal areas approved by the engineer .
disposal areas outside of the project right of way must be operated so as to blend into the surrounding area utilizing an erosion control plan etc .
as prescribed for the use of offsite areas in article num with any cost thereof considered incidental to the use of the disposal area .
disposal areas within the project right of way shall be dressed and treated as directed using erosion control items provided in the contract for payment of directed work .
g the hauling of materials including logs brush and debris by fording live streams will not be permitted .
temporary bridges or other structures must be provided for this purpose .
h operations of mechanized equipment in live streams or stream channels will not be permitted except in areas where channel changes retaining walls temporary or permanent bridges or other such work is required by the plans or directed .
i fuels oils bitumen or other greasy or chemical substances originating from construction operations shall not be allowed to enter or be placed where they may enter a live steam .
j the outlet ends of all channel changes shall be so laid out and aligned as to provide direct flow into old stream beds without an abrupt direction change .
k the operations for any material pit located within sight of the project right of way or any other state or federal highway shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements given in article num allowing adequate space for conservation of existing natural screenings or permit the installation of screen planting between the road surface and the disturbed area .
pit sites shall be dressed to obliterate any unsightly appearance and treated in such a manner that erosion of the pit will not occur and result in the pollution of the water shed area .
num responsibility for damage claims .
a general .
the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the state the department the county the municipality the officers and employees from all suits actions or claims of any character brought because of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property due to the operations of the contractor or because of or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the work or through use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work or because of any act or omission neglect or misconduct of the contractor or because of any claims or amounts arising or recovered under the workmens compensation act or any other law ordinance order or decree and so much of the money due the contractor under and by virtue of his contract as may be considered necessary by the department for such purpose may be retained for the use of the state or in case no money is due his surety will be held liable until such suit or suits action or actions claim or claims for injuries or damages as aforesaid shall have been section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num settled and suitable evidence to that effect furnished to the department except that money due the contractor will not be withheld when the contractor produces satisfactory evidence that he is adequately protected by public liability and property damage insurance .
the state will not be liable to the contractor for damage or delays resulting from work by third parties or by injunctions or other restraining orders obtained by third parties except as noted in subarticle numb .
b temporary stream crossings .
when the contractor is required to construct temporary stream crossings the responsibility of the contractor as above set forth shall extend to and include such structures together with their approaches .
c reporting accidents .
the contractor shall submit a verbal report to the engineer no later than the next working day after their occurrence all accidents occurring on the work which involve the public or the contractors forces .
accidents involving fatalities shall be verbally reported within eight hours .
the contractor shall follow this verbal report with a written report within ten calendar days after the accident .
the report shall contain complete information on the accident including names addresses of persons involved and names and addresses of witnesses .
num liability insurance .
the contractor without extra compensation shall carry insurance of the following kinds and amounts in addition to any other forms of insurance or bonds required under the terms of the contract specifications .
all insurance shall be by companies authorized to do business in alabama involving these types of insurance .
before beginning work the contractor shall have on file with the departments bureau of office engineer a valid insurance certificate showing the amounts of insurance carried and the risks covered thereby or a copy of the policies covering the requirements outlined herein in this article along with workmen compensation coverage before he will be allowed to perform any work on a contract .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to provide the information on his coverage in a timely and acceptable manner .
the department will not be responsible for delays or damages caused by failure on his part to provide this information in a timely acceptable manner .
certificates of coverage shall be on the departments form oenum or a form acceptable to the department that provides all of the information required by form oenum .
certificates shall have an original signature of the local within the state of alabama representative of the insurance company providing coverage .
the insurance coverage shall be provided on a continuous basis from the date work begins until the contract has been completed .
certificates of insurance shall indicate the policy period of the coverage .
should insurance coverage expire before the work is complete or the insurance company cancels the policy num day notice required work on the project for the construction firm involved will be halted until a notice of renewal of the coverage is received by the bureau of office engineer .
the department will not be responsible for any delays damages or claims on the part of the contracting firm not providing renewal certificates in a timely and acceptable manner .
if work is halted as outlined above working time will be charged as outlined in subarticle numa .
a contractors bodily injury liability and property damage liability insurance .
the contractor without extra compensation shall carry for himself and shall require from all subcontractors on the contract until the contract is completed with respect to the operations he or the subcontractors perform both premises operations and independent contractors coverages contractors bodily injury liability insurance providing for a limit of not less than num for all damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person and subject to that limit for each person a total limit of num for all damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence .
the contractor without extra compensation shall carry for himself and shall require from all subcontractors on the contract until the contract is completed with respect to the operations he or the subcontractors perform both premises operations and independent contractors coverages contractors property damage liability insurance providing for a limit of not less than num for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any one occurrence and a total of num for all occurrences during the policy period .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num b railroads protective bodily injury liability and property damage liability insurance .
when the contract specifies such the contractor shall carry insurance for himself and insurance in the name of the railroad company in the amounts and under the terms specified in special provisions provided in each contract otherwise the provisions of subarticle numa shall apply .
c automobile and truck bodily injury liability and property damage liability insurance .
the contractor without extra compensation shall carry for himself and shall require from all subcontractors and all owners of automobiles or trucks rented or hired on the contract until the contract is completed automobile and truck bodily injury liability and property damage liability insurance for not less than the limits prescribed by the alabama financial responsibility law .
the contractor also shall carry for himself insurance for nonowned and hired automobiles and truck coverage to at least the limits prescribed by the alabama financial responsibility law .
num opening sections of project to traffic .
opening of sections of the work to traffic prior to completion of the entire contract may be desirable from a traffic service standpoint or may be necessary due to conditions inherent in the work or by changes in the contractors work schedule and may be necessary due to conditions or events unforeseen at the time of the contract .
such openings as may be necessary due to any of the foregoing conditions shall be made when so ordered by the engineer .
under no condition shall such openings constitute acceptance of the work or a part thereof or a waiver of any provisions of the contract .
the plans andor special provisions shall state insofar as possible which sections shall be opened prior to completion of the contract .
on any section opened by order of the engineer whether covered on the plans or in the special provision or not the contractor shall not be required to assume any expense entailed in maintaining the road for traffic .
such expense shall be borne by the department or compensated for in a manner provided in article num .
on such portions of the project which are ordered by the engineer to be opened for traffic in the case of unforeseen necessity which is not the fault of the contractor compensation for additional expense if any to the contractor and allowance of additional time if any for completion of any other items of work on the portions of the project ordered by the engineer to be opened in the event of such unforeseen necessity shall be as set forth in a change order mutually agreed on by the engineer and the contractor as set forth herein .
if the contractor is dilatory in completing shoulders drainage structures or other features of the work the engineer may so notify him in writing and establish therein a reasonable period of time in which the work should be completed .
if the contractor is dilatory or fails to make a reasonable effort toward completion in this period of time the engineer may then order all or a portion of the project opened to traffic .
on such sections which are so ordered to be opened the contractor shall conduct the remainder of his construction operations so as to cause the least obstruction to traffic and shall not receive any added compensation due to the added cost of the work by reason of opening such section to traffic .
on any section opened to traffic under any of the above conditions whether stated on the plans or in the special provisions or opened by necessity of contractors operations or unforeseen necessity any damage to the highway not attributable to traffic which might occur on such section except slides shall be repaired by the contractor at his expense .
slide corrections performed by the contractor shall be compensated for in accordance with the provisions of article num .
num contractors responsibility for work .
until final written acceptance of the project by the engineer the contractor shall have the charge and care thereof and shall take every precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from any other cause whether arising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work occasioned by any of the above causes before final acceptance and shall bear the expense thereof except damage to the work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god such as earthquake tidal wave tornado hurricane or other cataclysmic phenomenon of nature or acts of the public enemy or of governmental authorities .
where a roadway is open to traffic damage caused by public traffic to any acceptably installed permanent items of work shall be repaired by the contractor before final acceptance .
damage to section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num portable impact attenuators shall be repaired by the contractor as necessary .
if the damage to these items was not caused by the fault or negligence of the contractor then the contractor will be compensated for the repair work either at the contract unit bid prices of the original items of work or as extra work as determined by the engineer .
in case of suspension of work the contractor shall be responsible for the project provide for normal drainage and shall erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at his expense .
during such period of suspension of work the contractor shall properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under his contract and shall take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
num furnishing rightofway .
the department will be responsible for the securing of all necessary rightsofway in advance of construction .
any exceptions will be indicated in the contract .
num personal liability of public officials .
in carrying out any of the provisions of these specifications or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by or within the scope of the contract there shall be no liability upon the director engineer or their authorized representatives either personally or as officials of the state it being understood that in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the state .
num no waiver of legal rights .
upon completion of the work the department will expeditiously make final inspection and notify the contractor of acceptance .
such final acceptance and processing of the final estimate however shall not preclude or estop the department from correcting any measurement estimate or certificate made before or after completion of the work nor shall the department be precluded or estopped from recovering from the contractor or his surety or both such overpayments as it may sustain or by failure on the part of the contractor to fulfill his obligations under the contract .
a waiver on the part of the department of any breach of any part of the contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract shall be liable to the department for latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
num stormwater management .
a protection of project site and adjacent property .
the contractor shall perform the work while protecting the project site and adjacent property from contaminated and turbid stormwater runoff .
the requirements in section num shall apply to all work regardless of whether or not any of the pay items of section num are included in the contract .
when a pay item is not in the contract for an item of temporary erosion control and the work is deemed necessary by the engineer to restore or maintain compliance with the adem npdes general permit or the contract the work will be paid for as extra work .
the contractor shall minimize the introduction of and remove sediment nutrients and other pollutants in stormwater runoff originating within the aldot right of way .
the quality of water originating off of the right of way and entering the project site shall not be diminished as it flows through the site .
b best management practices .
the contractor shall implement and maintain appropriate structural and nonstructural best management practices bmps for the prevention and control of nonpoint sources of pollutants e.g .
sediment oil and grease chemicals etc .
during project construction .
the contractor shall abide by the regulations of the alabama department of environmental management adem applicable to construction stormwater and the national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes general permit .
c npdes permit coverage for construction stormwater discharge .
a project note will be shown on the plans indicating the status of npdes permit coverage for construction stormwater discharge and the availability of a preliminary aldot construction best management practices plan cbmpp for the project .
when npdes permit coverage is required and retained by aldot the alabama department of transportation is considered to be the permittee section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num and the engineer is considered to be the responsible official .
when npdes permit coverage is required and retained by the local public agency lpa the lpa is considered to be the permittee and the lpa will designate their responsible official .
the permittee is responsible for all required npdes permit maintenance renewal modification and termination .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining applicable npdes permit coverage through adem for all material pits waste areas plant sites haul roads and other offsite areas selected by the contractor to construct the project .
copies of the written acknowledgement from adem verifying that permit coverage has been obtained shall be forwarded to the engineer with or as part of the contractors stormwater management plan swmp before ground is disturbed in these areas .
d weather preparedness and recovery .
the contractor shall prepare a project specific weather preparedness and recovery plan as part of the contractors swmp .
at a minimum the plan shall include details to implement the following four components to the maximum extent practicable num .
unexpected weather preparations .
cover unstabilized ditches with polyethylene or other material securely anchored to prevent erosion of the channel .
where feasible the required permanent stabilization should be installed instead of temporary measures .
cover unstabilized slopes with temporary mulching polyethylene or other material securely anchored to prevent erosion of the slope .
where feasible the required permanent stabilization should be installed instead of temporary measures .
num .
forecasted weather preparations .
plan work to minimize additional soil disturbance in the days preceding an event .
ensure all bmps are properly installed and maintained to prevent erosion capture sediment and reduce turbidity .
cover unstabilized ditches with polyethylene or other material securely anchored to prevent erosion of the channel .
where feasible the required permanent stabilization should be installed instead of temporary measures .
cover unstabilized slopes with temporary mulching polyethylene or other material securely anchored to prevent erosion of the slope .
where feasible the required permanent stabilization should be installed instead of temporary measures .
num .
severe weather preparations .
dewater basins and close basin outlet pipe valves to maximize the capture and treatment of turbid stormwater .
install temporary diversions to route stormwater away from critical areas .
remove sediment from existing bmps to maximize the capture of new sediment .
review and improve or upgrade bmps which have performed poorly during previous precipitation events .
plan work to minimize additional soil disturbance in the days preceding an event .
ensure all bmps are properly installed and maintained to prevent erosion capture sediment and reduce turbidity .
cover unstabilized ditches with polyethylene or other material securely anchored to prevent erosion of the channel .
where feasible the required permanent stabilization should be installed instead of temporary measures .
cover unstabilized slopes with temporary mulching polyethylene or other material securely anchored to prevent erosion of the slope .
where feasible the required permanent stabilization should be installed instead of temporary measures .
num .
weather recovery .
immediately repair any breach in basin dams .
remedy hazardous conditions .
conduct a site inspection of the entire project site in accordance with item numenum .
create a schedule of needed corrective actions in accordance with item numenum .
which will be included in the noncompliance notification report submitted to adem set repair priorities starting at the discharge point in each drainage area when possible and evaluate environmental impacts offsite impacts timeliness of accessibility for repairs and public perception .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num e inspections and corrective actions num .
daily observations .
the contractors qualified credentialed inspector qci and the departments project qci shall perform daily observations of discharge points and areas of the project where the ground is disturbed and record rainfall measurements and weather information .
if any previously undocumented bmp deficiencies or other regulatory violations are observed the project qci will notify the departments project qualified credentialed professional qcp the contractor qci shall notify the contractor qcp andor superintendent and a formal site inspection will be performed .
num .
site inspections .
when the project is covered by the npdes general permit formal inspections shall be made by the contractor qci and the project qci together under the supervision of the contractor qcp andor superintendent and the project qcp respectively .
project site inspections of the construction best management practices shall be made by the qcis per the requirements of the npdes permit and no less frequently than once per week and after the accumulation of num inch num mm of rainfall within num hours .
the project site inspections shall be initiated as soon as possible and within num hours of resuming work on the project and shall be completed no later than num days after a qualifying rain event .
inspection certification reports and noncompliance notification reports if warranted will be entered into the departments stormwater tracking system swts by the project qci .
required verbal notifications of noncompliance to adem are the responsibility of the permittee .
construction stormwater sampling and turbidity monitoring shall be performed by the permittee when directed by the project qcp or as required by the npdes general permit .
the contractor qci and the project qci shall both be present during stormwater sampling .
stormwater turbidity sampling reports if required will be entered into the departments swts by the project qci .
if the npdes permit is held by the lpa the reports shall be written using adems form num num or form num num if applicable by the lpa qci .
formal inspections shall be reported to adem by the permittee in accordance with npdes permit requirements .
copies of all draft reports shall be provided to the engineer no later than num hours after the inspection .
copies of signed reports shall be submitted to the engineer no later than num days after the inspection .
num .
qcp site evaluations .
the permittees qualified credential professional qcp shall personally perform site evaluations in accordance with the npdes general permit at least once per every six months .
these evaluations shall consist of an onsite inspection of all erosion sediment and turbidity control best management practices being implemented to determine adequacy and consistency with site conditions and shall include a review of the cbmpp to ensure proper maintenance .
the resulting inspection reports shall be submitted to adem by the permittees qcp .
for aldot held npdes permits the resulting inspection reports will be entered into the departments swts by the project qcp .
num .
corrective actions .
if an inspection report reveals anything outside of regulatory compliance the npdes general permit requires immediate corrective action shall be taken by the contractor and completed prior to the next storm event but no later than num days after the inspection unless prevented by unsafe weather conditions .
additional inspections shall be performed until the observed deficiency is corrected and in compliance with the npdes general permit .
should discharges from construction activity cause or contribute to instream turbidity exceeding background turbidity by more than num nephelometric turbidity units ntus or cause substantial visible contrast with background turbidity the contractor shall suspend construction activity in the drainage area discharging to the affected stormwater discharge point until effective corrective actions are implemented and instream turbidity decreased to acceptable levels .
the suspension of construction activities includes all operations that are not directed toward correction of erosion sediment and turbidity control best management practices permanent stabilization or returning the project to regulatory compliance .
aldot has the right to require the suspension of similar construction activities throughout the project should conditions and actions by the contractor be deemed unacceptable by the engineer .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num any damage to properties adjacent to the project site due to the contractors acts omissions misconduct intentional or negligent conduct regarding stormwater management shall be restored in accordance with the requirements of article num .
any regulatory fines costs damages or expenses incurred by aldot due to the contractors acts omissions misconduct intentional or negligent conduct shall be reimbursed to aldot or otherwise compensated by the contractor .
any regulatory fines costs damages or expenses incurred by the contractor for offsite areas are and shall be the sole and exclusive responsibility of the contractor .
f npdes permit termination .
the contractor shall be responsible for stormwater runoff control on the project until the npdes general permit for coverage of construction stormwater is terminated .
termination of npdes permit coverage can only be requested after acceptance for maintenance and approval by the engineer .
termination shall be requested no later than num days after acceptance for maintenance .
num environmental protection and spill prevention .
the contractor shall comply with all federal state and local laws and regulations controlling pollution of the environment .
the contractor shall also take all reasonable precautions to prevent pollution of streams lakes ponds reservoirs and other waters of the state with fuels oils bitumens chemicals or other harmful materials and to prevent pollution of the atmosphere from particulate and gaseous matter .
the contractor shall comply with all adem and local air pollution control programs within the state and their rules and regulations regarding air pollution matters especially open burning fugitive dust and asphalt batching plant restrictions .
a valid permit for open burning or operation of an asphalt batching plant will be required from the air pollution control agency within whose jurisdiction the work is to be performed before such operations will be allowed .
construction and worker debris shall not be exposed to precipitation or stormwater .
all construction and worker debris trash garbage discarded construction materials etc .
shall be immediately removed and disposed of in an approved manner .
the contractor shall minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing wheel wash water concrete washout and other wash waters .
prior to discharge all wash waters and dewatering discharges shall be captured and treated .
concrete and other material washout pits shall be lined with geotextile filter fabric and have a perimeter barrier to prevent material transport by stormwater .
when the contractors operations encounter or expose any abnormal or potentially abnormal condition which may indicate the presence of a hazardous andor toxic waste such operations shall be discontinued in the vicinity of the abnormal condition and the engineer shall be notified immediately .
the presence of barrels discolored earth metal wood visible fumes abnormal odors excessively hot earth smoke or anything else which appears abnormal may be indicators of hazardous andor toxic wastes and shall be treated with extraordinary caution .
the contractor shall not resume operations in the vicinity of the abnormal condition until so directed by the engineer .
disposition of the hazardous andor toxic waste shall be made in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the alabama department of environmental management these specifications and as directed by the engineer .
where the contractor performs work necessary to dispose of hazardous andor toxic waste payment will be made at the unit prices for pay items included in the contract which are applicable to such work .
when the contract does not include such pay items payment will be made as provided in article num for extra work .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer and implement a spill prevention control and counter measures spcc plan for all fuel or chemical storage tanks or facilities located on aldot right of way .
the spcc shall be submitted in accordance with the regulations given in the adem administrative code and the npdes general permit .
the contractor shall maintain onsite or have readily available sufficient oil and grease absorbing material and flotation booms to contain and clean up fuel or chemical spills and leaks .
soil contaminated by paint or chemical spills oil spills etc .
shall be immediately cleaned up or be removed and disposed of in an approved manner .
section num prosecution and progress num num temporary construction encroachment into streams water bodies and wetlands .
temporary encroachment into streams water bodies and wetlands may be shown as a part of the contract requirements if the encroachment is necessary for the completion of the work .
a contractor shall submit a request for all other temporary encroachments into streams water bodies and wetlands if the encroachment is not prohibited by requirements given in the contract .
requests shall be submitted for proposed temporary stream crossings temporary water diversions and temporary work bridges and platforms .
a request for a temporary encroachment shall be submitted as an attachment to the contractors stormwater management plan and forwarded to the state construction engineer for review and acceptance .
the submittal of the request shall contain the following num .
a description of how water quality will be protected during the encroachment .
num .
a drawing of the proposed encroachment including a dimensioned plan view and elevation view depicting the location and distances from the water body existing ground elevation and proposed and existing structures .
num .
the drawing shall also include details and dimensions of the pipes bridges or other facilities allowing the passage of water .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to ensure the opening under or through the drainage facilities is adequately sized to allow for normal seasonal flows .
num .
a description of the sequence of placement and eventual removal of any temporary fill .
num .
the type and estimated volume in cubic yards cubic meters and tons metric tons of any fill material proposed to be placed .
num .
provisions required to prevent fill from being eroded and measures for recovering and removing any fill material that is eroded .
us army corps of engineers or other regulatory approval and notice may be required for the encroachment into streams water bodies and wetlands .
corps of engineers approval that is not given to the aldot or to the county holding the nationwide permit for the project will not be accepted as being adequate regulatory authorization for the encroachment .
all encroachments into streams water bodies and wetlands shall be done in accordance with the requirements of regulatory permitting approvals and conditions .
encroachments shall be done in a manner that will minimize the adverse affect on the quality of the water .
maintenance shall be performed as necessary to ensure water passage and to ensure that neither fill nor water is contaminated by equipment fluids or by loose materials falling from equipment .
the methods and materials proposed for temporary encroachments into streams water bodies and wetlands and the protection of water quality during an encroachment shall be done by the contractor with no direct payment unless shown otherwise on the plans .
num permits for pesticide application .
all pesticide including herbicide applications shall be done under the onsite direct supervision of a person possessing a commercial pesticide application permit and a professional services permit turf and ornamentals category or a commercial applicator permit and a custom applicator permit rightofway pest control category issued through the alabama department of agriculture and industries .
proof of the possession of these permits shall be furnished to the engineer prior to the commencement of work .
any work performed without the onsite direct supervision of these permitted individuals will be subject to rejection by the engineer .
section num prosecution and progress num subletting and assignment .
a subletting .
num .
limitations of the extent of subletting .
section num prosecution and progress num the contractor shall not sublet the contract or any portion thereof or of his right title or interest therein without written consent of the engineer .
if such consent is given the contractor will be permitted to sublet a portion of the work but shall perform with his own organization work amounting to not less than num percent of the total contract cost .
a contractor that does not perform at least num percent of the work with his own organization may be disqualified from further bidding and may not be approved for work in any role or capacity on an aldot project .
upon default of the contractor the surety will be permitted to have all of the work performed under sublet approval .
work performed without sublet approval will be designated as unauthorized work as noted in article num .
any items designated in the contract as specialty items may be performed by subcontract and the cost of such specialty items performed by subcontract may be deducted from the total cost before computing the amount of work required to be performed by the contractor with his own organization .
no subcontracts or transfer of contract shall relieve the contractor of his liability under the contract and bonds .
the department reserves the right to disapprove a request for permission to sublet when the proposed subcontractor has been disqualified from bidding for those reasons listed in subarticle numb .
num .
subcontractors status .
a subcontractor shall be recognized only in the capacity of an employee or agent of the contractor and his removal may be required by the engineer as in the case of an employee .
b assignment .
the performance of the contract may not be assigned except upon the written consent of the director .
consent will not be given to any proposed assignment which would relieve the original contractor or his surety of their responsibilities under the contract nor will the director consent to any assignment of a part of the work under the contract .
the contractor may assign moneys due or to become due him under the contract if such assignment is approved by the director to the extent permitted by law but any assignment of moneys shall be subject to all proper setoffs in favor of the department and to allow deductions provided for in the contract and particularly all money withheld whether assigned or not shall be subject to being used by the department for the completion of the work in the event that the contractor should be in default therein .
an assignment by operations of law or assignment for the benefit of creditors or the bankruptcy of the contractor shall not vest any right in this contract in the trustee in bankruptcy the contractors creditors or the agent of the creditors .
in no case will the department make the warrant payable to anyone other than a party to the contract and therefore if the contractor assigns the proceeds of his contract to a bank or other individual or company approval of the assignment by the director only constitutes an agreement to make the warrants payable to the contractor and for it to be mailed to the address of the party to which the contract is assigned .
num notice to proceed .
a general .
a notice to proceed shall be issued by the engineer within num calendar days after final execution of the contract by the director and approval by the governor unless both parties agree in writing to a stipulated extension in time for the issuance of a notice to proceed .
unless the contractor is otherwise notified in writing it shall be understood that the mailing or the delivery to the contractor or his authorized agent of a copy of the executed and approved contract and bonds or the mailing of written notice by the engineer or receipt of telegraphic notice from the engineer that the contract has been approved by the governor shall constitute the notice to proceed .
if the contractor is notified in writing that none of the above shall constitute notice to proceed he shall not commence work until receipt of a written notice to proceed signed by the engineer .
b time of beginning work .
unless otherwise directed in writing by the engineer the contractor will be expected to begin work within num calendar days after issuance of notice to proceed .
section num prosecution and progress num num progress schedule of operations .
prior to the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit a satisfactory comprehensive bar graph schedule of operations to the area construction engineer on all projects which have a contract time in excess of num working days or num calendar days .
this schedule shall be on form cnum furnished by the department at the time of contract award .
said schedule of operation shall provide a bar for each major phase of construction such as but not limited to clearing and grubbing grading drainage structures bridges base shoulders paving etc .
with an estimated start and completion date for each bar and an overall project completion date all within the specified contract time .
in lieu of the form cnum the contractor will be allowed to submit their critical path method schedule of operations as a pdf file if the above information is included .
the engineer may order the submittal of a bar graph schedule of operation on any project which has a contract time less than that specified above should he deem such necessary for project control .
a revised bar graph schedule and completion update may be required within ten days of the occurrence of any one of the following conditions num at each major change from the original submitted num when a time extension is granted and num when a revised bar graph schedule is requested by the engineer .
when an electronic critical path schedule is required in the proposal this schedule will be used in lieu of the bar graph schedule of operation in evaluating work progress .
in such case the same time frame noted in this article for the original submittal along with the update requirements will apply .
the engineers approval of the aforementioned schedule of operations does not waive any contract requirements .
num prosecution of work .
a preconstruction conference .
the contractor and subcontractors shall attend a preconstruction conference scheduled by the engineer and shall describe how the work will be prosecuted .
the preconstruction conference will be held after the award of the contract and prior to the commencement of any work .
b soil erosion and stormwater management .
num .
compliance and progress .
if the contractor fails to comply with the requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes general permit the erosion and sediment control plan escp the construction best management practices plan cbmpp the accepted stormwater management plan swmp other contract documents or the directions of the engineer the engineer may order the contractor to discontinue all operations except work in managing erosion sediment transport turbidity and construction stormwater discharge until the requirements are met .
temporary cessation of operations for environmental compliance does not and shall not constitute a delay or qualify for consideration of an extension of contract time .
failure of aldot to observe the work of the contractor does not relieve the contractor of its contractual responsibility for the prevention of soil erosion and the control of sediment .
the permittees qcp is responsible for mitigation of damage to public or private property .
the contractor shall not commence any activities within a drainage area that disturb the soil or expose it to erosive forces until fully prepared to continuously pursue work until permanent soil stabilization is achieved .
the installation of temporary soil erosion and sediment control best management practices bmps shall be performed in coordination with the installation of the permanent erosion control features to assure effective continuous erosion control throughout the life of the project .
the contractor will be required to construct install and maintain all permanent erosion control features as grading advances .
num .
manufacturer recommendations for manufactured products and devices .
the contractor shall furnish the manufacturers recommendations for material selection installation and maintenance of any manufactured bmp or manufactured component of a bmp to the engineer prior to installation .
num .
contractors stormwater management plan .
the contractor shall prepare a stormwater management plan swmp for all projects .
the swmp is required regardless of the type of work funding or regulatory permitting .
the swmp is required regardless of whether or not an erosion and sediment control plan is shown in the plans .
the most recent version of aldots electronic swmp template shall be section num prosecution and progress num used to create the contractors swmp .
the contractor and the erosion and sediment control subcontractor if applicable shall sign and certify the swmp .
submitted swmps will not be considered complete if the provided template has been modified .
three copies of the swmp shall be submitted to the area construction engineer at least num days prior to the preconstruction conference .
the swmp shall provide sequences and details of all erosion and sediment control work clearing and grubbing operations grading operations and operations establishing permanent erosion control features .
the swmp shall include operational details and identification of personnel and equipment that will be dedicated to implementing the plan at all phases of the work .
the swmp shall include a project specific weather preparedness and recovery plan based on the requirements of subarticle numd .
work shall not begin until the swmp has been accepted as complete by the engineer .
written acknowledgement of npdes permit coverage from adem and other required clearances and acknowledgements required by subarticle numb for any offsite waste areas or pits shall be submitted with or included in the swmp .
the details for proposed temporary encroachments into streams water bodies and wetlands required by article num shall be submitted with or included in the swmp .
requests to store fuel tanks or other chemicals on aldot right of way and applicable spill prevention plans required by article num shall also be submitted with or included in the swmp .
num .
fuel tanks .
any requests to store a fuel tank on the project right of way shall be accompanied by a spill prevention control and countermeasures spcc plan and both shall be submitted with or included in the swmp as required in article num .
the use of onsite fuel storage tanks will not be allowed if this is shown to be prohibited on the plans .
num .
erosion and sediment control plan .
when an erosion and sediment control plan escp is included in the plans it is considered to be a part of the aldot cbmpp .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements of the design details as shown therein .
the contractor may submit requested modifications to the escp as part of the swmp for acceptance or rejection by the engineer .
the escp may also be modified by the engineer as field conditions warrant .
the contractor shall install bmps in an effective manner and at all locations directed or permitted by the engineer regardless of the bmp quantities and locations depicted on the escp .
all modifications made to the escp will be documented in the cbmpp by the permittees qci and certified by the permittees qcp .
num .
qualified credentialed professionals .
the department may assign a fulltime qualified credentialed professional project qcp to the project .
otherwise another aldot qcp typically the area stormwater coordinator will perform most of the project qcp duties .
the project qcp will report to the project manager and will be guided by the area stormwater coordinator .
the project qcp will oversee contractor compliance with the npdes general permit the cbmpp the erosion and sediment control plan and the contractors swmp .
to accomplish this the project qcp duties include reviewing and approving the contractors swmp signing as the operational qcp of the aldot cbmpp and maintaining and updating the aldot cbmpp operational component possessing knowledge of the location and condition of all discharge points within the project limits communicating to the project manager and the area stormwater coordinator any issues of regulatory noncompliance or any potential violations in the area of environmental protection and construction stormwater supervising and directing the project qcis providing oversight of the erosion and sediment control crew if applicable and the installation maintenance repair correction and removal of bmps providing oversight of the contractors forces during clearing grading and construction of stormwater conveyances in order to minimize the potential for negative environmental impact section num prosecution and progress num communicating with the project manager and contractor qcp or superintendent a minimum of once per month and attending project meetings reviewing and approving inspection certification reports and coordinating with aldot and contractor personnel to ensure that any stormwater related issues are addressed in a timely manner conducting semiannual formal stormwater site evaluations described in item numenum .
and entering the corresponding inspection certification reports into the stormwater tracking system accompanying adem personnel on all regulatory inspections of the project and communicating the proceedings and outcomes to the project manager and the area stormwater coordinator representing the department before regulatory agencies as its qualified credentialed professional and directing any mitigation efforts on behalf of the department .
num .
qualified credentialed inspectors .
a .
contractors qualified credentialed inspectors the contractor shall assign to each project a fulltime primary and a backup qualified credentialed inspector contractor qci certified by adem and verified by aldot .
the contractor qci shall be an employee of the contractor .
the name contact information and credentials of the contractor qcis shall be included in the swmp and the engineer shall be notified whenever a substitute contractor qci is assigned by the contractor .
there will be no direct compensation for the contractor qcis .
the contractor qci shall work under the direct supervision of the contractor qcp andor superintendent .
the contractor qci shall be in charge and direction of the contractors work regarding the implementation of the cbmpp the escp and the swmp and shall have the authority from the contractor to mobilize crews to make immediate repairs to bmps during working and nonworking hours .
to accomplish this the contractor qci duties include possessing knowledge of the contractors swmp the escp the cbmpp and the npdes general permit requirements maintaining qci certification by attending required refresher training possessing knowledge of the location and condition of all discharge points within the project limits communicating to the contractor qcp andor superintendent any issues of regulatory noncompliance or any potential violations in the area of environmental protection and construction stormwater guiding the erosion and sediment control crew if applicable and the contractors forces as directed by or in the absence of the contractor qcp andor superintendent during the installation maintenance repair correction and removal of all bmps in order to minimize the potential for negative environmental impact reporting to the contractor qcp andor superintendent a minimum of once per week and attending project meetings in the absence of the contractor qcp andor superintendent inspecting bmps on a daily basis to ensure that all controls are in place at all times and ensuring conformance with the contract documents conducting all required formal stormwater inspections turbidity monitoring and construction stormwater sampling described in item numenum .
with aldot personnel coordinating with contractor and aldot personnel to ensure that any stormwater related issues are addressed in a timely manner .
b .
departments qualified credentialed inspectors the department will assign to each project at least one fulltime qualified credentialed inspector project qci certified by adem .
the project qci will work under the direct supervision of the project qcp andor project manager .
the project qci will assist the project qcp andor project manager with overseeing contractor adherence to the requirements of the npdes general permit the cbmpp the erosion and sediment section num prosecution and progress num control plan and the contractors swmp .
to accomplish this the project qci duties include possessing knowledge of the contractors swmp the escp the cbmpp and the npdes general permit requirements maintaining qci certification by attending required refresher training possessing knowledge of the location and condition of all discharge points within the project limits communicating to the project qcp andor project manager any issues of regulatory noncompliance or any potential violations in the area of environmental protection and construction stormwater assisting the project qcp andor project manager with oversight of the contractors forces during clearing grading and construction of stormwater conveyances in order to minimize the potential for negative environmental impact reporting to the project qcp andor project manager a minimum of once per week and attending project meetings in the absence of the project qcp andor project manager inspecting bmps on a daily basis to ensure that all controls are in place at all times and ensuring conformance with the contract documents conducting all required formal stormwater inspections turbidity monitoring and construction stormwater sampling described in item numenum .
with the contractor qci and entering the corresponding inspection certification reports into the stormwater tracking system coordinating with the project qcp andor the project manager and contractor personnel to ensure that any stormwater related issues are addressed in a timely manner .
num .
erosion and sediment control crew .
when required by the plans the contractor shall provide a fulltime dedicated erosion and sediment control crew .
the crew shall be under the supervision of the contractor qcp or superintendent who shall be assisted by the contractor qcis .
there will be no direct compensation for the erosion and sediment control crew .
for all projects the contractor shall provide sufficient personnel and appropriate and sufficient equipment and materials on the project at all times to meet the daily erosion and sediment control plan implementation requirements .
additional personnel equipment and materials shall be readily available to assist with implementation of the weather preparedness and recovery plan within the timeframe allowed by the npdes general permit .
erosion and sediment control materials shall be stored on the project and protected from precipitation runoff and sunlight .
num .
stormwater meeting .
a stormwater meeting shall be held after the preconstruction conference and prior to the beginning of work .
the meeting shall convene at the project site .
aldot construction personnel including the area stormwater coordinator andor the project qcp the project manager the project qci the contractor qcp if applicable the contractor qci the contractors superintendent and any subcontractors that will be involved in clearing earthwork seeding or erosion and sediment control operations shall attend .
the escp the cbmpp the swmp clearing limits and sequence of construction shall be among the items discussed .
project discharge points adjacent property and water bodies should be observed and discussed during the meeting .
any existing stormwater problems or issues should also be discussed and documented .
the contractor shall notify all subcontractors of the meeting and require their attendance .
aldot will notify all applicable regulatory agencies .
num .
limit of exposure of erodible material .
no more than num acres num ha of erodible material shall be exposed at any time unless otherwise indicated on the plans by a project note that has been specifically approved by the state construction engineer .
no increase in the limit of exposure will be considered after letting .
if it is noted on the plans that the area of erodible material will be allowed to be greater than num acres num ha the contractor shall include as part of the swmp project specific details addressing management of the increased acreage during clearing and section num prosecution and progress num grubbing excavation and embankment vegetation establishment temporary erosion and sediment control drainage and construction of stormwater operations .
any approval to increase the area of exposure including that shown on the plans may be rescinded if the project is found by the engineer to be noncompliant with the npdes general permit or environmental related contract requirements .
all areas of exposed erodible material will be considered as contributing to the limit of exposure until final required stabilization is installed or applied and erosion is controlled to the maximum extent practicable .
the contractor may submit a request for review and approval by the state construction engineer to exclude areas of exposure which are outside of the control of the contractor and have been temporarily stabilized .
requests for approval for unnecessary clearing may be considered only if provisions for erosion and sediment control are proposed to be implemented at the contractors expense .
c notice of intention to start work .
the contractor shall provide the engineer written notice of his intention to start work at least num hours in advance of beginning work and at least num hours in advance of beginning particular features of construction such as driving piles placing concrete et cetera .
should prosecution of the work be discontinued by the contractor with the consent of the engineer the contractor shall give the engineer at least num hours notice in writing before resuming operations .
d continuous prosecution of the work .
the contractor shall prosecute the work continuously and diligently in the order and manner set out in his schedule or prescribed by the engineer .
he shall provide sufficient satisfactory materials labor and equipment to guarantee the completion of the project in accordance with the plans and specifications within the time specified in the contract .
should the contractor fail to maintain a satisfactory rate of progress the engineer will require that additional forces and equipment be placed on the work to bring the project up to schedule and maintain it at that level .
failure to maintain the quality and progress of the work shall be cause for the engineer to withhold all estimates which are or may become due until satisfactory quality and progress are maintained or the contract may be defaulted as provided in article num. e unsatisfactory progress .
should the contractor fail to maintain a satisfactory rate of progress in performance of the work prior to expiration of the contract the following regulation shall apply after preparation of the contractors monthly estimate the department will review the progress of the work .
the dollar amount of the work performed will be the total dollar amount that has been paid minus the dollar amount of partial payments for stored materials .
the percentage of work performed will be based on the dollar amount of work performed and the total contract amount .
this will be compared to the percentage of contract time elapsed .
if the percentage of thework performed as compared to the percent of contract time elapsed is behind by more than num percentage points a warning notice of possible disqualification will be sent to the contractor by certified mail return receipt requested appropriate credit will be allowed for any extension previously approved in conformity with article num .
the warning notice will describe the unsatisfactory progress revealed by the computation and that ten days will be allowed from the date of receipt of the warning in which to bring his progress within the allowed num percent complete the project or furnish acceptable reasons why the contractor should not be given a final notice of disqualification .
at the end of the numday period if the contractors progress is not within the allowed percentage nor has acceptable reason been furnished to waive final disqualification the department will issue a final notice of disqualification .
num limitation of operation .
the contractor shall conduct the work at all times in such a manner and in such sequence as will insure the least interference with traffic .
he shall have due regard to the location of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a section on which work is in progress before work is started on any additional section if the opening of such section is essential to public convenience .
section num prosecution and progress num num character of workmen methods and equipment .
the contractor shall at all times employ sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the several classes of work to full completion in the manner and time required by these specifications .
all workmen shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform properly the work assigned to them .
workmen engaged in special work or skilled work shall have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to perform all work properly and satisfactorily .
any person employed by the contractor or by any subcontractor who in the opinion of the engineer does not perform his work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly shall at the written request of the engineer be removed forthwith by the contractor or subcontractor employing such person and shall not again be employed in any portion of the work without the approval of the engineer .
should the contractor fail to remove such person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until compliance with such orders .
all equipment which is proposed to be used on the work shall be of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition as to meet requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of work .
equipment used on any portion of the project shall be such that no injury to the roadway adjacent property or other highways will result from its use .
when the methods and equipment to be used by the contractor in accomplishing the construction are not prescribed in the contract the contractor is free to use any methods or equipment that he demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer will accomplish the contract work in conformity with the requirements of the contract .
when the contract specifies the use of certain methods and equipment such methods and equipment shall be used unless others are authorized by the engineer .
if the contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the contract he may request authority from the engineer to do so .
the request shall be in writing and shall include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed and the reasons for desiring to make the change .
if approval is given it will be on the condition that the contractor will be fully responsible for producing work in conformity with contract requirements .
if after trial use of the substituted methods of equipment the engineer determines that the work produced does not meet contract requirements the contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and shall complete the remaining construction with the specified methods and equipment .
the contractor shall remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the engineer may direct .
no change will be made in basis of payment for the construction items involved nor in contract time as result of authorizing a change in methods or equipment under these provisions .
num temporary suspension of work .
a authority to suspend .
the engineer shall have the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part by written order to the contractor for such period or periods as he may deem necessary due to either of the following reasons num .
failure on the part of the contractor to carry out orders given or to perform any provision of the contract in which case time will be charged and no time extension will be granted or num .
unsuitable weather or other essential conditions of a highly unusual or unpredictable nature which he considers unfavorable for the suitable prosecution of the work in which case either time charges will be suspended or a time extension will be granted .
upon suspension the work shall be put in proper and satisfactory condition carefully covered and properly protected as directed by the engineer .
reference is made to article num. b legal stoppage or termination .
should the progress of the work be stopped by a temporary injunction court restraining order process of judgment of any kind directed to either of the parties hereto then such period of delay will not be charged against the contract time .
the state shall not be liable to the contractor for the said legal delays of num calendar days or less or for termination of the contract because of a legal order except as provided in subarticle numb .
consideration will be given to properly documented added costs for a legal delay in excess of num calendar days if submitted in accordance with section num claims .
if a herein noted delay is of such duration as not to be in the section num prosecution and progress num best interest of the state as determined by the director he may by written order terminate the contract in the same manner prescribed in subarticle numc for termination of a contract .
c automatic time suspension .
time will be suspended on calendar day projects during periods when no work can be performed on the project due to operational check periods or seasonal limitations when such periods are required by the specifications .
time will also be suspended for specification mandated curing periods for placement of permanent traffic stripe when all other work has been completed and the traveling public has full use of the highway .
d suspension considerations .
if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation andor contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for adjustment within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
upon receipt the engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost andor time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of his determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
num determination of contract time .
a general .
the number of working days or calendar days allowed or the calendar date specified for completion of the work included in the contract will be fixed by the department will be stated in the proposal and contract and will be designated as the contract time .
b beginning and end of contract time .
contract time charges shall begin when the contractor begins work on a pay item or on incidental work that will interfere with traffic but in no case later than num calendar days after date of issue of notice to proceed .
time charges shall end upon satisfactory completion of all pay items in the contract .
c days work not permitted .
the contractor shall not permit work on any pay item to be done on sundays and the following holidays national memorial day fourth of july labor day thanksgiving day and christmas day except with written permission of the engineer .
d monthly statement and time charges .
num .
contracts on a work day basis .
for projects on a working day basis the engineer will furnish the contractor a monthly time statement for the preceding month .
this time statement will show the number of working days charged as outlined in the definition of working day in subarticle numb the number of working days in the contract and the number of working days remaining to complete the contract .
under the provisions of article num the engineer will determine the controlling item or items of work based on consideration of the contractors approved schedule of operations and the operations that should be in progress at the time to provide for the orderly completion of the work within the contract time .
consideration to not charging time will be given when delays of six hours or more occur when the causes for delays may be due to but not restricted to the following section num prosecution and progress num num .
unavoidable causes beyond the control of the contractor without fault or negligence on his part .
num .
contractors proof in form of letters from suppliers of inability to obtain materials due to a regionwide shortage of such materials .
num .
failure on the part of a utility company to diligently perform work not under the control of the contractor .
num .
acts of the department .
num .
recovery time .
num .
strikes .
a working day will not be charged when the placement of hot mix asphalt is the controlling item of work and the start up operation is in an adjustment period unless the plant resumes production .
upon receiving the monthly time statement the contractor shall review the statement and compare the time charges with his records .
if the contractor disagrees with the time charges on the statement he shall file a written protest setting forth the reasons why he considers the monthly time statement incorrect .
the contractor is encouraged to file any such protest as soon as possible after receiving the time statement .
num .
contracts on a calendar day or date basis .
for projects on a calendar day or calendar date basis a similar statement will be furnished the contractor indicating the number of calendar days remaining in the contract .
num extension of contract time .
a general .
an extension of contract time will be granted in the event the total cost of the completed work exceeds the total contract bid price .
for the purpose of this item the following costs will be excluded from the computation for total cost supplemental agreements regardless of whether or not time extensions are allowed on the agreements bituminous material price adjustments adjustments due to the cost of construction fuel for hma production liquidated damages incentive or disincentive payments price adjustments for pavement smoothness compensation for delay claims .
overruns of pay items included in sections num and num .
the extension of contract time shall be in the same ratio as the increase in the total cost .
if the contractor finds it impossible for reasons beyond his control to complete the work within the contract time as specified or as extended in accordance with the provisions of this article he may at any time prior to the expiration of the contract time as extended make a written request to the engineer for an extension of time setting forth therein the reasons which he believes will justify the granting of his request .
the contractors plea that insufficient time was specified is not a valid reason for extension of time .
if the engineer finds that the work was delayed because of conditions beyond the control and without the fault of the contractor he may extend the time for completion in such amount as the conditions justify .
the extended time for completion shall then be in full force and effect the same as though it were the original time for completion .
if the contractor disagrees with the decision of the engineer he may appeal directly in writing to the director .
the director shall have final authority to approve or disapprove the request for an extension of time .
the director may at his discretion refer the appeal to the claims committee for a recommendation before making his decision .
reference is made to section num claims .
time extension requests will not be referred to the claims appeal board .
b contracts on a working day basis .
when the time set for completion of the work is a number of working days extensions of contract time will be handled as outlined in subarticle a above .
section num prosecution and progress num c contracts on a calendar day or calendar date basis .
when the time set for completion of the work is a number of calendar days or a calendar date working days are not applicable .
extension of time beyond the said calendar days or date will be made as follows when the notice to proceed is delayed more than num calendar days after execution of the contract the date of completion will be extended the number of calendar days in excess of num days between the date of execution of the contract and the date of actual issuance of the notice to proceed .
where work is suspended by order of the engineer due to no fault of the contractor and time is not suspended a time extension will be granted for the number of calendar days the work is so suspended .
a time extension will be granted as provided in subarticle numb .
a time extension will be granted as outlined in the first paragraph of subarticle a above .
the following are valid reasons for time extensions when delays due to these causes are considered by the department of transportation to be beyond the control of the contractor num .
utility work being performed by others not under the contractors control that prohibit the contractors construction operations from proceeding with the normal working forces he would otherwise employ in performing the controlling item or items of work which normally would be in progress at the time said utility work is being accomplished .
num .
recovery time as defined in article num .
num .
if in the course of work material delivery time is in excess of that normally anticipated due to demands beyond the supplying industries capabilities provided such materials are necessary for the prosecution of the controlling items of work at that time and such can be substantiated by the contractor in the form of letters from suppliers the department will consider a time extension for the delay caused by the lack of available materials .
num .
if in the course of this project the contractor feels he has been unjustly penalized because of delays in departmental decisions he may submit for consideration by the engineer written specific data covering the item or items and the time element involved .
the department will consider only an extension for the actual work delay caused by the delay in obtaining a decision .
num .
if in the course of the work strikes occur while the contractor is working in good faith and such was not caused by action of the contractor the department will consider a time extension for the delay caused by the strike .
when allowing a time extension under the provisions noted in this subarticle consideration in determining the adjusted completion date for the work will be given to allow additional time to compensate for seasonal conditions weather and other factors not under control of the contractor .
should the contractor after exercising a concerted effort to diligently prosecute the work taking full advantage of every available work day not be able to complete the work within the adjusted completion time because of nonavailability of days in which work can be performed the department may consider an additional extension of time for the work .
num failure to complete work within contract time .
should the contractor or in case of default the surety fail to complete the work within the time stipulated in the contract or the adjusted time as granted under the provisions of article num a deduction for each calendar day or work day that any work shall remain uncompleted an amount indicated by the liquidated damages schedule shown in article num or provided in the contract documents shall be deducted from any monies due the contractor on monthly estimates .
any adjustments due to approved time extensions or overruns in the contract amount will be made on the monthly semifinal or final estimate as may be appropriate .
liquidated damages assessed as provided in these specifications is not a penalty but is intended to compensate the state for increased time in administering the contract supervision inspection and management particularly that management and inspection which requires maintaining normal field project management forces for a longer time on any construction operation or phase than originally contemplated when the contract period was agreed upon in the contract .
permitting the contractor to continue and finish the work or any part of it after the time fixed for its completion or after the date to which the time for completion may have been extended will in no way operate as a waiver on the part of the department of any of its rights under the contract .
section num prosecution and progress num num schedule of liquidated damages .
original contract amount liquidated damages daily charge more than to and including calendar day or fixed date work day num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num when the contract time is on the calendar day or date basis the schedule for calendar days shall be used .
when the contract time is on a work day basis the schedule for work days shall be used .
num default of contract .
if the contractor num .
fails to begin the work under the contract within the time specified in the notice to proceed or num .
fails to perform the work with sufficient workmen and equipment or with sufficient materials to assure the prompt completion of said work or num .
performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or to perform anew such work as may be rejected as unacceptable and unsuitable or num .
discontinues the prosecution of the work or num .
fails to resume work which has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so or num .
becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency or num .
allows any final judgement to stand against him unsatisfied for a period of num days or num .
makes an assignment without the consent of the surety and approval of the department or num .
fails to furnish documentation necessary for final acceptance and payment or num .
fails to carry out provisions of the contract or num .
for any other cause whatsoever fails to carry on the work in an acceptable manner the engineer will give notice in writing to the contractor and his surety for such delay neglect or default .
if the contractor or surety within a period of num days after such notice does not proceed in accordance therewith then the department will upon written notification from the engineer of the fact of such delay neglect or default and the contractors failure to comply with such notice have full power and authority without violating the contract to take the prosecution of the work out of the hands of the contractor .
the department may appropriate or use any or all materials and equipment on the ground as may be suitable and acceptable and may enter into an agreement for the completion of said contract according to the terms and provisions thereof or use such other methods as in the opinion of the engineer will be required for the completion of said contract in an acceptable manner .
all costs and charges incurred by the department together with the cost of completing the work under contract will be deducted from any monies due or which may become due said contractor .
if such expense exceeds the sum which would have been payable under the contract then the contractor and the surety shall be liable and shall pay to the department the amount of such excess .
notice to the contractor shall be deemed to be served when delivered to the person in charge of any office used by the contractor to his representative at or near the work or by certified letter return receipt requested addressed to the contractor at his last known place of business .
in addition to the provisions provided in this article failure of the contractor to sign the final estimate within the time limits prescribed in subarticle numd will be classified as a default .
section num prosecution and progress num num blank .
num termination of contractors responsibility .
a general .
the contract will be considered complete when all work has been finished the final inspection made by the engineer the project accepted by the department the necessary advertisements published all in accordance with the provisions of article num and the final estimate paid .
upon completion of the above the contractors responsibility will then cease except as set forth in his bonds .
b special conditions .
should the department find that the contractor is unable to complete his contract work due to the inability to obtain specified materials or satisfactory substitutes therefor or labor because of laws rules or regulations placed into effect or the inability of industry to produce specified materials within a reasonable time the director may by written notice relieve the contractor from that portion of the contract which can not be performed .
also should the state determine that further prosecution of the work on a project will not be in the best interest of the public the director may by written order eliminate or delete any or all remaining items of work on a contract .
the deletion or elimination of work under the above conditions will in no way affect the unit prices bid in the contract .
work actually performed will be paid for at the contract unit prices .
should relief from performance of the contract or any portion thereof directly cause the loss of any work or materials already furnished under the terms of the contract the contractor will be reimbursed for the actual cost of salvaging the materials or as mutually agreed to .
materials obtained by the contractor which have been inspected tested and accepted by the engineer but not incorporated into the work may at the option of the engineer be purchased in accordance with the provisions of article num .
if by the deletion of work items the volume of work completed is too small to compensate for the organization and moving of equipment to and from the work consideration will be given to reimbursement for actual costs thereof the intent being that an equitable settlement be made compensation for this however shall not exceed the percentage differentiation between plan quantities and actual quantities performed and if num of the estimated work was performed no compensation for the organization and moving of equipment to and from the work will be allowed .
in no event will a claim for loss of anticipated profits be considered .
the deletion or elimination of work under the above conditions shall in no way relieve the contractor from his responsibility for work actually performed nor any just claims as a result thereof .
final termination of the contract shall be as noted in subarticle a above for the work completed .
c national emergency .
the director may by written order terminate the contract or a portion thereof when the contractor is prevented from proceeding with the construction contract as a direct result of an executive order of the president with respect to the prosecution of war or in the interest of national defense .
when contracts or any portion thereof are terminated before completion of all items of work in the contract payment will be made for the actual units or items of work completed at the contract unit price bid or as mutually agreed for items of work partially completed or not started .
no claim for loss of anticipated profits will be considered .
reimbursement for organization of the work and moving equipment to and from the job will be considered where the volume of work completed is small to compensate the contractor for these expenses under the contract unit prices the intent being that an equitable settlement will be made with the contractor .
acceptable materials obtained by the contractor for the work that have been inspected tested and accepted by the engineer and are not incorporated in the work may at the option of the engineer be purchased from the contractor in accordance with the provisions of article num .
final termination of the contract shall be as noted in subarticle a above for the work completed .
section num measurement and payment num section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities .
a general .
all work acceptably completed under the contract will be measured by the engineer according to united states standard measures and weights unless otherwise provided on the plans or in the special provisions .
no local rules or customs will be followed or considered .
when standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit lumber etc .
and these items are identified by gage weight mass section dimensions etc .
such identification will be considered to be nominal weights masses and dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved will be accepted .
b base layer and pavement areas .
all longitudinal measurements for computing area of base layers and pavements will be made along the actual surface of the roadway and not horizontally and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures in the roadway having an area of nine square feet one square meter or less .
for all transverse measurements for area of base layers and pavements the dimensions to be used in calculating the pay area shall be the neat dimensions shown on the plans or directed .
c structures .
structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the plans or as ordered in writing unless otherwise provided elsewhere in the specifications or in the special provisions .
d excavation .
in computing volume of excavation embankment and borrow the average endarea or other acceptable method will be used .
it is stipulated and agreed that the electronic computer andor planimeter shall be considered as instruments of precision adapted to the computation and measurement of these volumes and areas .
completed final cross sections and computed quantities will be made available to the contractor upon request but shall not be removed from the engineers office .
e linear measurements .
all items which are measured in linear measurement by the foot meter such as pipe culverts guardrail underdrains etc .
will be measured parallel to the base or foundation upon which such structures are placed unless otherwise shown on the plans or indicated in these specifications .
f gage .
the term gage when used in connection with the measurement of plates shall mean the u.s. standard gage when used with wire shall mean u.s. steel wire gage .
g blank .
h weight mass measurements .
num .
general .
the term ton shall mean the short ton metric ton consisting of num pounds avoirdupois num kg .
scales for measuring materials shall be furnished by the contractor at agreed locations and without extra compensation .
scales shall be suitable for the type of service for which they are to be used and shall be operated by a competent qualified operator .
scales for quarry run materials shall be sensitive to num pounds num kg all other scales shall be sensitive to num pounds num kg or less .
for items being paid for by the ton metric ton weights masses may be recorded on the weight mass ticket to the nearest num pounds num kg except that weights masses for quarry run materials may be recorded to the nearest num pounds num kg .
electronic load cell weight mass systems shall be equipped with automatic zeroing devices .
the maintenance tolerance of scales shall be num percent of the range in which they are to be used .
the acceptance tolerance applied to a new device or a device which has been condemned and repaired to be placed back in service shall be num percent of the range in which they are to be used .
section num measurement and payment num scales shall be checked and serviced by a reputable scales company registered with the alabama department of agriculture .
the time between checks shall not exceed four months except that checks for scales used in proportioning the component materials for portland cement concrete shall not exceed six months .
in addition any time a plant is moved or substantially modified the scales shall be checked .
a copy of the check shall be sent to the area in which the scale is located .
it is the contractors responsibility to maintain suitable acceptable scales and any time a check indicates the scales to be inaccurate the engineer will reject them for use on the project until such time as they are recertified .
weights masses above the acceptable capacity of a set of scales will not be acceptable .
num .
weight mass measure for pay purposes .
if material is shipped by rail the car weight mass may be accepted provided that only the actual weight mass of material is paid for and is certified by a car weight mass obtained from a certified scale after the unloading .
however car weights will not be accepted for steel reinforcement structural steel or materials that are to pass through a mixing plant .
trucks used to haul material being paid by weight shall be measured empty daily with the driver in the truck to establish a daily tare weight .
each truck shall also bear a plain legible identification number .
commercial materials except reinforcing steel and structural steel which are measured by weight mass for pay purposes shall be measured by a qualified weighmaster using acceptable weight tickets .
as a minimum the weight ticket shall contain the following num name of the contractor and material producer .
num project number and county .
num truck number .
num contract item number and item name .
num date and time of loading .
num gross tare and net weights .
num weighmasters signature .
may be electronically generated .
num any additional information as required of the contractor or material producer for participation as a qualified source as given in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual unless furnished on a separate applicable bmt certificate of compliance .
for measurement systems capable of measuring net weight directly from the measuring hopper the gross and tare weights will not be required .
in lieu of bulk weight the department will accept weights of materials normally sold in bagged form i.e .
fertilizers cement etc ..
the engineer will make at least one unannounced independent weight check for every three months of operation with at least one per project for each material delivered under the weighmaster program .
each check will include a check of both the gross and the tare weights masses .
for these weight checks the contractor shall make necessary arrangements meeting the approval of the engineer for the use of independent scales certified in accordance with item numhnum .
it shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor to insure that a weight mass ticket is delivered to the project with each load .
weight tickets will not be accepted after the truck has left the project .
weighmasters must be qualified in accordance with the provisions of section num chapter num of the code of alabama num or in case of material purchased out of state complying with the appropriate state laws rules and regulations for weighmasters of the state involved .
a copy of the weighmasters certificate shall be furnished the engineer and additionally a copy shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the vicinity of the measuring operations .
num .
weight mass measurement for proportioning etc .
of materials .
scales used for proportioning mixtures within mixing plants shall comply with the following unless otherwise noted section num measurement and payment num a. asphalt mixing plants .
scales may be either springless dial multiple beam or electronic load cell type .
for multiple beam scales a tare beam for balancing and a telltale device for accurate measuring visible to the plant inspector on the mixing platform shall be provided .
b .
concrete mixing plants or units .
for obtaining weight mass of materials at a central plant beam springless dial or electronic load cell scales suitable for this class of service shall be used .
unless separate measuring units are used for each kind of material measured the scales shall be equipped with a multiple measuring beam with enough beams so that the required weight mass of each material to be measured can be separately set off and all material measured without changing the settings .
separate scales shall be provided for bulk cement and for bulk fly ash as provided in article num .
scales of the suspended hopper type shall have a telltale dial tare beam or other device that indicates to the operator the approach of not less than the last num pounds num kg of the required hopper load for structure concrete plants or the last num pounds num kg for concrete pavement plants .
telltale dials shall clearly show when overload is on the scale and suitable provisions shall be made for disconnecting such dials when necessary for balancing the scales and again connecting the dial without affecting the dead load balance .
dial faces shall be of a material not affected by moisture and shall have a suitable transparent protective cover for the dial face and dial indicator .
an acceptable method of marking the correct dial indicator position when predetermined loads are in the hopper shall be provided .
plants with operational automatic cutoff devices shall be an acceptable substitute for providing markings for predetermined loads .
for obtaining the weight mass of materials at the work site scales shall be of appropriate capacity and shall meet the requirements noted above however for small structures in difficult locations use of platform scales suitable for measuring wheelbarrows will be permitted .
scales for obtaining the weight mass of wheelbarrows shall have beams so arranged that the weight mass of the wheelbarrow may be set separately from the weight mass of the material .
separate scales shall be used for each aggregate for bulk cement and for fly ash unless the multiple beam type is used with a separate beam for each material and release levers to throw each beam out of service .
suspended hopper measuring equipment shall be of an approved type complying with the requirements of this article .
c. base course mixing plants .
measuring equipment shall meet the requirements of subitem b. above with separate bins for each size aggregate and separate bins and scales for additives calcium chloride cement etc .. i loose measurement volumetric .
all materials to be measured by the cubic yard cubic meter loose measurement or measured in the vehicle shall be hauled in approved vehicles and will be measured therein at the point of delivery .
no allowances will be made for the settlement of material in transit .
approved vehicles for this purpose may be of any size or type acceptable to the engineer provided that the body is of such shape that the actual contents may be readily and accurately determined .
each approved vehicle must bear a plainly legible identification mark indicating the specific approved capacity .
all approved vehicles shall be loaded to not less than their water level capacity when they arrive at the point of delivery .
loads not hauled in approved vehicles or of a quantity less than the specifically approved quantity for the hauling vehicle measured as specified herein will be rejected and shall be removed from the work .
if rejected no compensation will be allowed for the rejected load .
j conversion of weight mass to volume .
when requested by the contractor and approved in writing material specified to be measured by the cubic yard cubic meter may have its weight mass determined and such weight mass will be converted to cubic yards cubic meters for payment purposes .
ratios for conversion from weight mass measurement to volume measurement will be determined periodically by the section num measurement and payment num engineer .
each ratio as determined shall be agreed to by the contractor before such method of measurement will be used .
k timber .
timber will be measured by the thousand feet board measure mbm cubic meter actually incorporated in the structure with no allowance for any waste except beveled ends .
measurement will be based on nominal widths and thickness and the extreme length of each piece .
l lump sum .
the term lump sum when used as an item of payment will mean complete payment for the work described in the contract .
when a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the unit will be construed to include all necessary fittings and accessories .
num measurement of asphaltic material .
a weight mass .
asphaltic materials shall be measured in tons metric tons or gallons liters as specified on the plans or in the proposal .
if measured by weight mass each tank truck drum or distributor shall have its weight mass obtained as the material is delivered to the location of the work and the container vehicle shall have its weight mass obtained immediately after emptying except that when this method can not be used other means of accurately measuring the material may be substituted with permission of the engineer .
b gallonage liters .
when specified on the plans or in the proposal bituminous material will be measured by the gallon liter in the railroad car tank truck distributor tank or drums .
each railroad tank tank truck drum or distributor tank of bituminous material delivered for the project will be measured .
the measurement shall be taken when the bituminous material is of a uniform temperature and free from air bubbles .
c temperature correction .
the volumetric measurement of the bituminous material will be based upon a temperature of num f num c using the following correction factors num per degree f num per degree c for petroleum oils having a specific gravity above num at num fnum f num cnum c num per degree f num per degree c for petroleum oils having a specific gravity between num and num at num fnum f num cnum c num per degree f num per degree c for emulsified asphalts .
num scope of payment .
a quantities .
the quantities listed in the bid schedule do not govern final payment .
payments to the contractor for contract items will be made for the actual quantities of these items performed in accordance with the plans and specifications .
if upon completion of the construction these actual quantities show an increase or decrease from those in the proposal the contract unit prices will still govern except where modified by supplemental agreement or allowance made as provided in articles num and num .
quantities included in supplemental agreements will be paid for as stipulated therein .
force account work will be paid for as provided in article num. b basis of payment .
the contractor shall accept the compensation as herein provided in full payment for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to the completed work and for performing all work contemplated and embraced under the contract also for all loss or damage arising from the nature of the work or from the action of the elements except as noted in article num or from any unforeseen difficulties which may be encountered during the prosecution of the work and until its final acceptance also for all risks of every description connected with the prosecution of the work .
c unit price coverage .
in cases where the basis of payment clause in the specifications relating to any unit price in the bid schedule requires that the said unit price cover and be considered compensation for certain work or materials essential to the item this same work or materials will not be measured section num measurement and payment num or paid for under any other pay item which may appear elsewhere in the specifications .
reference is made to item numcnum .
d repair or renewal of defective work .
the payment of any current estimate shall in no way affect the obligation of the contractor to repair or renew any defective parts of the construction or to be responsible for all damages due to such defects .
e bituminous material price adjustments .
num .
asphalt index .
the contract unit prices for bituminous materials shall be based on the asphalt prices at the time of opening bids .
the department will establish a monthly asphalt index to address fluctuations in the cost of the bituminous materials during the life of the project .
the index will be composed of the following four entries pg asphalt for all grades without polymer pg asphalt with polymer for all grades with polymer emulsified asphalt for all grades without polymer and cutback asphalts emulsified asphalt with polymer for all grades with polymer .
num .
usage and payment .
adjustments in compensation will be computed each month that bituminous materials are used in the work .
bituminous plant mix bases and pavements surface treatments and tack coat are the only types of bituminous materials for which a price adjustment will be computed .
adjustments in compensation will be based on an index that is a monthly price per gallon for the bituminous material .
before the expiration of contract time plus approved time extensions the dollar amount of adjustment will be determined by multiplying the increase or decrease of the current current estimate month index from a base index by the number of gallons of bituminous material used in the work during the period covered by the monthly estimate .
the base index will be the value of the index for the month in which the project is let .
this same index will apply to bituminous materials added to the contract by supplemental agreement after letting .
after the expiration of contract time plus approved time extensions two calculations of a potential price adjustment will be made .
the first calculation will be made using the current index and the base index .
the second calculation will be made using the index during the month that contract time plus approved time extensions expired and the base index .
the amount of the price adjustment for the current estimate period will be the smallest amount of an increase in compensation if both calculations are an increase in compensation .
the amount of the price adjustment will be the largest amount of a decrease in compensation if both calculations are a decrease in compensation .
the amount of the price adjustment will be the decrease in compensation if one of the calculations is an increase in compensation and the other calculation is a decrease in compensation .
the amount of asphalt will be calculated as follows bituminous plant mix bases and pavements the number of gallons liters of new bituminous material required by the approved job mix formula .
a conversion factor of num pounds per gallon num kgl will be used for figuring quantities .
no measurement for adjustment will be made for the amount of asphalt rejuvenator used or for the amount of bituminous material recovered and used in surface recycling operations .
surface treatments actual gallons liters of asphalt used within specification requirements with volumetric correction to num f num c as per subarticle numc .
tack coat actual gallons liters of asphalt used within specification requirements with volumetric correction to num f num c as per subarticle numc .
f adjustments due to cost of construction fuel for hma production .
changes in the compensation due the contractor will be made by the engineer to address changes in the cost of fuel required for the production of hot mix asphalt hma in a plant .
the changes in compensation will be made based on a monthly index of the cost of fuel determined by the department .
section num measurement and payment num a monthly hma production fuel index will be established based on the average area terminal price reports for no .
num fuel and no .
num num s fuel of the platts oilgram price report published during the week in which the first day of the month occurs .
before the expiration of contract time plus approved time extensions the dollar amount of adjustment will be determined by multiplying the increase or decrease of the current current estimate month index from the base index by the number of gallons of fuel that are used in the production of the hma during the period covered by the monthly estimate .
the number of gallons of fuel required for the production of the hma shall be num gallons per ton num l per metric ton of hma produced during the estimate period .
the base index will be the value of the index for the month in which the project is let .
after the expiration of contract time plus approved time extensions two calculations of a potential price adjustment will be made .
the first calculation will be made using the current index and the base index .
the second calculation will be made using the index during the month that contract time plus approved time extensions expired and the base index .
the amount of the price adjustment for the current estimate period will be the smallest amount of an increase in compensation if both calculations are an increase in compensation .
the amount of the price adjustment will be the largest amount of a decrease in compensation if both calculations are a decrease in compensation .
the amount of the price adjustment will be the decrease in compensation if one of the calculations is an increase in compensation and the other calculation is a decrease in compensation .
changes in compensation will be made for the number of tons metric tons of hma placed and paid for in accordance with the requirements given in the following sections section num plant mix bituminous base section num paverlaid surface treatment section num polymer modified open graded friction course section num stone matrix asphalt section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers .
num extra and force account work .
a general .
the contractor will receive and accept payment for work performed under his contract either as contract items of work or as extra work .
contract items of work will be paid for at the unit prices stipulated in the contract .
extra work will be paid for at the unit prices or lump sum stipulated in supplemental agreement or on a force account basis .
supplemental agreements shall be executed in accordance with subarticle numb .
when prices are negotiated for payment by supplemental agreement satisfactory proof of administrative markups for profit overhead and other costs may be required by the engineer .
extra work performed on a force account basis will be compensated for in the following manner .
b force account basis .
num .
labor .
for all labor foremen and superintendents employed on the force account work the contractor shall receive the agreed hourly wages or scale for the number of hours the said laborers foremen and superintendents were actually engaging in or directly supervising such work .
no allowance will be made for general superintendence .
hourly wages for salaried employees will be based on a numhour work week .
the wages or scale shall be comparable to the wages or scale paid by the contractor for work of a like nature on his contract pay items and shall be agreed upon in writing by the contractor and engineer before the said force account work is begun .
to this sum shall be added an amount equal to num percent thereof .
no additional pay beyond the agreed hourly scale will be allowed for overtime work unless such overtime work is authorized in writing by the engineer .
labor costs will be allowed for travel time to and from the jobsite when that travel is specifically for the purpose of accomplishing force account work .
travel time shall be established and approved by the engineer prior to beginning of the work .
travel time costs shall be validated with certified payrolls .
section num measurement and payment num per diem or daily subsistence will be allowed when those costs are directly related to force account work and a part of the contractors usual and customary expenses .
an additional num percent will be added to the per diem or daily subsistence costs .
num .
bond insurance and tax .
for public liability and property damage insurance and workmens compensation insurance premiums increased bond premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes the contractor shall receive the actual cost to which no percent shall be added in addition on projects which the state gross receipt tax is applicable may include said tax .
the contractor shall furnish satisfactory evidence of the rates paid for such bond insurance and tax .
num .
materials .
for materials accepted by the engineer and used the contractor shall receive the actual cost of such materials delivered on the work exclusive of machinery rentals as herein set forth to which cost num will be added .
num .
equipment .
for rental rates of equipment other than small tools authorized by the engineer for use on force account work the engineer will use the latest publication of equipmentwatch cost recovery formerly rental rate blue book by equipmentwatch a division of penton business media incorporated to determine payment to the contractor .
payment will be made for the actual time that the authorized equipment is in operation on the force account work including travel time to and from the jobsite when that travel is specifically for the purpose of accomplishing force account work .
the hourly rate for each piece of equipment will be the monthly rate shown in the equipment table divided by num .
weekly and daily rates will not be used .
in addition for equipment solely dedicated to the force account work consideration will be given to paying standby cost .
operating rates and standby rates for computing the equipment payment will be determined as follows operating rates .
the hourly rate will be multiplied by the appropriate rate adjustment factor and regional factor shown in the rate adjustment table and on the regional adjustment map respectively to obtain the adjusted hourly rate .
the estimated operating costhour from the equipment table will be added to the adjusted hourly rate to establish the operating rate .
standby rates .
the use of a standby rate is appropriate when equipment has been ordered to be available for force account work but is idle for reasons which are not the fault of the contractor .
the standby rate will be determined by multiplying the adjusted hourly rate by num .
operating rates will be used only when the equipment is actually being used .
standby rates will be used under the following conditions a .
the equipment must be totally dedicated to the force account work and not used intermittently on other work .
b .
standby cost will not be considered until after the equipment has been operated on the force account work .
c. if the equipment is dedicated for force account for a full calendar work week the standby time will be num hours minus the operating time for the week .
if the difference in these two figures is zero or less there will be no payment for standby .
d. if the equipment is dedicated for force account for a partial week the standby time will be computed on a daily basis .
the standby time per day will be num hours minus the operating time for the day .
if the difference in these two figures is zero or less there will be no payment for standby .
the above will apply without further adjustment if overtime work is approved by the engineer .
the above shall be full compensation for all equipment costs except operator cost .
payment for operators will be under item numbnum labor .
if equipment is required that is not listed in the rental rate blue book then payment will be made for that equipment based on a certified or paid invoice for the period of time covered by the invoice .
in this case the equipment must be totally dedicated to the force account work and no distinction will be made between operating cost and standby cost .
if this section num measurement and payment num equipment is owned by the contractor then rental rates for operating and standby costs shall be agreed upon between the contractor and engineer prior to its use .
num .
professional services compensation for professional services shall be on an invoice basis .
labor and equipment costs will not be calculated separately for professional services .
num .
costs not allowed .
no allowance shall be made for general superintendence the use of small tools or other costs for which no specific allowance is herein provided .
num .
administrative allowance .
when force account work is accomplished by an approved subcontractor or professional service the contractor shall receive as compensation for administration costs an amount equal to five percent of the total amount paid under items num num num and num of this subarticle for force account work accomplished by an approved subcontractor or professional service .
num .
compensation .
the compensation as set forth in this subarticle shall be received by the contractor as payment in full for extra work done on a force account basis .
said compensation shall cover all work profit administrative costs and incidental costs of whatever nature incurred in the work whether performed by the prime contractor or an approved subcontractor .
at the end of each day the contractors representative and the inspector shall compare records of the cost of work done as ordered on a force account basis .
num .
statements .
no payment will be made for work performed on a force account basis until the contractor has furnished to the engineer duplicate itemized statements of the cost of such force account work detailed as to the following a .
name classification date daily hours total hours rate and extension for each laborer and foreman .
b .
designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and extension for each truck and other unit of machinery and equipment .
c. quantities of materials prices and extensions .
d. transportation of materials .
e. travel time for equipment .
f. cost of public liability and property damage insurance and workmens compensation insurance premiums increased bond premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security tax .
statements shall be accompanied and supported by original receipted invoices for all materials used and transportation charges provided that if materials used on the force account work are not specifically purchased for such work but are taken from the contractors stock then in lieu of the original invoices the statements shall contain or be accompanied by an affidavit of the contractor certifying that such materials were taken from his stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
num compensation for altered quantities .
when the accepted quantities of work vary from the quantities in the bid schedule the contractor shall accept as payment in full so far as contract items are concerned payment at the original contract unit prices for the actual quantities of work done .
no allowance or other adjustment except as provided in article num will be made for any increased expense loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the contractor resulting either directly from such alterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation among the contract items of overhead expense on the part of the bidder and subsequent loss of expected reimbursement therefor or from any other cause .
additional work caused by alterations of plans or changes in character of work will be paid for by supplemental agreement or on a force account basis .
section num measurement and payment num num omitted items and cancelled work .
a elimination of items .
should any items contained in the proposal be found unnecessary for the proper completion of the work contracted the engineer may eliminate such items from the contract and such action shall in no way invalidate the contract and no allowance will be made for items so eliminated in making final payment to the contractor except for such actual work as may have been done materials actually purchased and bona fide equipment costs incurred for such eliminated item prior to notification of the elimination of the items .
b unused materials .
for materials ordered and delivered for the unfinished portion of such cancelled or omitted items the state will pay actual certified cost material and handling or transporting cost plus fifteen percent for both overhead and gross receipt tax charges no anticipated profit will be considered .
material paid for shall become the property of the state and shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer .
num partial payment .
once each month the engineer will make an appropriate estimate on the regulation form of the work or portion of the work completed and the value thereof based on the contract unit prices or proportional part thereof for lump sum items less any assessed liquidated damages or other designated deductions .
this estimate may if requested in writing by the contractor and approved by the engineer include cost of certain commercial nonperishable items such as but not limited to base aggregates reinforcing steel bridge piling structural steel prefabricated bridge components traffic signal equipment electrical equipment fencing materials sign materials and others as may be authorized by the engineer within the following limitations num .
the location of the storage site shall be at the project site or other designated location in the vicinity of such construction whenever practical .
offsite storage may be approved if the engineer considers offsite storage to be more practical .
in either case all conditions of this article concerning stored stockpiled material shall be met .
departmental form cnum will be used to document all payments for stored material .
num .
all material approved for payment in storage must be manufactured for specific use on the project .
it shall be stored in accordance with good construction practices and shall be separated from other materials where it can be inventoried at any time .
no payment will be made on any material which does not conform with the requirements of the plans and specifications .
the contractor will be responsible for the security of all storage sites .
num .
an individual payment and the accumulated payment unless otherwise provided under a specific item of work shall be the smaller of the following two dollar amounts num of the certified invoice cost including applicable taxes plus gross receipts tax for the materials actually delivered to the approved storage site or num of total bid price for the item of which the material is a part .
an invoice or an accumulation of invoices for each eligible pay item must total num or more before consideration will be given for making partial payment .
all invoices shall be certified by the contractor or the supplier of the material .
the certification shall be shown on the invoice and shall read as follows i do hereby certify that this is a true and correct invoice .
this wording shall be followed by the signature of an authorized representative of the contractor or the supplier .
num .
after payments are placed on monthly estimates the contractor shall furnish the project manager with copies of certified paid invoices from the suppliers of the materials .
the certification shall be shown on each invoice and shall read as follows i do hereby certify that this is a true and correct invoice and has been paid .
this wording shall be followed by the signature of an authorized representative of the supplier .
failure to furnish these certified paid invoices within thirty num days from the date of issuance of the monthly payment check covering the estimate for which the payment of materials was made by the state will result in the deletion of the payment from the next estimate following the expiration of said numday period .
num .
as stockpiled materials are incorporated into the work proportional deductions will be made in the monthly estimate for such partial payments .
section num measurement and payment num num .
partial payment for materials on hand will not constitute acceptance and any faulty material will be rejected even though previous payment may have been made .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for furnishing and incorporating acceptable materials into the work and for any loss or damage regardless of the cause for any material on which partial payment is made .
num .
transportation charges for delivery of eligible materials to the approved storage site may be included in partial payments for stockpiled materials if properly documented .
such charges may be included in the materials invoice or handled as a separate invoice whichever is appropriate .
the estimate less any payments previously made will be certified by the director for payment provided progress and quality of work is satisfactory and in conformity with subarticle numb .
no monthly payment will be required to be made when the amount due on the project is less than num .
a statement of any sum due the state or county for equipment labor or supplies furnished under the provisions of these specifications will be furnished along with the estimate and the amount of same will be deducted from the estimate before payment is made by the state .
the payment of any monthly estimate for any portion of the work as provided in the specifications shall in no way affect the obligation of the contractor to complete the work in accordance with the contract num payments to subcontractors .
retainage shall not be withheld from payments owed to subcontractors or lower tier subcontractors .
the prime contractor shall make payment to all subcontractors for the portion of the work satisfactorily performed by the subcontractors within num calendar days not counting saturdays and sundays of the contractors receipt of a partial payment from the aldot .
the prime contractor shall submit to the project manager a notarized certification of payment signed by an authorized company representative for each estimate period .
this certification shall read companys name paid all subcontractors active on the project for estimate period no .
within num calendar days not counting saturdays and sundays of the receipt of the partial payment covering said estimate period .
the certification shall be submitted within sixty calendar days of the close of the estimate period for which it applies .
failure to furnish the certification in a timely manner may result in the withholding of further monthly payments or other punitive action until the delinquent certifications have been submitted .
should an aldot audit reveal that the contractor did not make payments as stated in the certification aldot will take punitive action against the contractor .
this action may include disqualification from bidding for a minimum period of six months .
num payment for work .
payment for work will be made by the state by warrants drawn against state funds that are legally available for such work .
all monies payable under the contract or any part thereof will be paid to the contractor in accordance with the provisions of these specifications and no assignment or order executed by the contractor directing payment of any portion or all of such funds to any other person or persons will be recognized by the state unless such assignment or order specifies the amount to be so paid and the purposes for which the assignment or order is given .
such assignment or order shall have attached thereto by endorsement or otherwise the consent of the surety .
no such assignment or order will be binding on the state .
num disputed claims for extra compensation .
claims shall be handled as provided in section num claims .
num time limit for final adjustment .
it is understood that the director will not be bound to consider applications for correction of estimates and payments including assessed liquidated damages after the contractor has signed his final estimate or after num days from the date when the final estimate is submitted to the contractor for his signature or approval unless in the latter case the contractor submits written request within the numday period for adjustment of estimates and payment including assessed liquidated damages .
section num measurement and payment num num final payment .
a final quantities .
within num calendar days after the final inspection as outlined in article num the engineer will prepare the list of final quantities for the various items of work performed .
the engineer will submit by certified letter return receipt requested the list of final quantities to the contractor for his review and concurrence .
the contractor will have num calendar days from the date of receipt to submit either written concurrence of the final quantities or a written statement of disagreement .
the written statement of disagreement shall contain a list item by item of the quantities that the contractor does not agree with and his reasons for disagreement on each items final quantity .
failure by the contractor to furnish the written statement within num calendar days shall be prima facie evidence that the contractor considers the submitted final quantities to be satisfactory and waives any further consideration of the final quantities .
upon notice from the contractor of a dispute in quantities the engineer will promptly attempt to resolve the differences .
if the engineer is not able to reach an agreement with the contractor the matter will be referred to the director for resolution .
the director may refer the dispute to the claims committee for a recommendation before making a final decision .
issues of disputed quantities will not be referred to the claims appeal board .
if the contractor requests the department to make a resurvey which will require additional field andor office work the director may grant the request with the understanding that the contractor will be paid the final survey andor computed quantities whether they be more or less than the original final quantities .
if a resurvey is made at the contractors request the contractor and the department shall share equally the additional cost of the resurvey and the contractors portion of this cost will be deducted from the final estimate .
b claims .
all claims for extra compensation will be handled in accordance with section num claims .
c final estimate documentation .
prior to submission of the final estimate voucher to the contractor for his signing the contractor shall furnish the following documentation as applicable num .
a nonresident contractor must provide a certified statement of good standing from the state department of revenue and the appropriate county andor city authority .
this statement certifies that the nonresident contractor had paid all taxes due and payable to the state of alabama or any political subdivision thereof .
see section num of the alabama code .
num .
proof of publication of advertisement of project completion as per item numc .
num .
a signed affidavit attesting that all known debts for labor and materials used on the project and all approved subcontractual obligations associated with the construction of the project have been paid or will be paid within num days after final payment .
the affidavit shall be on a standard form furnished by the department .
failure by the contractor to furnish any of the above documentation will be cause for the engineer to declare the contractor to be in default as per article num. d payment .
upon resolution of the final quantities all claims and receipt of the above listed documentation and written notice of final acceptance the final estimate voucher will be prepared taking into consideration all prior partial payments .
the engineer will submit by certified letter return receipt requested the final estimate voucher to the contractor for his signing .
the contractor shall have num calendar days after receipt of the voucher to sign and return the same for processing for final payment .
should the contractor fail to sign and return the voucher within the num days he will be declared in default in accordance with paragraph num of article num .
upon receipt of the signed final estimate voucher or default action taken per paragraph num of article num the department will issue a warrant in the amount due the contractor .
the final warrant will be issued to the surety in cases where the contractor is placed in default under article num and the contract is placed in the hands of the surety .
by agreement it is hereby stipulated that the contractor and the surety are forever barred and estopped from any recovery of claims whatsoever against the department under the terms of the contract .
section num claims num section num claims num general .
when filing a claim the contractor shall follow the procedures set forth in this section .
num notice of intent .
in any case where the contractor deems that extra compensation is due him for additional cost not clearly covered in his contract and not ordered by the engineer as extra work as defined herein the contractor shall notify the project manager in writing with copy to the construction engineer of his intention to make claim for such extra compensation .
the written notice of intent shall be furnished to the engineer prior to the time the contested work is started .
oral notification by the contractor and confirmed in writing by the contractor within three calendar days will be accepted as complying with this requirement .
the written notice of intent shall set forth the reasons the contractor believes additional compensation will be due the nature of cost involved and insofar as possible the total amount of the claim .
the contractor hereby agrees to waive any claim for additional compensation if notification as provided in the foregoing is not furnished or the engineer is not provided facilities by the contractor for keeping account of actual costs .
such notice by the contractor and the fact that the engineer has kept account of the cost as aforesaid is not evidence of the validity of the claim .
a separate determination of the validity of the claim will be made by the aldot .
num record keeping .
after giving the aldot a notice of intent to file a claim the contractor shall keep daily records of all costs incurred for affected operations .
these daily records shall identify each operation affected the specific locations where work is affected and the potential effect to the projects schedule .
the aldots project manager will also keep records of all labor material and equipment applicable to affected operations .
on monday or the first work day of each week following the date of the notice of intent to file a claim the contractor shall provide the aldots project manager with the daily records for the preceding week .
if the contractors records indicate costs greater than those kept by the aldot the aldot will meet with the contractor and present its records to the contractor at the meeting .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing within three work days of any inaccuracies noted in or disagreements with the aldots records .
the engineer will review the matter correct any inaccuracies he finds in the aldots records and notify the contractor in writing of his decision .
refusal or failure by the contractor to attend the aforementioned meetings and present his records shall constitute a waiver by the contractor of his claim .
to protect the integrity of the independent records maintained by aldot for comparison with those submitted by the contractor aldot records other than those mentioned above will not be made available to the contractor until after aldots receipt of the contractors complete records documenting the claim aldot will retain possession of the records and provide copying facilities with the contractor reimbursing the aldot for the expense of the copying .
no amendment to the claim shall be made following receipt of the aldots records .
num claims process .
a general .
after the work has been completed on the disputed items of work the contractor shall have num calendar days to submit his claim .
any claim not submitted within this num calendar day period is waived .
the contractor shall submit six copies of the claim containing the required documentation listed in article num to the project manager .
once the claim is received a joint review of the claim will be made by the area and the construction bureau and a written response to the contractor will be made within num calendar days .
if the contractor does not agree with this decision he may request to make a presentation to the claims committee .
this written request along with six additional copies of the original claim shall be made to the project manager by certified mail within num calendar days from the date of the aldots response .
failure to make section num claims num the request within the required time period shall constitute waiver of the claim by the contractor .
b claims committee .
the claims committee will be composed of aldot employees appointed by the director who were not involved in the design or construction of the project .
for federal aid projects the fhwa will be invited to send an observer .
the presentation will convene at the mutual convenience of the aldot and the contractor .
issues not specifically presented in the claim package acted upon by the construction bureau and the area are not subject to consideration by the claims committee .
following the presentation the claims committee will provide a written recommendation to the director .
the claims committees recommendation may be accepted modified or denied by the director .
if accepted the directors decision shall be final non appealable and not subject to judicial or other review except as provided in these specifications .
if the contractor does not accept the decision of the director he may request to make a presentation to the claims appeal board .
this request shall be made in accordance with item numcnum .
below .
c claims appeal board .
num .
composition and appointment .
the claims appeal board is a standing committee created to receive a presentation regarding a claim .
the claims appeal board will hear claims for additional monetary compensation which may include a request for a time extension however standalone time extension requests will not be considered by the board .
the board consists of three primary members who are normally appointed for twoyear terms .
a threemember pool of alternates will be selected from which to provide a substitute for the primary member in the event that the primary member is unable to serve at a particular time or in the event that the director declares the position vacant due to unfitness death illness incapacity conflict of interest or any other circumstance which would make service on the board by that member impossible difficult or unobjective .
the three primary members of the board and three alternates are appointed in the following manner .
the transportation director appoints the primary and one alternate for one position .
the alabama road builders association appoints the primary and one alternate for a second position .
the transportation director and the alabama road builders association jointly appoint the primary and one alternate for a third position .
the jointly appointed primary member will be the board chairman .
the jointly appointed alternate will be the alternate board chairman .
at least one board member must be a licensed professional engineer in the state of alabama .
in the event that an alternate member is elevated to permanently replace a primary member of the board then a new alternate shall be appointed in the same manner as was the departing alternate .
such will also be the case if an alternate position is declared vacant by the director due to death illness incompetence or other reasons .
in the event that both the primary member and the alternate member are unable to serve or must recuse themselves due to conflict of interest etc .
on a particular claims hearing a new member of the board will be appointed in the same manner as the primary member to sit for that particular hearing .
the aldot will notify the contractor in writing of the date of the presentation and the names of the board members .
the contractor will have ten calendar days from receipt of the letter to file with the director by certified mail an objection as to the composition of the board which specifically details the nature of the objection .
the director shall have final authority in determining the composition of the board .
each board member will be paid num per hour for actual time spent on reviewing the plans specifications and claim attending the presentation and for preparing the report to the director .
this payment will cover all compensation and expenses .
num .
presentations .
the contractor may initiate a request for a board presentation bysubmission of a written notice by certified mail to the director within num calendar days from the date of the directors decision on the recommendation of the claims committee .
failure to make the request within the required time period shall constitute waiver of the claim by the contractor .
the board presentation will convene at the mutual convenience of the board the department and the contractor .
issues not specifically presented in the original claims section num claims num package are waived and are not subject to consideration by the board .
the contractor shall not contact or have any discussions with members of the claims appeal board while the claim is pending except during the formal presentation .
the fhwa will be invited to send an observer for federal aid projects .
the contractor shall pay for num percent of the expenses of a board presentation .
the written recommendation of the board will be sent to the director following the presentation .
the claims appeal boards recommendation may be accepted modified or denied by the director .
after receiving the recommendation of the claims appeal board the director has num calendar days to report his decision to the contractor .
the directors decision in the resolution of any and all claims shall be final nonappealable and not subject to judicial or other review .
the decision of the director is binding upon all parties including but not limited to contractors subcontractors and third party beneficiaries .
after the final ruling by the director on a claim a supplemental agreement shall be processed to make payment for any amount deemed payable by the director .
num claim compensation .
a general .
num .
compensable items .
the liability of the department for claims will be limited to the following specifically identified compensable items a .
additional job site labor expenses .
b .
additional costs for materials .
c. additional jobsite overhead .
d. an additional num percent of the total of subitems a b and c above for home office overhead and profit .
e. equipment costs which shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of item numbnum .
f. bond costs .
g. subcontractor costs as determined by and limited to those items identified as payable under subitems a b c d e and f above .
h. administrative allowance to the prime contractor equal to three percent of the first num and one percent of all over num of the total amount for processing a claim on behalf of a subcontractor .
i .
gross receipts tax .
j .
interest that accrues after num calendar days from the date of the governors signature on the supplemental agreement that makes payment for a claim .
num .
noncompensable items .
the department will have no liability for the following specifically identified non compensable items a .
profit in excess of that provided herein .
b .
loss of anticipated profit .
c. labor and equipment inefficiencies .
d. home office overhead in excess of that provided herein .
e. consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency .
f. indirect costs or expenses of any nature .
g. attorneys fees claims preparation expenses or costs of litigation .
h. interest prior to the final resolution of the claim as defined in subitem numanum.j .
above .
b claims for delay .
the department will have no liability for damages due to delay beyond those items which are specifically identified as compensable under subarticle numa above .
equipment costs for equipment involved in a delay claim shall be determined in accordance with the requirements for standby rates as provided in item numbnum .
the department will be liable only for those delay damages caused by or arising from acts or omissions on the part of the department which violate legal or contractual duties owed to the section num claims num contractor by the department .
such delays may constitute a basis for a claim for delay damages andor a request for a time extension .
the contractor assumes the risk of damages from all other causes of delay .
c claims for acceleration .
the department will have no liability for any constructive acceleration unless the department gives express written direction for the contractor to accelerate his effort beyond that required by the original contract .
any acceleration related costs will be handled as extra work as provided in article num .
num required claim documentation .
all claims shall be submitted in writing and shall be sufficient in detail to enable the engineer to ascertain the basis and the amount of each claim .
all information submitted to the department under this article will be used solely for analyzing andor resolving the claim .
as a minimum the following information shall be provided for all claims a a copy of the written notice of potential claim filed for the specific claim by the contractor .
b the date on which actions resulting in the claim occurred or conditions resulting in the claim became evident .
c a detailed factual statement of the claim providing all necessary dates locations and items of work affected by the claim .
d the specific provisions of the contract which support the claim and a statement of the reasons why such provisions support the claim .
e the amount of additional compensation sought and a breakdown of the amount into the categories specified as payable under article num claim compensation .
f the name function and activity of each department official or employee involved in or knowledgeable about facts that give rise to such claim .
g the name function and activity of each contractor or subcontractor official or employee involved in or knowledgeable about facts that give rise to such claim .
h the identification of any pertinent documents and the substance of any material oral communication relating to such claim .
i if an extension of time is also sought the specific days for which it is sought and the basis for such request .
for delay claims in addition to the above a description of the operations that were delayed the reasons for the delay and how they were delayed will be required .
num auditing of claims .
all claims filed against the department shall be subject to audit by the departments external auditor at any time following the filing of such claim .
the audit may begin on ten days notice to the contractor subcontractor or supplier .
the contractor subcontractor or supplier shall cooperate with the auditors .
failure of the contractor subcontractor or supplier to maintain and retain sufficient records to allow the departments auditor to verify the claim shall constitute a waiver of that portion of such claim that can not be verified and shall bar recovery thereunder .
without limiting the generality of the foregoing and as a minimum the auditors shall have available to them the following documents a daily time sheets and foremans daily reports .
b union agreements if any .
c insurance welfare and benefits records .
d payroll register .
e earnings records .
f payroll tax returns .
g material invoices purchase orders and all material and supply acquisition contracts .
h material cost distribution worksheet .
i equipment records list of company equipment rates etc .. j vendor rental agreements and subcontractor invoices .
k subcontractor payment certificates .
l canceled checks payroll and vendors .
m job cost report .
n job payroll ledger .
section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num o general ledger general journal if used and all subsidiary ledgers and journals together with all supporting documentation pertinent to entries made in these ledgers and journals .
p cash disbursements journal .
q financial statements for all years reflecting the operations on this project .
r income tax returns for all years reflecting the operations on this project .
s depreciation records on all company equipment whether such records are maintained by the company involved its accountant or others .
t if a source other than depreciation records is used to develop costs for the contractors internal purposes in establishing the actual cost of owning and operating equipment all such other source documents .
u all documents which reflect the contractors actual profit and overhead during the years this project was being performed and for each of the five years prior to the commencement of this project .
v all documents related to the preparation of the contractors bid including the final calculations on which the bid was based .
w all documents which relate to each and every claim together with all documents which support the amount of damages as to each claim .
x worksheets used to prepare the claim establishing the cost components for items of the claim including but not limited to labor benefits and insurance materials equipment subcontractors and all documents which establish the time periods individuals involved the hours and the rates for the individuals .
section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num goals .
this contract contains a specific goal for the participation of certified dbes .
the goal is expressed as the percentage of the total amount of the contract that is required for dbe participation and is given in the proposal .
this type of participation is defined as race conscious .
if no specific percentage is indicated in the proposal then any dbe firm utilized for work in this contract is defined as race neutral .
the requirements listed in article num and num still apply to contracts with no specific goal .
in addition any participation by dbes above the required goal is also defined as race neutral .
num certification .
the department maintains a current listing of certified dbe firms by categories of work .
the departments certification extends only to the requirements of num cfr num with regard to business size disadvantaged status and ownership and control of business .
the certification does not attest in any way to the capabilities or capacity of any business to perform satisfactorily .
dbe firms that are not on the current certification list must seek approval prior to tendering an offer on any project .
num low bidder submittal dbe utilization plan .
this contract will be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder .
the apparent low bidder must submit within five calendar days of the letting date the following information in writing on form oe num dbe utilization plan provided by the department the name and address of the dbe firm or firms the description of the work to be subcontracted the dollar amount of the work a written commitment from the bidder to use the dbe a written confirmation from the dbe that it is participating in the contract as provided in the commitment .
num failure by low bidder to meet dbe goal .
in the event the apparent low bidder can not meetthe dbe goal the low bidder must provide documentation that good faith efforts were made to meet the goal .
section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num num good faith efforts by low bidder .
a solicitation of dbe participation .
a good faith effort is soliciting through all reasonable and available means e.g .
attendance at prebid meetings advertising written notices corresponding with the aldots dbe program coordinator placing postings on the small business network of bid express the interest of all certified dbes who have the capability to perform the work of the contract .
the bidder must solicit this interest within sufficient time to allow the dbes to respond to the solicitation .
the bidder must determine with certainty if the dbes are interested by taking appropriate steps to follow up initial solicitations .
b selecting portions of the contract work to facilitate dbe participation .
a good faith effort is selecting portions of the work to be performed by dbes in order to increase the likelihood that the dbe goals will be achieved .
this includes where appropriate breaking out contract work items in to economically feasible units to facilitate dbe participation even when the bidder might otherwise prefer to perform these work items with its own forces .
c providing information about contract requirements .
a good faith effort is providing interested dbes with adequate information about the plans specifications and requirements of the contract in a timely manner to assist them in responding to a solicitation .
d negotiating in good faith .
a good faith effort is negotiating in good faith with interested dbes .
it is the bidders responsibility to make a portion of the work available to dbe subcontractors and suppliers and to select those portions of the work or material needs consistent with the available dbe subcontractors and suppliers so as to facilitate dbe participation .
evidence of such negotiation includes the names addresses and telephone numbers of dbes that were considered a description of the information provided regarding the plans and specifications for the work selected for subcontracting and evidence as to why additional agreements could not be reached for dbes to perform the work .
a bidder using good business judgment would consider a number of factors in negotiating with subcontractors including dbe subcontractors and would take a firms price and capabilities as well as contract goals into consideration .
however the fact that there may be some additional costs involved in finding and using dbes is not in itself sufficient reason for a bidders failure to meet the contract dbe goal as long as such costs are reasonable .
also the ability or desire of a bidder to perform the work of a contract with its own organization does not relieve the bidder of the responsibility to make good faith efforts .
bidders are not however required to accept higher quotes from dbes if the price difference is excessive or unreasonable .
e investigating the capabilities of a dbe to perform the work .
a good faith effort is establishing sound reasons based on a thorough investigation of the capabilities of a dbe to perform the work for rejecting a dbe as being unqualified .
the bidders standing within its industry and membership in specific groups organizations or associations and political or social affiliations for example union vs. nonunion employee status are not legitimate causes for the rejection or nonsolicitation of bids in the bidders efforts to meet the project goal .
f providing assistance in obtaining bonding credit and insurance .
a good faith effort is providing assistance to interested dbes in obtaining bonding lines of credit or insurance as required by the dbe or bidder .
g providing assistance in obtaining equipment supplies and materials .
a good faith effort is providing assistance to interested dbes in obtaining necessary equipment supplies materials or related assistance or services .
h utilizing industry governmental and service groups .
a good faith effort is effectively using the services of available minoritywomen contractors groups local state and federal minoritywomen business assistance offices and other organizations as allowed on a casebycase basis to provide assistance in the recruitment and placement of dbes .
num evaluation of low bidders good faith efforts .
the department has established a good faith efforts committee .
section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num if the good faith efforts committee determines the information and documentation from the bidder are satisfactory the bid will be declared responsible .
acceptable good faith efforts may include activities in addition to those that are described in article num and num cfr part num appendix a .
a low bidders good faith efforts on other aldot construction contracts may be considered in determining the acceptability of the low bidders good faith efforts to meet current participation goals .
if the information and documentation are unsatisfactory the bidder will be notified in writing within five days .
the bidder will be given the opportunity to appear before the departments transportation director to present additional evidence of good faith efforts .
the bidder will then be given a written decision on the outcome of the consideration of this evidence .
failure to meet the contract goal or demonstrate good faith efforts will result in the bid being declared to be in default and the bid bond shall be forfeited .
num dbe termination after award of the contract .
a notification of termination .
a prime contractor can not terminate a dbe subcontractor listed on the dbe utilization plan for convenience and then perform the work of the terminated subcontract with its own forces or those of an affiliate without the departments prior written consent .
if a listed dbe subcontractor fails to perform or performs unsatisfactorily the prime contractor will notify the project manager in writing with a copy to the construction engineer stating the reasons for termination with supporting documentation .
b substitution of new dbe for terminated dbe .
if the reasons for termination are satisfactory the prime contractor will be required to obtain a substitute dbe and submit a revised dbe utilization plan or demonstrate good faith efforts as described in articles num and num in trying to obtain a substitute dbe .
if the prime contractor fails or refuses to comply the department reserves the right to issue a warning letter as defined in the dbe violations article num andor an order stopping all or part of the payment and work until satisfactory action has been taken .
num credit for work assigned to meet the dbe goal .
a value of work performed by a dbe .
num .
work done directly by dbe forces .
the dollar amount of that portion of a construction contract that is performed by the dbes own forces will be counted towards meeting the dbe goal .
this dollar amount shall include the cost of supplies and materials obtained by the dbe for the work of the contract including equipment leased by the dbe .
this dollar amount shall not include supplies materials and equipment the dbe purchases or leases from the prime contractor or affiliates of the prime contractor .
the term affiliates is defined in subarticle numa .
num .
fees and commissions charged by a dbe .
the dollar amount of fees or commissions charged by a dbe firm for providing a service such as professional technical consultant or managerial service or for providing bonds or insurance specifically required for the performance of the contract will be counted towards meeting the dbe goal .
the fee shall be reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily paid for similar services .
num .
dbe obtaining a subcontract with lower tier subcontractor .
when a dbe subcontracts part of the work of its subcontract to another firm the value of this work will be counted toward the dbe goal if the dbes subcontractor is a dbe .
work that a dbe subcontracts to a nondbe firm will not be counted toward the dbe goal .
b joint venture .
when a dbe performs as a participant in a joint venture the dollar amount of the contract equal to the distinct clearly defined portion of the work of the contract that the dbe performs with its own forces will be counted toward dbe goal .
c commercially useful function .
num .
requirement for a commercially useful function .
the dollar amount of contract work performed by a dbe will only count towards meeting the dbe goal if the dbe performs a commercially useful function .
section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num num .
definition of a commercially useful function .
a dbe performs a commercially useful function when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing managing and supervising the work involved .
to perform a commercially useful function the dbe must also be responsible with respect to materials and supplies used on the contract for negotiating price determining quality and quantity ordering the material and installing where applicable and paying for the material itself .
the determination of whether or not a dbe is performing a commercially useful function will be based on the amount of work subcontracted industry practices whether the amount the firm is to be paid under the contract is commensurate with the work it is actually performing and the dbe credit claimed for its performance of the work and other relevant factors .
num .
extra participation not a commercially useful function .
a dbe does not perform a commercially useful function if its role is limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction contract or project through which funds are passed in order to obtain the appearance of dbe participation .
the determination of whether or not a dbe is an extra participant will be based on similar transactions particularly those in which dbes do not participate .
num .
insufficient participation not a commercially useful function .
if a dbe does not perform or exercise responsibility for at least num of the total cost of its contract with its own work force or the dbe subcontracts a greater portion of the workthan would be expected on the basis of normal industry practice for the type of work involved the dbe is not performing a commercially useful function .
num .
consideration of trucking as a commercially useful function .
the following factors will be given consideration in determining whether or not a dbe trucking company is performing a commercially useful function a .
responsibility for management and supervision of trucking .
the dbe must be responsible for the management and supervision of the entire trucking operation for which it is responsible on a particular contract and there can not be a contrived arrangement for the purpose of meeting dbe goals .
b .
truck ownership and operation .
the dbe must own and operate at least one fully licensed insured and operational truck used on the contract .
c. credit for transportation services .
the dbe will receive credit for the total value of the transportation services it provides on the contract using trucks it owns insures and operates using drivers it employs .
d. leasing from dbe firm .
the dbe may lease trucks from another dbe firm including an owneroperator who is certified as a dbe .
the dbe who leases trucks from another dbe will receive credit for the total value of the transportation services the lessee dbe provides on the contract .
e. leasing from nondbe firm .
the dbe may also lease trucks from a nondbe firm including an owneroperator .
the dbe who leases trucks from a nondbe is entitled to credit only for the fee or commission it receives as a result of the lease arrangement .
the dbe does not receive credit for the total value of the transportation services provided by the lessee since these services are not provided by a dbe .
f. exclusive use of truck during lease .
to receive credit for trucking it must be clearly shown on a lease that the dbe has exclusive use of and control over the truck .
this does not preclude the leased truck from being used for work for others during the term of the lease with the consent of the dbe so long as the lease gives the dbe absolute priority for use of the leased truck .
leased trucks must display the name and identification number of the dbe .
g. lease agreement documentation a copy of each lease agreement both for dbe firms and nondbe firms must be submitted with the dbe utilization plan if the dbe trucking company intends on utilizing section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num a this type of trucking participation or with the first form dbenum submittal after the lease agreement is executed and utilized on the contract .
num .
consideration of appeal by dbe that work is a commercially useful function .
when it is determined that a dbe is not performing a commercially useful function the prime contractor and the dbe will be given the opportunity to provide documentation to rebut this determination .
the departments decisions concerning commercially useful functions are subject to review by other entities but are not administratively appealable to the usdot .
d materials and supplies counted toward meeting the dbe goal .
num .
dbe manufacturer .
if the materials or supplies are obtained from a dbe manufacturer num of the cost of the materials or supplies will be counted toward meeting the dbe goal .
a dbe manufacturer shall be defined as a firm that operates or maintains a factory or establishment that produces on the premises the materials supplies articles or equipment required under the contract .
num .
dbe regular dealer .
if the materials or supplies are purchased from a dbe regular dealer num of the cost of the materials or supplies will be counted toward meeting the dbe goal .
a dbe regular dealer shall be defined as a firm that owns operates or maintains a store warehouse or other establishment in which the materials supplies articles or equipment of the general character described by the specifications and required under the contract are bought kept in stock and regularly sold or leased to the public in the usual course of business .
to be a dbe regular dealer the firm must be an established regular business that engages as its principal business and under its own name in the purchase and sale or lease of the products in question .
a person may be a dbe regular dealer in such bulk items as petroleum products steel cement gravel stone or asphalt without owning operating or maintaining a place of businessif the person both owns and operates distribution equipment for the products .
any supplementing of regular dealers own distribution equipment shall be by a longterm lease agreement and not on an ad hoc or contractbycontract basis .
in addition the regular dealer with the exception of steel must be certified in accordance with the departments program for the materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
packagers brokers manufacturers representatives or other persons who arrange or expedite transactions are not dbe regular dealers .
num .
brokers with respect to materials or supplies purchased from a dbe which is neither a dbe manufacturer nor a dbe regular dealerthe entire amount of fees or commissions charged for assistance in the procurement of the materials and supplies or fees or transportation charges for the delivery of materials or supplies required on a job site will count toward the dbe goal if the fees are reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services .
the cost of the materials and supplies will not be counted toward the dbe goal .
e certification at the time of the execution of the contract .
if a firm is not currently certified as a dbe at the time of the execution of the contract the firms participation in the contract will not be counted toward the dbe goal .
when a prime contractor has made a commitment to using an ineligible firm one decertified by the department and a subcontract has not been executed before the department issued the decertification notice work by the ineligible firm does not count toward the contract goal .
the prime contractor must meet the contract dbe goal with an eligible dbe firm or demonstrate that he has made good faith efforts to do so .
if a prime contractor has executed a subcontract with an ineligible firm before the department issued the decertification notice the prime contractor may continue to use the firm on the contract and may continue to count the firms participation toward the contract dbe goal .
section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num f payments considered applicable to the dbe goal .
the participation of a dbe subcontractor toward meeting the dbe goal will only be counted toward the goal after the compensation for the work has been has been paid to the dbe .
g reporting dbe performance .
num .
monthly estimate report .
to document the dbe participation for the contract the prime contractor shall furnish the project manager an aldot form dbenum for each estimate period .
in the case of contracts with more than one project a form dbenum shall be submitted for each project estimate .
the prime contractor shall provide the required data for each dbe active on the project during the estimate period .
if no dbe was active during the time period such indication should be made on the form .
form dbenum shall be submitted on all federal aid projects regardless of whether or not the contract contains a specific dbe goal .
the form dbenum shall be submitted within sixty calendar days of the close of the estimate period for which it applies .
failure to furnish the form dbenum in a timely manner may result in the withholding of further monthly estimates until the delinquent information has been submitted .
num .
monthly estimate documentation .
for dbe manufacturers dealers and broker including any feecommission service work a copy of the paid invoice shall be submitted with the dbenum form work for which the work performed and services provided applies .
for dbe truckers who haul materials from a commercial facility such as a quarry to the plant for stocking purposes for the production of materials for the contract a copy of each haul ticket shall be provided to the project manager with the dbenum form .
this documentation is to verify the work performed for this contract .
num .
final report .
prior to the submission of the final estimate voucher for signing the prime contractor shall furnish a final form dbenum for each dbe subcontractor .
this final form dbenum shall be submitted to document any changes in the quantities of work performed by the dbe since the project completion due to the final quantities review and resulting payment adjustments .
this form shall be submitted with the information required in subarticle numc .
num .
certification of actual payments form .
prior to the submission of the final estimate voucher for signing the prime contractor shall furnish a certification of actual payments to dbe firms form for each dbe subcontractor .
this form shall be submitted with the signature of an authorized representative of the dbe in order to document the total amount paid to the dbe firm as indicated on the final form dbenum .
in the event that the dbe firm has gone out of business and is unavailable to sign the form the prime contractor shall submit copies of the subcontractor estimates and cancelled checks verifying the amount paid to the dbe firm .
this form shall be submitted with the information required in subarticle numc .
num dbe violations .
a descriptions of violations .
num .
violations by bidders and prime contractors .
possible violations by bidders and prime contractors include but are not limited to failure to provide the dbe utilization plan within five calendar days of the letting date failure to meet the contract goal failure to make good faith efforts deleting dbe subcontractors for convenience improper dbe participation credit reports continued failure to furnish form dbenum reports failure to comply with department decisions and directives concerning dbe activities and fraud .
num .
violations by dbe subcontractors .
possible violations by dbe subcontractors include those listed in num cfr part num as well as failure to fulfill contract commitments and negotiations .
num .
determination of violations .
section num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num these violations are only possible examples and not all inclusive .
the department reserves the right to determine exact violations and the extent of each violation on a case bycase basis .
b violations prior to award of the contract .
failure by the apparent low bidder to provide the dbe utilization plan within the time frame specified or failure of the apparent low bidder to make and document good faith efforts will result in the contract not being awarded to that bidder and forfeiture of its bid bond .
the next low bidder will become the new low bidder and will have five calendar days from notification by the department to provide the dbe utilization plan .
failure to provide the required dbe utilization plan or to make and document good faith efforts will result in the contract not being awarded to that bidder and forfeiture of its bid bond .
if the contract is awarded to the next low bidder the original low bidder will be prohibited from doing any work relating to the contract either as subcontractor or in any other capacity .
these restrictions shall apply to any other name under which the same person individual partnership company firm corporation association cooperative affiliate or other legal entity may be operating and in which the principal owners are involved .
c violations while the contract is in effect .
for the first violation of the dbe requirements a letter will be written to the prime contractor andor the dbe if applicable citing the violation and warning that failure to rectify the violation or further violations will result in disqualification as outlined in subarticle numb .
the second violation will result in the prime contractor andor the dbe subcontractor being disqualified as outlined in subarticle numb for an indefinite period .
the disqualification may be reviewed each six months if requested in writing by the disqualified firm .
the third violation will result in the prime contractor andor the dbe subcontractor being disqualified as outlined in subarticle numb for an indefinite period .
the disqualification will be for at least one year .
it may be reviewed after one year if requested in writing by the disqualified firm .
an exception to the above is that an open and flagrant violation .
the prime contractor andor the dbe subcontractor will not be issued a warning letter and the prime contractor andor dbe subcontractor will be summarily disqualified as outlined in subarticle numb for at least six months .
the disqualification may be reviewed after such time if requested in writing by the disqualified firm .
if applicable the dbe subcontractors continued status as a certified dbe will be recommended to the departments dbe review committee for review .
section num clearing and grubbing num division num earthwork section num clearing and grubbing num description .
clearing and grubbing shall be the removal and disposal of vegetation trees shrubs vines stumps roots etc .
and other objects trash refuse debris etc .
within designated limits .
num materials .
herbicides allowed for use shall be approved by the department .
only herbicides listed in the aldot manual for roadside vegetation management shall be used .
num construction requirements .
a control of erosion and stormwater runoff .
the requirements for the control of erosion and stormwater runoff are given in article num and section num .
these requirements shall be implemented prior to the beginning of initial clearing operations .
b work limits .
the engineer will designate the location and extent of right of way lines easement lines and construction limits .
work limits may be designated by the engineer within right of way lines easement lines and construction limits when limited work is required .
the contractor shall not exceed the maximum limit established for the exposure of erodible material .
c vegetation designated to remain undisturbed .
the contractor shall not damage vegetation and terrain that the engineer designates to remain undisturbed .
damage shall be repaired without additional compensation as directed by the engineer .
d disposal of materials .
the contractor shall dispose of all removed materials .
the contractor shall comply with all local state and federal laws and ordinances pertaining to disposal .
the contractor shall submit a plan for the satisfactory disposal of materials .
clearing shall not begin until the engineer accepts the plan as having sufficient detail .
the plan shall include an acceptable means for the treatment of disposal areas so as not to present an unsightly appearance create a public nuisance or create future maintenance problems for the department .
the disposal plan shall provide for the satisfactory disposal of biodegradable materials and rubbish within num days after accumulation unless a longer period is authorized in writing by the engineer to prevent the infestation of pests .
disposal by the burning of perishable materials will be permitted only when authorized in accordance with the requirements given in articles num and num .
burning will not be allowed on the state right of way unless approved in writing by the engineer .
disposal by the indiscriminate dumping of materials with or without the property owners consent is not satisfactory disposal .
the contractor shall obtain written permission from the property owner for any disposal area .
a copy of the written permission from the property owner shall be submitted to the engineer prior to disposal .
the use of mechanical brush clippers or other recycling methods may be considered for approval .
section num clearing and grubbing num e clearing and grubbing pay item numa .
num .
clearing .
clearing shall be the removal of vegetation on and above the ground surface within the construction limits .
clearing shall also be the selective removal removal designated by the engineer of vegetation beyond the construction limits to the limits of the right of way or easement lines .
trash refuse and debris shall be removed with the removal of vegetation .
num .
grubbing .
the areas within the limits of construction shall be grubbed as directed by the engineer and as follows .
grubbing within fill areas shall be the complete removal regardless of depth in the ground of vegetation and other objects where any part of the vegetation or object is within num foot num mm of the ground surface .
grubbing outside of actual foundation excavation lines at bridge sites and channel changes shall be limited as directed by the engineer so that stumps may be left in place to aid in erosion control .
grubbing in all other areas within the construction limits shall be the complete removal of vegetation and other objects where any part of the vegetation or object is visible at the ground surface .
num .
clearing and grubbing at bridge construction sites .
when a pay item is not given on the plans for the clearing and grubbing at bridge construction sites the contractor shall clear and grub the entire width of the right of way without extra compensation .
clearing and grubbing shall begin num foot num mm before the beginning of any part of a structure usually the structure wings end bents or abutments and shall end num foot num mm beyond the end of any part of the structure .
f selective clearing pay item numb .
selective clearing shall comply with the requirements shown on the plans and shall be performed as directed by the engineer .
g clearing pay item numc .
num .
required clearing .
the work of clearing is usually required for the removal of trees bushes trash and refuse along the right of way where earthwork will not be required .
clearing shall be the removal of trees and bushes and possibly the chipping of timber and the spreading of the chips .
any areas where chipping and spreading are allowed or required will be shown on the plans .
clearing shall also be the removal and disposal of trash refuse and debris .
num .
damage caused by removal operations .
offroad equipment shall not travel on be parked on or operate on the wearing surface of the roadway .
the contractor shall perform the work as directed by the engineer to minimize the damage done to the existing terrain .
damage to the paved or grassed shoulders shall be repaired by the contractor without extra compensation .
when conditions exist where deep rutting or other grade disturbances are caused by the operation of machinery work shall cease or alternate methods shall be chosen to complete the work .
any damaged areas shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
num .
cutting down trees .
where trees can not be felled without endangering traffic encroachment on the roadway injury to other trees structures or property they shall be cut down in sections .
num .
mowing .
areas that have crosssectional slopes of num or flatter shall be mowed to a height of num inches num mmmax .
with a rotary type cutter in one continuous operation after trees and underbrush have been removed .
mowing shall be completed prior to the final acceptance of the project .
num .
areas where the chipping of timber and spreading of chips are required .
areas where the chipping of timber and spreading the chips is allowed or required will be shown on the plans .
tree trunks limbs and bushes shall be cut into chips using a chipping section num clearing and grubbing num machine .
the average largest dimension of a chip shall not be greater than num inches num mm .
the chips shall be loosely dispersed to eliminate any accumulation of a continuous blanket layer .
the contractor shall chip any debris created by the clearing operation and any preexisting debris such as dead trees and limbs to leave the area suitable for mowing .
num .
removal by the end of the workday .
tree trunks and limbs num inches num mm or greater in diameter shall be removed from the project site or chipped if required by the end of the workday on which they are cut .
num .
removal of stumps .
stumps shall be removed to the groundline or below .
removal shall be accomplished by cutting or grinding .
additionally hardwood tree stumps shall be removed to a minimum depth of num foot num mm below the ground line or treated with an aldot approved dyed herbicide designated for cut stump treatment immediately after cutting or grinding .
num method of measurement .
a general .
for pay item numa the area to be cleared and grubbed will include the entire area within the construction limits right of way lines and easement lines and will be measured as one lump sum unit .
an approximate number of acres hectares will be given in the pay item description .
there will be no measurement of the clearing and grubbing required at bridge construction sites where there is no pay item for this work shown on the plans .
for pay item numb the roadside areas required to be selectively cleared will be measured in acres hectares computed from surface measurements of the area cleared .
for pay item numc roadside areas required to be cleared will be measured as one lump sum unit .
b partial payment item numa .
the estimated percentage of the total area cleared and grubbed each month will be multiplied by the contractors bid price for item numa .
these percentage payments will be made each month work is performed on this item until the entire project has been cleared and grubbed .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
for item numa clearing and grubbing will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete and maintain the work until acceptance of the project .
where the limits of construction are shown on the plans to extend beyond the beginning or end of the project payment for the clearing and grubbing of these areas shall be included in the contract price .
if the location of the limits of construction right of way lines or easement lines result in changes in areas from those shown on the plans payment will be handled as extra work as defined in article num .
for item numb selective clearing will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete and maintain the work until acceptance of the project .
for item numc clearing will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for cutting removal of debris chipping spreading of chips bushhogging herbicide repairing of damage to the existing ground surface including blading topsoil seeding etc .
and for furnishing all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete and maintain the work until acceptance of the project .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa clearing grubbing maximum allowable bid _______ per acre hectare approximately ______ acres hectares per lump sum numb selective clearing per acre hectare numc clearing per lump sum section num closing water wells num section num closing water wells num description .
this section shall cover the work of closing water wells at the locations shown on the plans or directed all in conformance with plan details these specifications and as approved by the engineer .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the requirements set forth in division num materials .
num construction requirements .
the closure of a water well shall be in accordance with the requirements of the alabama department of environmental management adem .
closing water wells may include removal and disposal of pumps pipe well casing andor other parts of the well if required in order to close the well .
the well shall be sealed with a sealing material meeting adem requirements .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of closing water wells measured for payment will be the number of separate units ordered and accepted .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment for closing water well at designated locations will be made at the contract price per each which shall include removal and disposal of pumps pipe well casing andor other parts of the well if required furnishing and placing the sealing material to seal the well excavation and subsequent backfill incident to well closure and furnishing all materials tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa closing water well per each section num removal and relocation of structures num description .
the work under this section shall cover the disposal or the reestablishment of structures such as buildings dwellings etc .
as designated on the plans or in the proposal .
this work shall also include all appurtenances such as out buildings fences walks driveways utility facilities septic tanks other manmade objects established lawns shrubs and designated trees associated with the structure .
the department assumes no responsibility for furnishing building sites for structures other than those designated for relocation by the plans and assumes no responsibility for moving permits .
num materials .
any material necessary for the reestablishment of a relocated structure shall meet the requirements of applicable building codes and regulations .
in all cases new material shall be equal to or better than the material in the original structure .
num construction requirements .
a laws rules regulations and ordinances .
the contractor shall comply with all federal state city and county laws rules regulations and ordinances covering moving reestablishing demolition or disposal of structures and appurtenances .
any utility service requiring disconnection or reconnection of a structure shall be done in accordance with the utilitys regulations and shall meet the approval of the utility .
section num removal and relocation of structures num b removal of structures .
num .
removal .
removal of a structure shall be the demolition and disposal of the structure identified in the contract .
it shall also be the restoration of the area of removal to a stable uniformly graded ground surface .
at least ten workdays prior to removal of any structure the contractor must file adem form num with the appropriate regulatory authority as designated by the form instructions .
num .
asbestos .
a .
examination of structure for asbestos before structure removal .
the contractor shall determine if asbestos is present in or on a structure before it is removed .
the structure shall be examined for the presence of asbestos in accordance with the rules and regulations of the governmental agencies that have regulatory jurisdiction over the work adem osha adph etc .. an alabama accredited asbestos inspector must conduct a thorough inspection of each structure and the report generated shall be submitted by the contractor to the engineer and the above described regulatory authority .
there will be no direct payment for the cost of the investigation required to determine whether or not asbestos is present in or on the structure .
the determination of the presence of asbestos shall be a subsidiary obligation of pay item numa removal of structures .
b .
credentials for removal and disposal of asbestos .
the removal and disposal of asbestos shall be done by contractors or subcontractors that have accreditation credentials from the alabama safe state environmental programs and are certified by adem as asbestos removal contractors .
c. removal of asbestos from a structure .
if asbestos is found in a structure the contractor shall obtain three price quotes for the cost of the removal and disposal of the asbestos .
the price quotes shall be submitted to the engineer for the selection of the contractor or subcontractor for the removal work .
the cost of the removal work will be paid for as extra work in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
num .
septic tanks .
the removal and abandonment of septic tanks shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the alabama department of public health adph .
direct payment will not be made for pumping the contents of the tank prior to removal of the septic tank and the sand or aggregate backfill that may be required to meet regulatory requirements for backfilling abandoned septic tanks .
if the removal of septic tanks is not shown to be required on the plans and the tanks are required to be removed by the engineer payment for the removal will be made as extra work in accordance with the requirements given in article num. c relocation of structures .
num .
general .
no structure under this classification shall be relocated until it has been inspected by the engineer in company with the contractor and the owners andor lessees and its actual condition determined .
an itemized written report of the condition of the structure at the time of such inspection shall be prepared by the contractor and signed by the engineer contractor owners andor lessees and a copy given to all parties concerned .
photographs from negatives not less than num inches num mm by num inches num mm in size shall be made of the structure as directed by the engineer .
prints of the photographs shall be attached to and become a part of each copy of the report before the report is signed .
once a contractor begins moving a structure he shall vigorously and continuously prosecute its moving and reestablishment in such a manner that the owner or lessee will be inconvenienced the shortest time possible .
if the work is not expedited the engineer may order all work stopped or withhold estimates until the work on the structure in question is satisfactorily completed .
structures that are moved to new locations or elevations shall be set upon substantial foundations conforming to the new elevations and sites .
sound materials salvaged from the same unit may be used supplemented by necessary new materials similar to those in the section num removal and relocation of structures num existing foundations .
any damage or injury occasioned by moving shall be repaired by the contractor without additional compensation .
certain structures may be designated to be cut off and reestablished at the right of way line .
care shall be taken to avoid damage to the remainder of the structure and any damage thereto shall be repaired by the contractor without additional compensation .
the cutoff portion of the building outside the right of way shall be braced and refaced along the right of way line as directed using new or suitable materials salvaged from the same unit .
the closure of a septic tank shall be done in accordance with the requirements given for removal of structures .
established shrubs and lawns along with designated trees are considered a part of a structure relocation hence they shall be either transplanted or replaced in kind .
transplanting procedures shall be consistent with details noted in these specifications for transplanting trees and shrubs and for grassing work .
num .
structure release .
structures and appurtenances shall not be considered satisfactorily relocated until the contractor has furnished the engineer with a release from the owners and lessees if applicable prepared on the form prescribed by the department for the purpose .
this release from the owners and the lessees shall not preclude the engineer from inspecting the moved structure and requiring any corrective work to be done that he considers necessary .
no disposition or modification of the structure other than that shown on the plans will be made by any agreement between the contractor and owner without the prior written approval of the engineer .
if the owners or lessees of any structure refuse to execute a release for the contractor and if after inspection the engineer determines that the contractor has done all that could be reasonably expected to be done to affect a satisfactory removal and reestablishment of the structure the engineer may certify such upon the departments form which will be sufficient to release monies due to the contractor however such certification and release of monies to the contractor will in no way be construed as a release of the liability or responsibility of the contractor under subarticle numa but shall be a release only for the purpose of releasing monies to the contractor .
d disposal of debris and cleanup of site after removal and relocation .
disposal of debris and materials not allowed for reuse shall be done in accordance with the requirements for disposal given in subarticle numd .
after the removal of a structure has been completed the contractor shall grade the area of removal to produce a stable uniform ground surface .
when clearing and grubbing is not a part of the contract the contractor shall obtain approval from the engineer to cut trees that interfere with structure removal or relocation .
if allowed by the engineer stone bricks broken concrete concrete blocks and concrete masonry of all types may be used to fill low areas basements and other depressions except abandoned septic tanks .
num method of measurement .
the removal or relocation of structures will be measured per each structure removed or relocated .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment will be made at the contract unit price which shall be payment in full for the removal and disposal off the right of way or the relocation and reestablishing of the structures including utilities all appurtenances the furnishing of any materials needed equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete all work required by this section .
this shall include all utility deposits bonds tiein fees etc .
and other actions necessary to reestablish the structure in an operable condition .
any site grading including basement excavation for structures shall be considered a part of the structure unless otherwise provided by plan details .
the removal or relocation of any or all structures may be deleted from the contract at the discretion of the engineer .
section num removal of miscellaneous existing drainage and other facilities num b payment will be made under item no .
numa removal of structures structure no .
per each numb relocation of structures structure no .
per each section num removal of miscellaneous existing drainage and other facilities num description .
the work under this section shall cover the removal wholly or in part and the satisfactory salvaging or disposal of miscellaneous facilities and obstructions which will not be permitted to remain within the right of way except those items removed and disposed of under other sections of these specifications .
salvaging of materials for reuse by the state will be required only when such is designated by the plans or proposal otherwise the materials shall become the property of the contractor .
quantities and limits of this type work indicated on the plans are approximate only subject to the engineers evaluation of the actual site condition .
num materials .
all new material required shall meet the applicable requirements of division num materials .
num construction requirements .
each existing bridge or portion thereof requires a removal plan to be submitted to the construction bureau prior to starting demolition .
no demolition work can start until the removal plan has been accepted and distributed .
no existing facility shall be removed or closed to traffic until satisfactory provisions for the passage of traffic have been made and approved by the engineer .
on navigable waterways provisions shall also be made for waterway traffic in accordance with u.s. coast guard andor corps of engineers rules and regulations .
the coast guard and corps of engineers shall be given notification of the dates and work procedures planned for the removal of existing bridges over navigable waterways .
the contractor shall give this notification at least num calendar days prior to the date of the beginning of the removal work .
use of methods or equipment which might damage completed structures structures to be retained or portions of structures will not be permitted .
blasting will not be permitted without prior written approval of the engineer .
blasting if approved shall be in accordance with article num .
where portions of existing pavement curb and gutter walks and similar items are to remain and join the surface of the new work they shall be removed to an existing joint or cut off to a neat line with vertical face using saws or other approved equipment that will not damage the retained portion of the work .
pipe that is not to be salvaged shall be removed or if concrete it may be broken up in place .
in removing manholes inlets etc .
any live sewers connected with them shall be satisfactorily bypassed rebuilt and reconnected without additional compensation .
removing railway or street railway tracks shall include removal of all rails paving switches frogs guardrails ties track encasement and other appurtenances .
ballast and concrete foundations shall be included unless otherwise directed .
removing pipe headwalls shall include removal and disposal of the encased joint of pipe unless otherwise directed .
rubble shall be removed in accordance with the requirements shown on the plans .
when the plans provide for using old bridge substructures or parts of them as permanent parts of a new structure only those portions shall be removed which are so indicated on the plans .
all portions of existing structures including debris above the bed of the stream or ground surface shall be removed unless otherwise specified on the plans .
concrete and masonry piers or abutments under embankment may be either removed entirely or broken down to an elevation of at least num feet num m below subgrade .
section num removal of miscellaneous existing drainage and other facilities num walls and foundations not needed shall be removed to an elevation at least num feet num mm below excavation limits in excavation areas num feet num m below subgrade in embankment areas and to ground level or as directed elsewhere .
all trenches and excavations resulting from the removal or breaking down of old culverts or structures shall be filled with suitable materials placed in accordance with section num .
any reinforcing steel to be left in place to serve as dowels or ties shall not be injured by the removal of the concrete .
such dowels or ties shall be cleaned and straightened or bent as required to fit new work .
removing cable guiderail shall include removal and disposal of all related items cables end anchors footings posts concrete pads hardware etc .
associated with the cable guiderail system .
num disposal of materials .
a designated salvable materials .
num .
where designated on the plans or in the proposal to be salvaged all sound materials having salvage value shall be carefully removed without undue splitting or breakage and all bolts nails etc .
shall be removed therefrom .
the use of equipment or facilities which might damage members or portions of the structure to be salvaged will not be permitted .
the contractor will be held responsible for any damage due to his negligence in removing salvageable materials and a sum fixed by the engineer as the value of the material so damaged shall be deducted from the contractors estimate .
no salvaged material shall be used in the construction of the new work except where so provided on the plans or in the proposal the contractor shall not make temporary use of any materials or parts from old structures without the written permission of the engineer and any materials and parts so used shall be left at a designated point at the same site and in substantially the same condition in which they were removed from the old structure .
num .
structural steel timber or other salvable materials removed from old structures unless otherwise specified or directed shall be stored in a neat and presentable manner on blocking at designated locations within the right of way .
structures or portions thereof which are specified on the plans or in the proposal to be salvaged for reerection shall be stored in separate piles .
special attention is directed to handling of salvaged bridge materials in that steel superstructures and frames unless otherwise provided shall be match marked and dismantled in an approved workmanlike manner and removed carefully so as to avoid damage .
num .
guardrail designated for salvage shall be carefully dismantled in condition for reerection and rail cable hardware and posts stored as directed at accessible points for removal .
cable shall be rolled or spooled in suitable condition for hauling .
num .
cable guiderail designed for salvage shall be carefully dismantled in condition to be reused and cable hardware and posts stored as directed at accessible points for removal or as directed in the plans .
cable shall be rolled rolled or spooled in suitable condition for hauling .
b undesignated materials .
when the plans or proposal do not provide for the salvaging of materials from existing roadway or bridge structures designated for removal all materials from such become the property of the contractor to be removed or disposed of by methods of his selection provided such does not conflict with other requirements of the specifications or will damage any existing work or facilities to be incorporated into the work .
c disposal of materials off the right of way .
material and debris removed from the right of way shall be disposed of in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
indiscriminate dumping of these materials on abutting property with or without the owners consent will not be considered satisfactory disposal .
the contractor must comply with all local state and federal laws and ordinances pertaining to the type material being disposed of and secure and submit written permission from the property owner for any disposal area .
in addition he shall include in the disposal plan an acceptable plan for treatment of the area so as not to present an unsightly appearance create a public nuisance or incur future maintenance problems for the department .
section num removal of miscellaneous existing drainage and other facilities num num method of measurement .
each old bridge or portion thereof each box culvert or culvert type structure exclusive of pipe culverts to be removed and for which direct payment is to be made will be designated on the plans by its station number and description and for the purpose of measurement and payment will be considered a complete and separate unit .
the quantity of plain or reinforced concrete pavement plain or reinforced concrete base and cement treated base removed including overlying surface will be measured and the surface area computed in square yards square meters .
the quantity of other surfaces and bases removed will be measured by cross sections as unclassified excavation .
removing concrete or stone curb combination curb and gutter gutter and valley gutter including any overlying surface material will be measured in linear feet meters .
concrete sidewalk and concrete crosswalk removed as directed will be surface measured and the area computed in square yards square meters .
the length of culvert pipe removed will be measured in linear feet meters .
the quantity of pipe headwalls manholes inlets and catch basins removed will be the number of separate units .
the removal of rubble as described on the plans will be measured as one lump sum unit .
guardrail removed as directed will be measured in linear feet meters along the top of the rail in place between extreme limits of an installation .
railway track removed will be measured in linear feet meters of separate tworail track .
a turnout will be measured as a separate tworail track beginning at the point of frog .
where rails have previously been removed removal of the remaining crossties concrete foundation and all remaining track appurtenances will not be measured and paid for but considered as a part of clearing and grubbing .
cable guiderail removal will be measured in linear feet meter along the length of the top cable from anchor to anchor .
removal shall include all items associated with the cable guiderail system .
no additional costs will be paid for removal of associated items of the cable guiderail system .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
when the contract contains a unit price for any pay item listed in this section such item will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall include cutting removal excavation and subsequent backfill incident to removal and furnishing all materials tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work as described .
it shall also include necessary and required salvage preservation storage on the right of way or disposal of the materials all as provided herein .
the unit price for removal of concrete pavement or concrete base shall include removal of any overlying surface .
payment for removal or partial removal of old bridges at designated stations will be made at the lump sum contract price for each bridge removed or partially removed as specified .
the contract unit price for the removal of rubble shall be full compensation for loading hauling and disposing of the rubble described on the plans .
payment for removal of all box culverts and culvert type structures will be made at the lump sum contract price for each culvert which shall include removal or partial removal as specified on the plans .
material required for backfilling structures removed in excess of overlying material excavated in their removal will be paid for at the contract unit price for excavation of the classification used .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa removal of old bridge station _____ per lump sum numb removal of old box culvert station _____ per lump sum numc removing per square yard square meter numd removing per linear foot meter section num removal and reinterment of graves num nume removing per each numg removal of rubble per lump sum concrete sidewalk concrete pavement concrete crosswalks concrete bases etc .
pipe guardrail curb curb gutter railroad tracks cable guiderail etc .
headwalls inlets etc .
section num removal and reinterment of graves num description .
this section shall cover the services necessary to remove disinter and reinter graves or remains found within the limits of the highway right of way .
the removal disinterment and reinterment shall be in compliance with all state county andor city rules and regulations .
reinterment shall be in approved established cemeteries or burial grounds .
the number of graves specified in the contract is approximate only the actual number may vary and will depend upon a close investigation of the existing burial site during preliminary grading operations .
only the number of graves actually moved as directed will be paid for at the contract unit price and no claim will be allowed for extra compensation due to overruns or underruns of the items provided under this section .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use in connection with work under this item must be acceptable to the engineer and suitable for the particular work with which it is associated .
num construction details .
a general .
in areas where graves or cemeteries have been located or suspected the engineer may direct the contractor to perform such clearing and grubbing stripping or excavation work as may be deemed necessary in a manner which will allow an examination of the area to ascertain if all graves have been properly located .
after the area has been checked and disinterment of the graves or remains properly accomplished the engineer will authorize the contractor to commence full grading operations .
cost of any clearing and grubbing stripping andor excavation to accomplish the above details shall be considered as a part of the type work under which it is performed and no additional compensation will be considered .
b disinterment and reinterment .
the removal disinterment and reinterment of remains shall be performed under the supervision of a qualified undertaker licensed to practice in the state of alabama .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all of the necessary permits required by state county or city authorities prior to beginning work under this section .
in addition the following services are considered to be essential and a part of the requirements of this operation num .
providing for ministerial service at the place of disinterment and reinterment .
num .
furnishing of a grave space at an approved established burial ground unless otherwise noted on the plans or proposal .
num .
providing for proper legal notices for disinterment and reinterment .
num .
providing for opening and closing of each grave at the place of disinterment and reinterment .
num .
providing for the displacement of the existing burial box or in case deterioration of the original box has occurred providing a satisfactory new burial box for the displacement of the remains .
num .
providing for the relocation of existing grave markers andor monuments or in case none exist providing a granite grave marker of at least num inches num mm by num inches num mm by num inches num mm .
section num mailbox reset num num method of measurement .
the removal disinterment and reinterment of graves when provided by the plans or proposal shall be measured in individual grave units with each grave actually removed and relocated considered as a separate individual unit .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
each grave directed and actually removed and reintered shall be paid for at the contract unit price per each which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials and services necessary to properly remove and reinter the remains on an approved site furnished by the contractor or when provided by plans or proposal reinterment on a designated site all in accordance with state county andor city rules and regulations and for furnishing all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa removal and reinterment of grave per each numb removal and reinterment of grave at designated site per each section num mailbox reset num description .
this section shall cover the work of permanently resetting mailboxes required to be removed from their original position inside the right of way .
num materials .
all new mailboxes and new support materials furnished shall meet the requirements shown on the plans .
the contractor may reuse existing mailboxes or support materials if approved by the engineer .
other materials shall be returned to the property owner if requested or disposed of by the contractor .
num construction requirements .
all work shall be done in a workmanlike manner in accordance with the requirements of local codes ordinances and u.s .
postal service regulations .
any materials lost or rendered unfit for reuse on account of negligence or improper handling by the contractor shall be replaced by him without additional compensation .
num method of measurement .
the number of mailbox reset installations will be the number of each type installation i.e .
single double or multiple permanently reset as directed and accepted .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for mailboxes removed only and not reset or for mailboxes removed and temporarily reset .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the number of mailbox reset installations measured as above provided will be paid for at the contract unit price each which shall be payment in full for all excavation backfilling resetting mailboxes and providing and installing all necessary mailboxes hardware and support materials and for all equipment tools materials and labor necessary to complete the work .
materials required for and the construction of the specified turnout will be paid for under other items of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa mailbox reset per each specify single double or multiple etc .
section num excavation and embankment num section num excavation and embankment num description .
the work under this section shall cover the excavation hauling disposal or compaction of all material not being removed under some other item which is encountered within the limits of the work and is necessary for all construction in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
all excavation covered in this section will be classified as unclassified excavation muck excavation channel excavation or borrow excavation as described in this section .
attention is directed to the fact that the roadbed must be treated by one of the methods specified in section num num or num before the placement of an overlying subbase base or paving structure will be permitted .
num materials .
a general .
all excavation within the right of way or easement limits will be known as roadway and drainage excavation and will be classified as unclassified excavation muck excavation or channel excavation .
excavation outside of the right of way or easement limits will be classified as borrow excavation .
b roadway and drainage excavation .
soils data indicated on the plans is for estimating purposes only and the department does not guarantee the accuracy thereof .
material designated for removal under embankment areas will be reclassified according to its condition at the time of removal .
num .
unclassified excavation .
unclassified excavation shall consist of the excavation of all materials of whatever character encountered in the work except channel excavation or muck excavation when such items are included as separate pay items in the plans or proposal .
num .
channel excavation .
channel excavation shall consist of the excavation removal and disposition as noted or directed of all material necessary to provide inlet and outlet ditches or channels for drainage structures in accordance with plan details .
however unless specifically designated by plan details such excavation will be classified as unclassified excavation .
num .
muck excavation .
material unsuitable for immediate reuse due to organic content saturated to the extent it is somewhat fluid and must be moved by dragline dredge or other similar type equipment which operates outside the area being excavated will be classified as muck .
unless explicitly authorized otherwise by the engineer before material is classified by the engineer as muck the contractor will be required to demonstrate that the material can not be removed by conventional methods and equipment normally used in the unclassified excavation operation .
conventional equipment includes all types of scrapers and dozers .
if no item for muck excavation is provided in the plans or proposal such excavation will be classified as unclassified excavation and payment will be made as outlined in item numanum .
c borrow excavation .
prior approval of all borrow sources must be given however this does not relieve the contractor from the full responsibility for the quality and quantity of the material used .
materials for borrow shall be in accordance with the following num .
embankment .
materials furnished for embankments above water and below subgrade shall be any stable material which can be compacted to the specified density .
num .
improved roadbed .
section num excavation and embankment num materials furnished for the improved roadbed shall be any stable material meeting the requirements of soil classification anum anum anum or anum as determined by aashto m num within the following limitations .
a .
materials in the anum or anum classification shall shall be submitted to the central materials and tests soils laboratory for a resilient modulus test .
the resilient modulus test results will then be evaluated by the materials and tests engineer to determine the suitability for use as improved roadbed .
b .
materials of the cherty or float gravel type which have a maximum of num passing the number num num mm sieve and num passing the num inch num mm sieve will not be required to conform to the soil classification noted above .
c. industrial waste a residue from a manufacturing operation may be used provided the material is taken from cold piles which are approved by the materials and tests engineer and the material is broken down by roadway operations or pit operations or crushing methods to allow approximately num percent passing the num inch num mm sieve .
however isolated oversize particles up to a maximum diameter of num inch num mm less than the thickness of the compacted layer may be used provided such does not exceed num percent of the weight mass based on num square yard num m num inches num mm deep .
the weight mass of num square yard num m will be calculated on the weight mass per cubic foot cubic meter of the material .
this material shall have a unit weight mass of not less than num pounds per cubic foot num kgm dry as determined by aashto t num method a or c and conform to the following composition table composition sieve passing by weight mass num num mm num liquid limit l.l .
num max .
plasticity index p.i .
num max .
cbr num min .
material meeting this specification will not be required to conform to any soil classification noted above .
num .
underwater backfill material .
material for underwater backfill shall be selected sandy material of an anum classification or an approved anum or anum material of which not more than num percent passes the number num num m sieve .
a rocky material that will form a firm foundation when deposited under water may also be acceptable .
num .
underwater embankment materials .
material for underwater embankment shall be secured from quarries designated on the plans or from other approved sources producing equally satisfactory material .
the material shall consist of num cubic yard num m and smaller size stone taken from approved natural rock formations .
the material shall be free from earth or other foreign material consisting of predominantly larger size stones .
material to be used for choking or blanketing the surface of the underwater embankment shall be of sandy or fragmentary nature such as stone spalls or screenings float gravel or gravel .
material that will slake or become plastic in water shall not be used as choking material or in the blanket course .
note certain materials within the roadway excavation limits may be authorized for use as improved roadbed material underwater backfill or underwater embankment however such authorization shall be in accordance with the provisions of article num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
prior to beginning excavation and embankment operations in any area all necessary clearing and grubbing of the area shall have been performed in accordance with the provisions of section num clearing and grubbing .
grading operations should commence as soon as possible after the beginning of the clearing and grubbing operations .
once grading operations begin the work shall be continuous towards completing excavation and embankment unless approved otherwise in writing by the engineer .
exposed erodible cuts shall be final dressed topsoil shall be placed and the ground surface shall be stabilized with mulch and permanent seeding .
the mulch and permanent seeding shall be placed in vertical increments not exceeding num feet num m as the work section num excavation and embankment num progresses .
embankments shall be constructed with temporary earth berms to divert runoff to cut slopes or temporary pipe as the work progresses .
final grading and permanent stabilization measures shall be initiated for cut slopes within num hours of meeting the limits of vertical grading increments or upon suspension or completion of grading operations in a given area .
final grading and permanent stabilization of embankments shall be initiated within num hours of reaching subgrade .
special attention is directed to the requirements given in section num and sections num through num pertaining to the establishment of temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures .
the excavation and embankment for the work shall be constructed and maintained so as to properly drain and have reasonably smooth and uniform surfaces .
the final subgrade elevation and section of both cuts and fills shall be in reasonably close conformity to that specified by the plans or directed i.e .
plus or minus num inch num mm from the designated grade and slope elevations .
no material shall be wasted without permission of the engineer .
excavation operations shall be so conducted that material outside of the limits of the slopes will not be disturbed .
choice of equipment to perform the work shall be that of the contractor .
the type and number of units shall be such as to perform the excavation and embankment operations in conformity with these specifications and secure the density specified .
supplemental equipment shall be furnished as necessary to keep the work properly shaped .
when the contractors excavation operations encounter artifacts of historical or archeological significance the operations shall be temporarily discontinued .
when directed by the engineer the contractor shall excavate the site in such a manner as to preserve the artifacts encountered and allow for their removal .
such excavation unless otherwise provided will be considered and paid for as extra work .
where portions of existing pavement are to remain and join the surface of the new work they shall be cut to a neat line with a vertical face using saws or other equipment that will not damage the retained portion of the work .
b roadway excavation .
num .
general .
all intersecting roads approaches entrances and driveways shall be graded and completed concurrently with the roadway grading and shall be kept passable at all times .
during the grading operation the area being graded shall be maintained reasonably smooth and well drained .
material used as directed by the engineer for temporary surface to permit public use of the project will be paid for at the contract unit price of the materials so used .
the contractor shall maintain this temporary surface .
cuts may be widened and the slopes varied as directed during construction according to the stability of the material encountered and the need for embankment material however benching of backslopes in order to obtain material will not be permitted unless authorized in writing .
if widening of a cut is necessary after the backslope is completed a width sufficient to accommodate normal grading equipment will be allowed .
unauthorized excavation beyond the required slope will not be paid for .
old roadways within the right of way shall be obliterated as directed .
roadway obliteration will be paid for as unclassified excavation unless otherwise designated on the plans .
num .
removal of topsoil .
topsoil within the construction limits shall be removed in the areas and to the depth as directed by the engineer .
topsoil may include sod but not tall vegetation or other debris and shall be kept free from subsoil .
it shall be stockpiled in approved locations with each stockpile not less than num feet num m high and containing not less than num hundred cubic yards num m .
each stockpile shall be shaped as necessary to permit accurate cross sections .
the work of removal and stockpiling of topsoil will be paid for as unclassified excavation .
temporary or permanent seeding mulching and other erosion control measures shall be applied as directed by the engineer and will be paid for under the appropriate items of work .
num .
selective grading .
certain designated zones or portions of cuts which afford the more suitable soils for roadbed construction shall be reserved as directed for use in forming the upper graded earth layer or layers for embankments or cuts for backfilling and for other purposes .
should it section num excavation and embankment num become necessary to stockpile selected material for use below the subgrade elevation of the same cut it may be stockpiled nearby so that the excavated material can be measured for payment for the rehandling .
num .
undercutting .
a .
soil .
unless noted otherwise on the plans cuts in soil shall be undercut num foot num mm where improved roadbed is required .
undercut areas shall be further undercut if the engineer determines that this is necessary for the removal of soft or yielding areas .
the areas of increased undercutting shall be shaped to drain backfilled with a suitable material and uniformly compacted to the density specified for embankment .
the length of a section of undercutting shall be a minimum of num feet num m. areas where improved roadbed is not required shall also be undercut if the engineer determines that this is necessary for the removal of soft or yielding areas .
these areas shall also be shaped to drain backfilled with suitable material and uniformly compacted to the density specified for embankment .
all depressions in undercut sections shall be cleaned out and provisions shall be made for drainage .
the depressions shall be backfilled and compacted with selected materials approved by the engineer .
undercutting will be measured and paid for as unclassified excavation .
b .
rock .
cuts in rock shall be undercut num foot num mm only where the rock does not extend above the subgrade across the full width of the improved roadbed .
all depressions in cuts in rock shall be cleaned out and provisions shall be made for drainage .
the depressions shall be backfilled with a crushed aggregate base material meeting the requirements of section num or a quarry crusherrun material suitable for the intended purpose .
the backfill shall be compacted as directed by the engineer .
there will be no direct payment for the material required to fill depressions made in rock cuts where the depressions resulted from the removal of rock .
num .
excavation and backfill of muck .
excavation and backfill of muck areas shall be performed in a manner acceptable to the engineer that will not permit the entrapment of muck within the backfill .
the backfilling of the excavated area shall follow immediately behind the excavation so that any soft material that is pushed ahead of the backfill can be removed .
after muck removal the contractor shall allow the engineer adequate time to take all elevations and measurements necessary for determining the volume removed .
normally the material used to backfill the excavated muck areas will be selected unclassified excavation or borrow excavation item numa or numd as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
when directed in writing by the engineer the material used to backfill the excavated muck areas will be borrow excavation underwater backfill or underwater embankment item nume or numf meeting the requirements of subarticle numc .
backfill material placed in water shall be so deposited that its weight mass will displace and force any remaining muck outward and ahead of the backfill and prevent trapping of muck pockets .
backpressure from displaced muck against the toe of the advancing backfill shall be relieved promptly by excavating the displaced muck as fast as it accumulates .
dikes ordered constructed within the right of way limits for controlling the muck will be paid for as unclassified excavation .
in addition to the requirements of article num for disposal areas where directed dikes shall be built without extra compensation to keep the deposited muck within the limits of the designated areas and as soon as the surface condition of the deposited material will permit the contractor shall remove all visible stumps roots logs and other debris from the waste pile and shall dispose of them as specified in subarticle nume without extra compensation .
before acceptance of the work all parts of the waste pile shall be drained and dressed to a pleasing and reasonably uniform surface and any necessary erosion control work performed all as directed by the engineer .
section num excavation and embankment num num .
excavation of rock .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the contractor shall use the presplitting technique to split the face of the rock cut in a relatively smooth plane along the designated backslope prior to shooting the interior portion of the cut .
presplitting shall be accomplished by drilling holes at intervals of approximately num feet num mm to num feet num m to the proper depth along the designated slope loading and stemming such holes with an appropriate light charge of explosive and detonating all holes simultaneously .
the contractor will not be required to presplit on slopes flatter than one to one .
in the event the cut is too deep for the presplitting to be done in one operation an num inch num mm offset will be allowed for the subsequent presplitting operations after the initial presplitting and interior blasting .
any material outside the designated side slopes that has been loosened or shattered by blasting shall be removed to provide a reasonably smooth and uniform slope .
no rock shall project more than num foot num mm inside the designated slope .
payment will be made for overbreakage and necessary backfill material for a distance not to exceed num foot num mm outside the designated slopes or num foot num mm below the designated elevation for undercutting however where presplitting is required no overbreakage on side slopes will be paid .
all overbreakage in excess of the noted limits shall be removed and necessary backfill performed by the contractor without additional compensation .
when authorized in writing rock from roadway excavation may be used under other sections of the specifications .
in such event payment will be made under the appropriate section for which the rock is so used and as provided in section num for the replacement of materials for use in the embankment .
all rock that is not required for other construction shall be placed in embankment insofar as possible in accordance with the provisions for embankments .
large rock or boulders that can not be used in embankment shall be disposed of by the contractor .
num .
benching .
in cuts where unstable soil conditions occur the plans may designate or the engineer may direct the use of benching .
the benching shall be accomplished by suitable drilling and blasting equipment when so directed .
this benching will be measured and paid for as unclassified excavation .
benching may also be ordered to provide a more stable foundation for heavy embankment .
benching shall be accomplished by excavating horizontally along the hillside down to or into rock or other suitable undisturbed foundation material forming a series of stepped benches .
each bench shall be in excavation for its entire width .
the benches generally shall parallel contour lines .
they shall be constructed at least num feet num m wide and may be required to be wider for better support of embankment .
benching of embankment will be measured and paid for as unclassified excavation only if it is required to be loaded onto equipment and hauled to another location .
c borrow excavation .
all stumps logs brush roots and other debris resulting from clearing and grubbing work in borrow pits shall be removed and disposed of as specified in subarticle nume .
no separate payment will be allowed for this operation .
material unsuitable for use in the work shall be disposed of in a satisfactory manner and the amount of such deducted or eliminated from quantities measured for pay purposes .
all borrow areas shall be bladed and left in such shape as to permit accurate measurements after excavating has been completed .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in sufficient time before beginning excavation so that the necessary cross sections may be taken .
the finished borrow areas shall be left in a condition satisfactory to the engineer and the property owner .
attention is directed to subarticle numb for conditions governing local pit operations .
the selection of areas of the source for use and sequence of excavation shall be as directed by the engineer in order that material of the best available gradation and soil characteristics may be secured .
d embankment .
num .
general .
only suitable approved materials shall be used in the work .
the engineer shall be the sole judge of the suitability of materials and may require such selection of materials as may section num excavation and embankment num be necessary to insure a satisfactory embankment .
sandy or rocky materials available shall be used to the extent practical across wet areas to form a floor for supporting the required embankment .
after clearing and grubbing of the embankment areas is complete all cavities and irregularities shall be enlarged to permit use of compaction equipment backfilling and compacted as required .
foundation preparation shall consist of the work required to provide a stable foundation for the embankment .
this may consist of undercutting and backfilling flooring sufficient to support equipment or other work as may be directed .
foundation preparation and compaction will be as directed by the engineer .
where embankment is to be placed on old concrete pavements or pavements having concrete bases the treatment of the old concrete shall be as specified on the plans .
where embankment is to be placed on any other type of roadway pavement or surface the existing pavement or surface shall be scarified to the extent necessary to provide ample bond between old and new material .
num .
embankment formation .
rocks broken concrete or other solid materials shall not be placed in embankment areas where piling is to be placed or driven .
roadway embankment of earth material shall be placed in reasonably uniform layers not exceeding num inches num mm loose measurement and insofar as practical the full width of the embankment section .
each layer shall be compacted as specified before the next overlying layer is placed .
care shall be taken during the compaction operations so that uniform density is obtained .
when the excavated material consists predominantly of rock fragments of such size that the material can not be placed in layers of the thickness prescribed without crushing pulverizing or further breaking down of the pieces resulting from excavation methods such material may be placed in the embankment as directed in layers not exceeding num feet num mm in thickness .
each layer shall be leveled and smoothed with suitable leveling equipment and by distribution of spalls and finer fragments or earth .
these type lifts shall not be constructed above an elevation of two feet num mm below the finished subgrade .
the balance of the embankment shall be composed of suitable material no material larger than num inches num mm smoothed and placed in layers not exceeding num inches num mm in loose thickness and compacted as specified for embankments .
placing of large stones up to twothirds the remaining embankment height at the point of placement will be allowed provided they are spaced so as to permit free access of proper equipment to compact the intervening fill in normal layers .
other large stones may be placed on fill slopes as directed .
when new embankment is to be placed against existing embankments or when embankment is built onehalf width at a time and slopes are steeper than num num when measured at right angles to the embankment the old embankment shall be continuously benched and the new work brought up in layers .
benching shall be of sufficient width to permit operations of placing and compacting equipment but in no case less than num feet num m. material thus cut out shall be recompacted along with the new embankment material at the contractors expense .
underwater backfill and underwater embankment shall be deposited in one layer for the full width of the embankment or as directed to the elevation designated on the plans or directed .
in the formation of underwater embankment the rock shall be fully choked with a blanket of approved choking material before placement of the remaining embankment .
embankment over under and around structures pipes culverts arches bridges and like except pipes and arches num inches num mm or less in diameter shall be selected embankment material placed and compacted or tamped as noted herein in a manner and by methods that will avoid unbalanced loading cause movement or place undue strain on any structure .
attention is directed to section num for pipes and arches num inches num mm or less in diameter .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for protecting the structures and any damage to any part of a structure due to not providing proper protection shall be cause for ordering its replacement without additional compensation .
num .
embankment compaction .
layers of embankment shall be compacted as specified in subarticle numb .
strict moisture control will not be required however it will be the contractors responsibility to section num excavation and embankment num maintain the moisture content necessary to satisfactorily compact the material .
compaction in a semidry condition will not be permitted .
where improved roadbed design is specified the layers up to the bottom of the improved roadbed shall be compacted as noted above and finished true to required line grade and cross section .
the improved roadbed layers shall then be constructed as provided in article num .
where improved roadbed design is not specified the embankment layers shall be continued up to subgrade elevation with the same compaction requirement as noted herein .
just before placing a subbase or other material on this graded earth roadbed the top num inches num mm shall be reconstructed as provided in subarticle numc of these specifications .
no compaction or density test will be required for underwater embankment or underwater backfill .
num use of materials .
all suitable materials removed from the roadway excavation shall be used insofar as practicable in the formation of the embankment roadbed base layers shoulders slopes bedding and backfill for culverts and for such other purposes and places as directed .
suitable materials shall be defined as those suitable for any of the above listed uses .
no excavated material shall be wasted unless permitted in writing by the engineer but shall be used uniformly to widen embankments to adjust grades to flatten slopes or shall be deposited in such places and for such other purposes as may be directed .
such material shall be handled as follows num .
suitable material .
suitable material shall be used at the time of excavation for any of the purposes outlined herein in this article .
it is not intended to stockpile suitable material unless ordered in writing by the engineer .
payment for second handling will be made only when reused from stockpiles previously ordered by the engineer .
num .
unsuitable material .
unsuitable material that can not be used at the time of excavation may at the option of the contractor be temporarily stockpiled within the rightofway or the contractor may make written request for disposal as waste in an approved area on or off the rightofway .
payment for the second handling of stockpiled unsuitable material will be made only when ordered in writing for use by the engineer for a specific pay item .
the remainder of the stockpiled material may be used to widen embankments flatten slopes etc .
as allowed by the engineer with no payment for the second handling or shall otherwise be disposed of off the rightofway with no payment for the second handling .
no payment will be made for the second handling of unsuitable material deposited outside the construction limits at the time of excavation and later spread onto a fill slope etc .
by use of a dozer or similar equipment .
num .
channel excavation .
channel excavation shall be used to fill old channels in the construction of embankments the flattening of slopes or shall be disposed of as approved by the engineer .
if permitted by the engineer waste channel excavation may be spread in uniform layers neatly leveled shaped and grassed with sufficient openings provided to permit surface drainage of adjacent lands however in no case will waste material piles be permitted to remain within num feet num m of the edge of any ditch channel or cut .
no payment will be made for any necessary rehandling of channel excavation material unless ordered for use by the engineer from stockpiles for a specific pay item .
num disposal areas for surplus material .
if no disposal areas are shown on the plans the contractor shall provide at his own expense disposal areas and submit along with the permission of the property owner a plan for treatment of the area which is acceptable to the engineer .
said plan shall provide for dressing grassing or other treatment to avoid unsightly appearance and not create a public nuisance or incur future maintenance problems .
disposal areas will not in general require clearing and grubbing or compaction of the waste pile however if clearing and grubbing or compaction is required such will be designated by plan details or in the proposal .
section num excavation and embankment num reference is made to item f of paragraph num of article num concerning handling of waste material and treatment of areas .
num finishing and dressing .
all the completed work shall be dressed and maintained substantially to the lines grades and cross sections shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
slopes shall be shaped rounded finished or trimmed in a neat workmanlike manner to conform to the slope lines shown on the plans or as modified by the engineer .
care shall be exercised that no material be loosened beyond the required slopes .
compensation for all such finishing and dressing shall be included in the contract unit prices and no direct payment will be made for this work .
num erosion control .
the contractor shall incorporate into the work all permanent erosion control features provided in the contract at the earliest practical date .
in addition temporary erosion control features may be ordered by the engineer to facilitate protection until the permanent control features can be installed .
particular attention is directed to section num and article num of these specifications .
num blank .
num method of measurement .
a general .
measurement for all accepted excavation except for borrow excavation for underwater embankment will be either by the cubic yard cubic meter of the material in its original position computed from cross sections by the average end area method or per ton metric ton as specified by the unit measure of the pay item .
measurement for borrow excavation for underwater embankment will be either by the ton metric ton or by the cubic yard cubic meter loose volume of the material in the hauling vehicle at the point of use as specified by the unit measure of the pay item .
embankment will not be measured for payment .
all of the operations required for embankment formation described herein shall be considered necessary work incidental to and for which compensation is included in the contract unit prices for the pay items of the materials composing the embankment .
muck excavation as described in subarticle numb will require the use of the following modified cross section and average end area method .
the volume will be measured between theoretical vertical side slopes a station or substation at a time immediately after completion of muck excavation and before backfill is placed .
no measurement or allowance will be made for necessary excavation of material for sloughing subsidence flattening sides slumps or rehandling materials or for shaping and dressing disposal areas .
the sloughing subsidence flattening or slump of side slopes in muck will not be classed as slides .
b measurement limitations .
measurement of pay quantities will not include any excavated material used for purposes other than those designated except as provided under article num .
where material has been excavated beyond the designated slope line and wasted the unauthorized wasted material will be measured and deducted from the excavation quantities .
any material excavated prior to the staking out and cross sectioning of the borrow sources by the engineer or in excess of that ordered for the work will not be included in the quantity measured for payment .
if the contractor places more borrow than is necessary thereby causing a waste of excavation the amount of such waste will be deducted from the borrow excavation as measured in the borrow source .
when a borrow area is adjacent to the right of way the dividing line between unclassified excavation and borrow excavation shall be either a vertical plane through the right of way line or the proposed backslope as shown on the plans whichever is most economically advantageous to the state .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
roadway and drainage excavation .
the accepted volume of unclassified excavation item no .
numa channel excavation item numb and muck excavation item no .
numc when provided in the plans or proposal section num machine grading shoulders num measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit prices bid for these items which shall be payment in full for excavation disposal of surplus and unsuitable materials see articles num and num hauling formation and compaction of embankment preparation and completion of subgrade and shoulders except when this work is included in other pay items the completion of all cuts embankments and channel excavation to conform to the lines grades and cross section indicated on the plans or otherwise directed and the completion of the roadway together with its appurtenances of intersecting roads streets driveways approaches temporary drainage facilities and other related incidental work for which the proposal contains no contract unit prices .
the said contract unit prices for the excavation item shall be payment in full for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
if no contract items for channel excavation andor muck excavation are provided such work will be paid for as unclassified excavation .
exceptions to the above will be made in the event of the following a .
if a backslope already completed and dressed is destroyed by a slide or if the engineer orders additional material taken from a completed and dressed backslope any redressing required will be paid for as provided in article num. b .
if a slide occurs after completion of the subgrade to line and grade or during subsequent work in the immediate area and is of such nature and extent that the engineer in order to avoid damage to the previous work directs its removal and such requires equipment other than equipment normal to the project an adjustment in price may be made .
however in no case shall such increase exceed num percent of the unclassified excavation contract unit price .
c. if no item for muck excavation is provided in the plans or proposal such excavation will be classified as unclassified excavation and payment will be made at two times the unit bid price for unclassified excavation .
num .
borrow excavation .
the accepted volume of borrow material designated under items numd nume and numf measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the items which shall be payment in full for the royalty and other expenses incidental to procurement construction and maintenance of haul roads clearing and grubbing stripping excavating loading hauling source moves dumping spreading and also for formation and compaction of embankment trimming slopes disposing of surplus materials preparation and completion of subgrade shoulders and intersecting roadways and furnishing of all equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
this pay item also includes any necessary work as may be required by the engineer or owner in the final dressing of the pit including grassing or other landscape work .
b blank .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa unclassified excavation per cubic yard cubic meter numb channel excavation per cubic yard cubic meter numc muck excavation per cubic yard cubic meter numd borrow excavation per cubic yard cubic meter nume borrow excavationunderwater per cubic yard cubic meter numf borrow excavationunderwater per ton metric ton specify either backfill or embankment .
section num machine grading shoulders num description .
this section shall cover the work of reconstructing the shoulder of a roadway where the grading is of such character that the material can be moved mixed and shaped with a motor patrol of adequate power and weight mass .
section num machine grading shoulders num in general this work shall consist of clipping the shoulder where directed prior to resurfacing and blading the shoulder after the resurfacing has been completed .
any additional material needed to bring the shoulder to the desired profile will be classified and paid for under the appropriate section for the type material furnished .
if seeding or other items are needed for erosion control such items will be shown on the plans and paid for under the appropriate specification section .
unless otherwise noted by plan details the completed work shall conform to the shoulder requirements for lines grades and typical section indicated by the plans or established by the engineer .
num material .
material used under this section shall be of the quality and character noted on the plans or ordered by the engineer suitable for the purpose intended and consistent with the requirements for such material noted in other parts of this specification .
num construction requirements .
a general .
clipping or blading of grass and soil from the shoulder as provided by the plans or directed shall be completed in advance of resurfacing operations .
the removed material shall be windrowed a sufficient distance and in such a manner as not to pose a safety hazard to the motoring public .
where directed the entire width of the shoulder shall be plowed scarified or otherwise loosened .
the shoulder then shall be reformed by blading the material from the windrows or by the addition of extra material as specified or directed with the machine grader and compacting it to the satisfaction of the engineer .
watering shall be used as necessary to aid compaction .
the machine grading shall continue until the shoulder is completed to conform to the lines grades and typical section shown on the plans or directed .
b equipment .
the contractor shall provide appropriately sized equipment in sufficient numbers to perform the work within the guidelines noted herein and the time frame for the contract .
c additional material .
it will be considered practicable to move material up to num feet num m longitudinally by means of the machine grader and all material moved within that limit will be paid for in the contract price for machine grading shoulders .
when it is necessary to waste surplus material such material shall be wasted on the front slope of the roadway in the vicinity of the removal site to the satisfaction of the engineer .
material secured from sources outside the right of way will be classified under the applicable classification .
num method of measurement .
accepted machine grading of shoulders will be measured in hundredfoot num m stations and fractions thereof to the nearest foot num m of shoulder along the centerline of roadway complete in place .
each shoulder graded will be measured separately .
borrow excavation topsoil or other material ordered used will be measured and paid for as provided by their appropriate sections unless otherwise specified .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
machine grading of shoulders measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price per station for machine grading complete in place which price shall be full compensation for the preparation construction and maintenance of the work involved including blading spreading compacting and dressing and for furnishing all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa machine grading shoulders per station section num structure excavation and backfill for drainage and minor structures num section num structure excavation and backfill for drainage and minor structures num description .
a general .
the work under this section shall consist of the removal and disposal of all excavated materials of any nature required for the construction of all box type culverts including bridge type pipe culverts including pipe arches storm drains and other minor structures in accordance with these specifications and to reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or designated by the engineer .
this section shall further include backfilling of structure foundations with suitable material in accordance with plan details or as directed .
b classification of materials .
num .
excavation .
all excavation for structures below natural ground or the designated subgrade whichever is lower or the elevation designated by the engineer will be classified as structure excavation and shall include all materials encountered regardless of their nature exclusive of water or other liquids which will not be classified as excavated material necessary for the proper construction of the structure .
excavation for ditches at the inlet and outlet ends of drainage structures and any other ditches indicated on the plans shall be constructed under roadway and drainage excavation items .
num .
backfill .
a .
foundation backfill .
special selected material ordered placed under a structure to provide a suitable foundation for the structure shall be classified as foundation backfill .
b .
general backfill .
material used for ordinary backfill shall include special material for areas immediately adjacent to weepholes and a drainage belt for large masonry structures .
num material .
a foundation backfill .
foundation backfill is a special selected material suitable approved freedraining commercial or local material for use as foundation for the structure .
b general backfill .
material used for general backfill shall be a compactible soil of acceptable quality except that material for areas immediately adjacent to weepholes shall be free draining material conforming to the following num .
local material shall have a permeability coefficient of at least num mmsec .
measured by the aashto t num constant head permeameter with num passing the num inch num mm sieve and a maximum of num passing the number num num mm sieve .
num .
commercial material shall be aggregates meeting the requirements of aldot num or aldot num .
other commercial aggregates will be considered and can be used if approved by the materials and tests engineer .
num construction requirements .
a general .
foundation excavation shall be of the size and depth conforming to the outline for the structure shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
unsuitable foundation material below the normal design elevation shall be removed as directed by the engineer and paid for as structure excavation .
where rock gravelly soil hard pan or other unyielding material is encountered it shall be removed as ordered by the engineer for a depth of at least num inches num mm below the section num structure excavation and backfill for drainage and minor structures num designated grade .
this extra depth of excavation shall be backfilled with suitable approved material measured and paid for as foundation backfill .
attention is directed to the special requirements for placement of pipe culverts in embankment areas noted in the plans .
b excavation .
choice of equipment to perform the excavation within the limits of the lines and grades noted in this section or directed shall in general be that of the contractor provided such produces the desired results without injuring any adjacent or adjoining work .
special care shall be taken not to disturb or loosen foundation material below designated foundation limits .
unless otherwise indicated in the plans or directed by the engineer all sheeting and bracing used in making structure excavation shall be removed by the contractor following the completion of the work .
c backfilling .
num .
foundation backfill .
foundation backfill shall be deposited uniformly for the full width of the excavation in horizontal layers not to exceed num inches num mm in thickness with each layer compacted as directed by the engineer .
num .
general backfill .
general backfilling consisting of all backfill except foundation backfill shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of section num and section num with particular attention directed to the requirements for protecting structures .
no backfill shall be placed against a newly constructed masonry or concrete structure for a period of num days unless authorized by the engineer .
large masonry or concrete structures such as box culverts and retaining walls etc .
shall have a deposit belt not less than num foot num mm wide and num foot num mm deep of approved local or commercial free draining material placed full length along the back face of the vertical walls at the line of weepholes .
this material must conform to the requirements specified under subarticle numb .
small structures such as inlets etc .
and top slabs of culverts having weepholes shall have approximately num cubic foot num m of approved commercial free draining material as specified in subarticle numb placed at each weephole .
placing of the material at weepholes shall be done in such a manner as to provide maximum depth of filtering effect .
prior to the placing of any free draining material each weephole shall be protected by rough stones a grooved concrete block or hardware cloth to permit seepage yet prohibit loss of material through the weephole .
no direct payment will be made for the operation or the special material noted above for treatment of weepholes .
num method of measurement .
a structure excavation .
num .
quantity of excavation .
the quantity of excavation will be the number of cubic yards cubic meters measured in its original position that is excavated in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the following limitations .
section num structure excavation and backfill for drainage and minor structures num num .
masonry structures other than culverts .
for masonry structures other than culverts measurement will be made of material removed from the area bounded by vertical planes num foot num mm outside of the neat lines of the foundation or footing plan and parallel thereto and to the elevations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer to provide installation on a suitable foundation .
no measurement or payment will be made for material excavated outside these limits .
num .
excavation for culverts .
for box arch and pipe culverts with wing walls or headwalls or other minor structures including storm sewers measurement will be made of the material removed in accordance with the following the excavation shall be considered to be a trench with vertical sidewalls .
no separate measurement for minor structures inlets junction boxes catch basins manholes etc .
other than noted below such being considered incidental to work .
the length of the excavation shall be the actual length of the structure including inlets junction boxes etc .
measured along the flowline plus num foot num mm at each end .
when headwalls or wing walls are used the length shall be the average net length of the structure tip to tip of wings .
the width of the excavation shall in the case of pipe structures be considered the inside diameter of the pipe plus num feet num m. for box culverts the width shall be the outside width of the barrels plus num feet num m. on all culvert structures no allowance will be made for wing flares or toe walls .
num .
depth of excavation .
the depth of excavation will be as deep as required to install the structure on a suitable foundation to the flowline indicated .
this depth shall then be measured in accordance with the following a .
pipe of inside diameter of num inches num mm or less shall be laid in a trench extending at least num foot num mm above the elevation of the top of the pipe .
the depth of excavation shall be measured from a point num foot num mm above the top of the pipe or from subgrade elevation in cut sections .
b .
for box culverts and pipe larger than num inches num mm in diameter cross sections of the original ground will be taken at major breaks in the ground line profile and at changes in the culvert barrel widths along the length of the culvert as defined in item num above .
num .
computation of the volume of excavation .
the average end area method shall be used in computing the volume and no measurement for payment will be made for material excavated outside of the limits noted above .
num .
excavation for side drain pipe .
no measurement or payment will be made for excavation for side drain pipe of any size or for side drain culverts unless so provided by plan details .
the cost of such excavation shall be included in the price bid for the items however pipe designated on the plans as storm sewer pipe will not be classified as side drain .
b foundation backfill .
foundation backfill will not be measured directly but the volume will be fixed at num percent of the volume of the excavation which it replaces that lies between the bottom of the structure and the bottom elevation of the trench ordered excavated .
where satisfactory structure foundation is provided by the normal process of removing and backfilling unsuitable material under fill areas none of such backfill will be classified as foundation backfill .
num basis of payment .
a structure excavation .
payment will be made for the number of cubic yards cubic meters measured as detailed above at the contract unit price bid for structure excavation .
such payment shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials equipment tools labor pumping bailing draining and all incidentals necessary to complete the work and shall include installation and removal of any cribs cofferdams shoring sheeting or other protection the section num excavation for bridges num satisfactory disposal of any unsuitable material from the excavation and the placement and compaction in backfill or embankment of the material excavated and suitable for such use .
b foundation backfill .
payment for the calculated cubic yards cubic meters of this material determined as noted herein will be made at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation of the item complete in place and includes furnishing of all material placement compaction and all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa structure excavation per cubic yard cubic meter numb foundation backfill localcommercial per cubic yard cubic meter section num excavation for bridges num description .
the work under this section shall cover foundation excavation for bridge structures which includes the removal of all material of whatever nature necessary for the construction of foundations and substructures including backfill all in accordance with the plans or as directed by the engineer .
it shall unless otherwise stipulated by the plans or proposal include the furnishing of all necessary equipment and the construction of all sheeting and shoring cribs cofferdams caissons dewatering etc .
which may be necessary for the execution of the work .
it shall also include the subsequent removal of these items and the placement of all necessary backfill as hereinafter specified .
it shall also include the disposing of excavated material not required for backfill in a manner and in locations as approved by the engineer .
the item of cofferdam and pumping when specified on the plans shall not be covered under this section .
attention is directed to section num for the requirements of this item .
num classification of material .
excavation for bridges shall include all material removed except water or other liquids .
excavation of material for bridges not within the classification of roadway or drainage excavation will be unclassified bridge excavation .
num construction requirements .
a inspection .
num .
notification .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a sufficient time in advance of the beginning of the excavation for each structure so that elevation and measurements may be taken of the existing ground .
no payment will be made for material removed or excavated before these measurements have been taken .
num .
approval .
ample opportunity shall be given the engineer for the inspection of foundation pits and the measurement of material removed .
in no case shall a foundation be closed to view until it has been inspected and approved .
num .
change in foundation elevations .
when in the contractors opinion rock or other firm foundation material of equal bearing value is encountered at an elevation above that shown for the footing and at a location not subject to erosion or scour the contractor shall notify the engineer in order that he may investigate and determine if it is advisable to raise the bottom of the footing .
when the excavation for a footing has been completed to the approximate elevation shown on the plans without encountering satisfactory foundation material the contractor shall notify the engineer in order that he may make an inspection and investigation such investigation to consist of drilling probing or jetting by the contractor a maximum of num holes per footing each hole a maximum depth of num feet num m. no direct payment will be made for this operation .
if additional holes are required they will be paid for as provided in article section num excavation for bridges num num .
the engineer will then fix the proper elevation of the footing or decide upon its treatment .
num .
drilling or probing .
when apparently satisfactory foundation material has been reached the contractor shall drill or probe not more than num exploratory holes to a maximum depth of num feet num m. the drilling will not be required if a note is shown on the plans to waive this requirement .
no direct payment will be made for this operation .
if additional holes are required they will be paid for as provided in article num. b depth and size of excavation .
the excavation for the bottom of the footing shall be carried to the depth as shown on the plans or as designated .
the design and elevation of footings are based on soundings taken at certain points for design purposes only .
these soundings may or may not be representative of the actual conditions encountered during construction .
bidders must assume the risk of having to excavate to a greater or lesser depth without altering the contract unit prices in the proposal except as hereinafter set forth and the footing elevations shown on the plans shall be considered as approximate only .
the engineer may order in writing such changes in dimensions or elevations of footings as may be necessary to secure satisfactory foundations for the structure .
the size of the excavation shall in all cases be ample to accommodate necessary forms down to rock marl selma chalk or similar hard material suitable for embedment of footings excavation in such materials shall be as near as possible to the neat lines of the footings and the footings poured without the use of forms .
in hard materials which can not be cut to neat lines with a pneumatic spade line drilling along the neat lines not to exceed num inch num mm centers will be required .
in dry soils suitable for footing embedment capable of providing stable neat footing lines permission may be given to allow pouring of footings without the use of forms otherwise the excavation shall be sufficient for forming the foundations .
the horizontal limits of excavation shall not extend beyond what is required for sheeting bracing forms and reinforcing cages .
c cofferdams or sheeting and shoring .
cofferdams or sheeting and shoring will be required in foundation excavation work when work is adjacent to pavement sidewalks railroad tracks utilities etc .
when the material encountered is unstable when such excavation will present a hazardous or undesirable condition or when necessitated due to water conditions .
materials and design to be used for this work will be determined by the contractor .
working drawings and design calculations will only be required if the foundation work is within an area adjacent to the trackline .
these areas are where a railroad company will require adequately designed cofferdams sheeting and shoring to protect the stability of the trackline during construction .
the contractor shall contact the railroad company to obtain the design requirements for the cofferdams sheeting and shoring .
working drawings and design calculations for cofferdams sheeting and shoring shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
if a seal is required in a cofferdam covered under this section it shall meet all of the requirements and be measured for payment in accordance with section num. d general backfill .
all material used for backfill shall be soil of an acceptable quality .
all spaces excavated and not occupied by abutments piers or other permanent work shall be backfilled .
backfill around all units of a structure shall be completed as soon as practical after the unit has obtained the required strength .
bracing forms and rubbish shall be removed from the excavated area before backfilling is commenced .
backfill within the limits of the roadway shall be as required by section num all other backfill except that placed below water level shall be tamped and compacted as required by the engineer .
e foundation backfill .
if the surface upon which the footing is to be placed becomes soft or muddy and will not dry out after the excavation has been dewatered the engineer may direct that a foundation course of approved free draining commercial material as specified in subarticle numb be used under the footing .
section num excavation for bridges num if this soft and muddy condition occurred through no fault or negligence of the contractor the engineer at his discretion may order payment to be paid under item no .
numb foundation backfill commercial .
if this item is not in the contract then payment will be made as extra work as specified in article num and article num .
when the above condition was the result in the opinion of the engineer of negligence on the part of the contractor no payment will be made for the required foundation backfill .
compaction shall be as directed by the engineer .
f preservation of stream banks and channel .
the natural ground adjacent to the structure shall not be disturbed without permission of the engineer .
unless otherwise specified no excavation shall be made outside of caissons cribs cofferdams steel piling or sheeting .
the natural stream bed adjacent to the structure shall not be disturbed without permission from the engineer .
if any excavation or dredging is permitted at the site of the structure before caissons cribs or cofferdams or piling are placed the contractor shall without extra compensation and after the foundation is in place backfill all such excavations to the original or established ground surface or stream bed with satisfactory material .
no material or debris shall be deposited in any designated navigation channel during construction except with the approval of the engineer .
such material or debris shall be removed to the normal navigation channel depth prior to completion and acceptance of the contract .
any material or debris resulting from the contractors operations deposited outside any designated navigation channel or other streams during construction except such fill as may be ordered as a permanent part of the work shall be removed and the channel freed from all obstructions before completion of the work .
g disposal of surplus and unsuitable material .
surplus excavated material after piers and abutments are backfilled shall be used to obliterate construction scars at or near the bridge site to smooth out depressions in and near the stream banks or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
a unclassified bridge excavation .
when listed as a pay item in the contract the quantity of unclassified bridge excavation will be the number of cubic yards meters of material excavated measured and calculated in its original position subject to the following limitations a .
the volume measured will be that actually removed except for seal concrete footings however no measurement will be made for material removed outside of the area bounded by vertical planes num foot num mm outside of the footing and parallel thereto down to hard material described in subarticle numb or for material excavated outside neat lines of footings in such hard material .
for stepped footings the volume will be measured and computed separately for each step .
when the size of a footing is reduced after the contractor excavated for a larger footing as directed the excavation will be measured based on the larger footing .
b .
water or other liquid will not be classed as excavated material and no measurement or direct payment will be made for their removal .
c. no measurement or payment will be made for excavation in pile abutments nor for any pile encasements .
d. no measurement or payment will be made for the excavation required for the construction of abutment caps on drilled shaft foundations .
e. no measurement will be made for material removed below the elevation designated to be the bottom of the footing unless removal of said material is ordered .
excavation necessary and incidental to the cleaning or excavating of crevices in the floor of a foundation pit below the established footing elevation will not be measured for payment .
f. no measurement will be made for the removal of material raised by driving piles or for the removal of material that flows through or over cofferdams or caissons .
section num excavation for bridges num g. the measurement of the volume of excavation for a seal concrete footing shall be calculated from the following l length of footing shown on contract plans feet meters w width of footing shown on contract plans feet meters d final approved elevation of the bottom of the footing feet meters b average elevation of the mud line or groundline river bottom at the cofferdam feet meters ve volume of excavation for which payment will be made cubic yards cubic meters .
ve l x w x b d num ve l x w x b d excavation outside of these limits of measurement may be required for the construction of a seal concrete footing depending on the details of construction selected by the contractor .
no direct payment will be made for any excavation outside of the footing plan dimensions shown on the contract plans .
b cofferdams or sheeting and shoring .
each accepted cofferdams or sheeting and shoring unit will be measured for payment as a lump sum unit .
a unit shall consist of all piers bents and abutments on a specific bridge which are not designated by the plans for item numb cofferdam and pumping .
partial payments will be allowed on monthly estimates in accordance with subarticle numanum .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
unclassified bridge excavation .
payment for the yardage of unclassified bridge excavation as provided above shall be payment in full for the furnishing of all materials equipment tools labor pumping bailing drainage sealing crevices backfilling including foundation backfill compacting disposal of excavated material and for all incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
if a footing is lowered below the elevation shown on the plans adjustments in the unit price for all of the unclassified bridge excavation of the footing involved will be made as follows depth lowered below plan elevation bid price plus num to num feet num m num over num feet num m to num feet num m num over num feet num m to num feet num m num over num feet num m num for stepped footings the above adjustments will be computed separately for each step .
num .
cofferdams or sheeting and shoring .
payment for a lump sum unit of cofferdams or sheeting and shoring as provided above shall be payment in full for the furnishing of all materials equipment tools and labor necessary to complete the construction of the specified piers bents and abutments and the removal and disposal of any cofferdams or other temporary construction used in the prosecution of the work .
payment for each accepted cofferdams or sheeting and shoring unit will be made at the contract lump sum price bid for each unit complete in place .
partial payments will be made on monthly estimates based on the percentage of the total work performed on each unit as estimated by the engineer .
in making this estimate each pier or bent considered as part of a unit will be given an equal percentage of the total unit .
upon completion of the foundation above ground line at a particular pier or bent that percentage of the total unit may be paid .
no consideration will be given for additional compensation for this item when footing elevations are lowered less than num feet num m such being considered incidental to the work .
if elevations are lowered num feet num m or more consideration will be given for additional costs caused by the revised elevations in accordance with article num. b payment will be made under item no .
numa unclassified bridge excavation per cubic yard cubic meter section num special protection for rock slopes num numb cofferdams or sheeting and shoring per lump sum station number bridge number ramp number etc .
lane if applicable .
section num special protection for rock slopes num description .
this section shall cover the work of providing special treatments to rock slopes for protection against excessive weathering popouts and other detrimental conditions which may endanger the highway roadbed .
in general the following methods used as directed by the engineer shall be applied to exposed rock surfaces or rock surfaces exposed by the construction .
rock bolting this work shall cover the anchoring of large blocks of rock which may be bounded by joints or cracks that might prove unstable by bolting them to more solid sections of rock .
seam sealing this work shall cover the partial removal of relatively thin seams of very soft unsatisfactory material and the resealing of the seams with a durable cap of concrete .
asphalt surfacing this work shall cover the surfacing of relatively flat horizontal sections of rock berms with an asphalt surface to prevent excessive wear or weathering of soft unstable rock .
pneumatic concrete blanket this work shall cover the construction of a protective blanket layer of concrete over an area of broken or loose boulders andor unstable rock to prevent fallouts from erosion and weathering .
special attention is directed to the fact that the items of work provided under this section are estimated and can not be accurately determined until the work is exposed therefore only the amounts actually used will be measured for payment and no claims will be considered for extra compensation due to overruns or underruns of the items covered by this section .
num materials .
a general .
all materials furnished for use under this section shall conform to the applicable sections of division num materials unless noted herein or provided on the plans .
b rock bolting .
material fabricated for use in the rock bolting operations shall conform to the following num .
bolts .
a. slotted .
all slotted bolts shall be steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num grade a. b .
headed .
all headed bolts shall be steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num grade a .
num .
wedges .
all wedges shall be steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num grade a .
num .
expansion shells .
all expansion shells shall conform to the requirements of astm a num specification for malleable iron castings grade num .
tapered plugs used with expansion shells shall be forged from steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num and a num grade num to num .
num .
roof plates .
all roof plates shall be steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num type num or astm a num grade a .
section num special protection for rock slopes num num construction details .
a rock bolting .
num .
general .
rock bolts shall be installed at the direction of the engineer at any point where the stability of the rock cut is questionable .
when bolting is deemed desirable it shall be done as quickly as possible .
rocks should be kept tight and not pulled back into place once it has been loosened by successive blasting or construction operations .
the holes for the rock bolts shall be drilled as closely as possible to the diameter recommended by the manufacturer of the wedge or shell .
num .
torque .
the diameter and length of the rock bolt to be used shall be determined by the engineer .
all installations shall be in accordance with the recommended procedure or method as given by the manufacturer of the rock bolts .
when directed by the engineer proper tests will be made to determine what torque the rock can withstand .
if the tests show that the highest torque practical is of a certain value for a particular grade of rock then torque shall be applied to the rock bolt provided the torque does not exceed the maximum recommended by the manufacturer of the rock bolts .
it is recognized that any overapplication of torque will only destroy the anchorage in the rock and in due time destroy the initial tightness of the bolt .
it is desired that a minimum torque of num foot pounds num nm be applied in all cases where the rock will withstand such pressure .
num .
installation details .
extreme care shall be taken to keep the drill hole aligned perpendicular to the plate bearing surface .
the diameter of the drill hole shall be as recommended by the manufacturer for the type of expansion unit to be used for anchorage into the rock .
expansion units shall not be used in holes larger than that for which they are designed .
when slotted type rock bolts are used the bolt with wedge shall be inserted in the hole until the wedge hits the bottom of the hole .
the bolt shall then be driven into the hole with an airpercussion hammer forcing the wedge into the slotted end of the bolt thus anchoring the bolt in the hole .
the plate and nut shall then be installed on the collar end of the bolt and the nut tightened to the torque recommended by the manufacturer .
b seam sealing .
num .
general .
the seam designated by the engineer for sealing shall be examined carefully during the grading operations for evidence of seepage which will require construction of weep holes in the sealing cap as well as for the best method for placing the sealing cap .
num .
cleaning of the seam .
the material in the seam to be treated shall be routed out or otherwise removed to a depth at least equal to the thickness of the seam or layer to be treated or to a depth which will give firm support to the sealing material .
num .
sealing the seam the clean seam shall be sealed or packed with one of the following types of concrete mixes .
the method of packing or placing the sealant shall be left to the contractor provided the method used produces the desired results and presents an acceptable appearance .
weep holes when deemed necessary shall be placed as directed .
a .
low slump class a concrete as provided by section num of the standard specifications .
b. pneumatic concrete of an approved mix of cement additives aggregates and water applied pneumatically .
mix designed by the contractor to produce a num day cylinder strength of num psi num mpa c. retempered class a concrete .
c asphalt surfacing .
num .
general .
an asphalt surface shall be placed on areas designated by the engineer to prevent excessive erosion from surface runoff over relatively soft and erodible materials .
section num special protection for rock slopes num num .
preparation of surface .
the surface to receive the asphalt surfacing shall be fairly uniform without excessive high and low spots suitable for coverage with asphalt .
the surface shall be clean and free from loose rock fragments before applying the surfacing material .
num .
surfacing material .
the surfacing material shall be asphalt cement grade num or an approved equal .
the bituminous material shall be applied at the rate of num gallons per square yard num lm .
the method of application shall be that of the contractors provided it is approved by the engineer and it produces the desired results and presents a pleasing appearance .
d pneumatic concrete blanket .
num .
general .
the exposed surface designated by the engineer to receive this type treatment shall be carefully examined to determine the installation procedure which will be necessary to conform to the reinforcing details shown on the plans .
num .
cleaning the area to be treated .
the area to be treated shall be cleaned of all loose scaly rock or soil fragments by the use of pressurized water and air jets or other approved means as directed by the engineer .
num .
placement of the protective blanket .
a. reinforcement shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the plans or as directed .
anchorage of the reinforcement to the slope shall be accomplished by the use of the anchor bolts of the size and shape shown by plan details .
b .
the pneumatic concrete blanket shall consist of an approved mix of cement additives aggregates and water pneumatically applied to the surface to be treated .
the mix shall be designed by the contractor so as to produce a num day cylinder strength of num psi num mpa .
placement of the pneumatic concrete shall be in accordance with the supplying producers recommendations provided the method used produces the desired results and presents an acceptable appearance .
note it is not the intent of this specification to require a uniform surface but to provide a fairly uniform layer of concrete of not less than the depth shown on the plans which in general parallels the surface being treated .
num method of measurement .
a rock bolting .
the measurement for rock bolts will be the linear feet meter of the specific size designated by the engineer complete in place and accepted .
b seam sealant .
the seam sealing material will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters complete in place .
the volume of material actually placed will be computed from measurements of the actual length width and depth of the excavated seam opening .
no allowance will be made for the replacing of material removed beyond the depth directed .
c asphalt surfacing .
the asphalt surfacing material will be measured in gallons liters .
d pneumatic concrete blanket .
the measurement of the pneumatic concrete blanket will be measured in square yards square meters computed from the areas actually ordered treated .
no allowances will be made for material placed outside of the designated areas nor for crevices etc .
required to be filled in order to obtain a continuous blanket over the area .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
rock bolting .
the accepted length of rock bolts placed as directed will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter complete in place which price shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing all materials including bolts wedges expansion shells and section num landslide corrections num accessories and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
seam sealant .
the accepted volume of seam sealant measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the seam sealant which shall be payment in full for the item complete in place and shall include all excavation disposal of excavation materials furnishing of the sealant placing of the sealant and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
asphalt surfacing .
the accepted volume of asphalt surfacing placed as directed will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per gallon liter which shall be payment in full for the bituminous material complete in place and includes furnishing the bituminous material preparing the surface transporting and heating of the material as required placing the material in the areas designated and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
pneumatic concrete blanket .
the accepted area treated under this item will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which shall be payment in full for the pneumatic concrete blanket complete in place and includes preparation of the surface to be treated furnishing all materials installation of wire reinforcement its accessories and anchor bolts placement of the pneumatic concrete and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa rock bolting num num mm slotted per linear foot meter numb rock bolting num num mm headed per linear foot meter numc rock bolting num num mm headed per linear foot meter numd rock bolting num num mm headed per linear foot meter nume seam sealant per cubic yard cubic meter numf asphalt surfacing per gallon liter numg pneumatic concrete blanket ___ inches mm thick per square yard square meter section num landslide corrections num description .
this section shall cover the work of correcting a landslide in an existing roadway slope within the designated areas shown on the plans or directed by the engineer all in accordance with the details shown on the plans or noted in this provision .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of the standard specifications for the type work performed or noted herein .
a geotextile filter .
a geotextile to be used as a special underdrain shall meet the requirements of plan details aashto m num for subsurface drainage geotextile class num and section num of these specifications .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
b horizontal drainage pipe .
the drainage pipe shall be pvc schedule num type i or ii or schedule num conforming to the requirements given in astm d num .
the i.d .
of the pipe shall be num inches num mm unless noted otherwise on the plans .
the pipe shall be furnished in lengths suitable for use with the drilling equipment approved for use .
section num landslide corrections num the ends of the pipe shall be machined to provide a smooth wall slip coupling when joined using appropriate solvent welding material thus precluding the use of conventional slip couplings .
fittings necessary for the outfall connections outside the drilling limits shall be pvc schedule num type i or ii or schedule num fittings having a burst strength equal to or greater than the pipe noted herein .
all pipe and fitting connections shall utilize solvent weld joints .
slotted pipe shall be furnished unless noted otherwise on the plans .
slotted pipe shall have two rows of slots circumferentially cut num degrees apart .
the average configuration shall be num slots per row per foot num mm with a maximum num inch num mm slot opening when used in a silty or clay soil or num slots per row per foot num mm with a maximum num inch num mm slot opening when used in a granular material .
the configuration and the slot opening size shall be as shown on the plans .
c rock buttress material .
unless otherwise noted on the plans rock buttress material shall be sandstone limestone dolomite or granite free of dirt and debris .
rock buttress material shall have the physical properties for soundness wear resistance and limited deleterious material content given in section num for riprap .
no more than num of the rocks used for the main buttress construction shall have a weight over num pounds .
at least num shall have a weight over num pounds .
no more than num shall have a weight under num pounds .
oversize rocks may be allowed by the engineer if spaced to permit filling and densification of the buttress .
rock used for choking shall pass a num inch num mm screen and shall be no more than num of the total rock required for the buttress .
acceptance of the gradation will be by visual inspection by the engineer at either the source of the rock or at the project site .
any difference of opinion between the engineer and the contractor about the acceptability of the gradation shall be resolved by sampling and testing the rock in accordance with the method provided in aldotnum .
the equipment labor and sorting site for this procedure shall be provided by the contractor at no cost to the department .
num construction requirements .
a general .
in general the work necessary to correct a landslide is dependent upon the in situ conditions and extent of damage existing at each site and will vary according to the details shown on the plans .
basic procedures may require any combination of the following work items num .
excavation for the removal of loose or unwanted material .
normally unclassified excavation as provided in section num will apply unless otherwise noted by plan details .
num .
construction of paved flumes installation of underdrain systems standard underdrain as provided in section num or special underdrain as noted herein or detailed in the plans or other methods of removing surface or ground water from the area .
num .
construction of retaining structures standard retaining wall mechanically stabilized earth wall or rock buttress as noted by plan details to stop slippage of slope material .
num .
restoration of back slope or front slope to a designated slope angle utilizing removed material ordinary or special borrow material as designated by the plans .
this work requires the preparation of the surface by rolling or otherwise compacting the area as directed to receive the backfill material .
the backfill material shall be placed in the same manner as prescribed in subarticle numd for embankment .
num .
restoration of the erosion control over the repaired area as prescribed by the appropriate erosion control items provided in the contract .
b excavation .
the area designated for treatment shall be excavated to the depth indicated by the plans or directed to remove loose or otherwise unacceptable material .
removed material designated for reuse shall be stockpiled on approved areas material not designated for reuse shall be disposed of as required in article num .
unless stockpile areas are designated on plan details the contractor shall provide at his expense satisfactory storage areas outside of the right of way limits .
section num landslide corrections num c drainage systems .
num .
surface drainage systems when required will be classified paid for and constructed under the appropriate item for such provided in the contract reference sections num num num num and num .
num .
underdrain systems when required will be one of the following classifications as indicated by the plan details .
a .
standard underdrain constructed and paid for under the provisions of section num. b .
special underdrains constructed in accordance with the details provided in the plans for size shape and content .
c. special filter blanket constructed in accordance with the details provided in the plans specifications or as directed by the engineer for size shape content and type .
if an aggregate blanket is required the type and size of aggregate shall be as designated on the plans .
the geotextile filter shall be placed in the manner and at the locations shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
at the time of installation the geotextile shall be rejected if it has defects rips holes flaws deterioration or damage incurred during manufacture transportation or storage .
the geotextile shall be protected at all times during construction from contamination by surface runoff and any geotextile so contaminated shall be removed and replaced with uncontaminated geotextile .
any geotextile damaged during its installation or during placement of backfill material shall be replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
the work shall be scheduled so that num days does not expire between placement of the geotextile and the covering of the geotextile with backfill .
backfill aggregate shall not be dropped on the geotextile from a height greater than num foot num mm .
greater drop heights will be permitted if the contractor provides a cushioning layer of sand on top of the geotextile before dumping of any stone .
the combination of drop height for stone and sand cushion layer thickness to be approved must be demonstrated to not puncture or damage the geotextile .
no measurement or separate payment shall be made for a sand cushion layer placed for the purpose of allowing an increased drop height of stone .
any damage to the geotextile during placement of aggregate shall be corrected prior to proceeding with the work .
d. horizontal drains constructed in accordance with the following details at locations etc .
shown on the plans or directed .
num horizontal drains shall cover the work of drilling appropriate size horizontal holes angle and slope designated on plans into backslope or frontslope and the installation of a designated size of slotted pvc drainage pipe to facilitate drainage of ground water .
num the installation procedure requires the holes be drilled with rotary drilling equipment capable of providing num inch num mm to six inch num mm diameter holes up to num feet num m in length to the designated lines and grades through soil and rock formations .
num the drilling equipment shall allow the installation operation to be accomplished by inserting the plastic drain inside the drill hole the full length of the drill hole .
num the installation operation of the drain pipe shall be done in such a manner that the drain pipe will be cemented together where necessary to form a continuous tube and will not be telescoped or damaged to the extent that its drainage efficiency will be impaired when completed .
num the entrance end of the pipe shall be plugged with a rounded or pointed extension .
the space between the drilled hole and the pipe shall be tightly plugged with earth for a length of at least num feet num mm at the outlet end of the hole .
num water used for drilling and water developed during drilling operations shall be disposed of by the contractor in such a manner that no damage will result to the work .
num unslotted pvc pipe approximately num feet num m in length shall be provided at the mouth of the drain to collector structure .
section num landslide corrections num d slope retaining structures .
num .
retaining walls castinplace or precast if required shall be constructed measured and paid for as provided in the appropriate section of the specifications .
num .
rock buttress if required shall be constructed etc .
in accordance with the following requirements a .
general .
the construction in general consists of the excavation of a trench preparation of a bedding to receive a rock buttress and the construction of a rock buttress to the line grades and slopes detailed on the plans .
b. excavation of trench .
the excavation necessary to prepare the trench to the line grades slopes and section shown on the plans or directed shall be classified and paid for under the item of unclassified excavation or as provided on the plans .
c. preparation of trench bed .
the preparation of the trench bed shall be as detailed on the plans .
special bedding if required will be noted on the plans .
materials used in the special bedding shall conform to the specified sections of the standard specifications and will be paid for under the appropriate pay item for the materials used .
d. rock buttress .
the rock buttress shall be placed in the prepared trench to the slopes shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
choking material shall be provided when needed to sufficiently fill the voids to allow for traversing by truck or as a filter layer between the rock buttress and any required embankment materials .
densification of the rock backfill will be required as directed by the engineer but density testing will not be required .
furnishing of the rock for the construction of the buttress shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
if permission is given to use any material outside regular excavation limits within the right of way it will be paid for only once under the appropriate pay item provided by this section .
e construction requirements for geotextiles .
exposure of geotextiles to the elements between lay down and cover shall be a maximum of num days to minimize damage potential .
the geotextile shall be placed and anchored on a smooth graded surface approved by the engineer .
the geotextile shall be placed in such a manner that placement of the overlying materials will not excessively stretch or tear the geotextile .
anchoring of the terminal ends of the geotextiles shall be accomplished through the use of key trenches or aprons at the crest and toe of the back slope of the buttress or as specified on the plans .
successive geotextile sheets shall be overlapped in such a manner that the upslope sheet is placed over the downslope sheet or upstream over downstream .
in underwater applications the geotextile and required thickness of backfill material shall be placed the same day .
the backfill placement shall begin at the toe and proceed up the slope .
riprap and heavy stone filling shall not be dropped onto the geotextile from the height of more than num foot num mm .
smaller sizes of stone filling shall not be dropped onto the geotextile from a height exceeding num feet num m. any geotextile damaged during placement shall be replaced as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
the geotextile shall be joined by either sewing or overlapping as outlined in article num of these specifications .
all seams shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
overlapped seams shall have a minimum overlap of num inches num mm except where placed under water where the overlap shall be a minimum of num feet num m. a geotextile patch placed over a damaged area shall be extended num feet num m beyond the perimeter of the tear or damage .
f restoration of slide slope .
restoration of slide slope front or back shall consist of preparing the area to receive the replacement material by the shaping and compaction of the area as prescribed in subarticle numd for embankments .
the material in place shall be compacted as noted in the plan details or directed by the engineer .
section num landslide corrections num the backfill material may be the material previously removed ordinary borrow or special backfill material of the type designated in the plans or proposal .
said backfill shall be placed in layers and compacted as prescribed in section num or noted by plan details .
erosion control items provided in the plans shall be used to reestablish the ground cover damaged or destroyed by the landslide or the restoration work .
num method of measurement .
a general item .
construction items not specifically provided in this section will be classified measured and paid for under the respective pay items for such work provided in the contract .
b rock buttress for landslide correction .
the item of rock buttress for landslide correction when provided in the plans or proposal will be the weight mass of rock used in construction of the buttress measured on approved scales .
measurement of any special bedding if required will be as specified for the respective pay item used for bedding .
c special underdrain .
the item of special underdrain when provided in the contract will be measured in linear feet meters of each special type detailed in the plans along the center of each line or lateral center to center of junctions andor fittings .
d special filter blanket .
the item of special filter blanket when provided in the contract will be measured in square yards square meters to the nearest num square yard num m complete in place for the material placed and accepted .
e horizontal drains .
horizontal drains will be measured by the linear foot meter of drain pipe installed in the holes drilled including the extension necessary to discharge into the collector structure .
f special backfill for slide correction .
num .
when the item of special backfill for slide correction per ton metric ton is provided in the contract the material ordered and accepted will be measured in tons metric tons on approved scales .
num .
when the item of special backfill for slide correction per cubic yard in place cubic meter is provided in the contract the accepted volume of backfill will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters complete in place by the cross section and average end area method .
cross sections shall be taken of the material in its original position whether from a borrow pit stockpile or other approved source before placing of the backfill and recross sectioned after placing the backfill .
the volume computed between these cross sections shall be the volume of backfill .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
when the item of rock buttress for landslide correction is provided in the plans or proposal the accepted weight mass measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid .
said contract unit price bid shall be payment in full for furnishing andor producing material royalties loading hauling placing consolidating shaping and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
the accepted item of special underdrain measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter which shall be full compensation for the underdrain complete in place .
said unit price includes excavation of the trench backfill and compaction thereof furnishing and installation of any pipe fittings geotextile filter or filler necessary thereto furnishing and placing of a connection to an outfall pipe or collector structure the disposal of excess material and for all tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
the accepted item of special filter blanket measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which shall be full compensation for the item complete in place and includes the furnishing of all materials preparation of the area to section num treatment of lime sinks num receive the filter blanket installation of the blanket and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
the accepted item of horizontal drain measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installation of the drains complete in place and connected to the collector structure .
said unit price includes full compensation for furnishing all materials services equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
the items of special backfill for landslide correction ordered accepted and measured as noted above will be paid for at the appropriate unit price bid per ton metric ton or cubic yard cubic meter complete in place which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the type material designated for preparation of the area to be treated loading hauling placement compaction and dressing of the area to the designated slope and includes all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa rock buttress for landslide correction per ton metric ton numb special underdrain ___ inch mm diameter per linear foot meter numc special filter blanket per square yard square meter numd horizontal drain ___ inch mm diameter per linear foot meter nume special backfill for landslide correction per ton metric ton numf special backfill for landslide correction per cubic yard cubic meter specify either aggregate or geotextile .
section num treatment of lime sinks num description .
the work under this section shall cover the treatment required to correct conditions occurring when lime sinks are found within or adjacent to construction limits of the work .
the application and extent of the treatment will be in accordance with plan details or as directed .
num materials .
material furnished for use under this section shall be of the quality and character noted on the plans or ordered by the engineer suitable for the purpose intended and consistent with the requirements for such materials as may be noted in other parts of these specifications .
num construction requirements .
a general .
choice of equipment to perform the work required under this section shall in general be that of the contractor provided such will produce the desired results within the limits directed by the engineer .
b sequence of work .
to properly evaluate the limits of the corrective treatment required to effectively bridge a lime sink the work shall be performed in the following sequence num .
exploration of the lime sink area to locate the sink hole will be as directed by the engineer the size of the exploratory excavation shall be kept to a minimum .
num .
the sink hole once located shall be enlarged to the size and depth as directed by the engineer to expose the solution cavity .
num .
after exposing the solution cavity it shall be plugged with a rock boulder or a plug of suitable material capable of sealing the cavity yet maintaining proper ground water drainage .
num .
after installation of the plug a strata of selected material that will permit proper ground water drainage shall be placed to a depth of approximately onehalf the excavated hole depth but not in excess of num feet num m. the material used for this special backfill shall be of the type shown on the plans or directed .
this special backfill material shall be placed in approximately equal uniform layers not to exceed num feet section num roadbed processing num num mm in thickness for the depth specified or directed .
no compaction or density tests will be required .
num .
the remainder of the backfill for the lime sink excavation shall then be constructed of unclassified excavation borrow or other designated material in accordance with the requirements for embankments as required in section num .
num .
in the event a sink hole occurs in the immediate vicinity of the finished subgrade elevation the use of concrete seal may be directed .
in such case the same process noted before shall be used up to the bottom elevation designated for the concrete seal .
the concrete shall be class a concrete of the thickness shown on the plans or as directed .
steel reinforcement if required will be as provided by the plans or as directed .
num method of measurement .
a lime sink excavation .
measurement for this item will be in cubic yards cubic meters computed from field measurements of the material actually removed as directed .
b special backfill for lime sink .
special backfill material furnished as directed will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters loose measurement or per ton metric ton in the transporting vehicle .
the boulder or plug will be measured for payment as an estimated number of cubic yards cubic meters or an estimated tonnage metric tonnage .
c concrete seal .
when the use of a concrete seal is ordered measurement will be made in cubic yards cubic meters computed from field measurement of concrete actually placed .
all reinforcement required will be measured in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
the accepted volume of lime sink excavation measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be payment in full for the removal and disposal of the excavated material in a manner satisfactory to the engineer and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the plans and this specification .
num .
the accepted volume of special backfill material including the plug measured as noted above in accordance with the method provided in the contract cubic yard cubic meter or ton metric ton will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be payment in full for the item complete in place and shall include all costs incidental to procurement excavating hauling dumping spreading and formation of the embankment and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
num .
the accepted volume of concrete for the seal measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the preparation of the concrete bed furnishing of all materials mixing hauling and placing and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
steel reinforcement will be paid for under item num steel reinforcement .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa lime sink excavation per cubic yard cubic meter numb special backfill for lime sink type material per cubic yard cubic meter numc special backfill for lime sink type material per ton metric ton numd concrete seal for lime sink per cubic yard cubic meter section num roadbed processing num description .
this section shall cover the operations required to provide a satisfactory roadbed for receiving a base or pavement structure layer .
roadbeds will be of two types num improved roadbeds when section num roadbed processing num designated on the plans or num modified roadbed whenever improved roadbed is not specified on the plans .
this section covers the additional work above that required for regular earthwork construction specified under section num .
improved roadbed .
improved roadbed shall require the top layer or layers of the graded earth of both cuts and fills with the upper surface at subgrade elevation to be constructed of selected material from unclassified excavation or borrow .
each layer of the plan designated thickness shall be processed and compacted as specified in article num .
modified roadbed .
modified roadbed shall require that the existing top layer of the graded earth of both cuts and fills below subgrade elevation be processed and compacted as specified in article num .
this procedure is to establish a proper subgrade before constructing an overlying layer .
num materials .
a improved roadbed materials from unclassifed excavation .
materials for improved roadbed that are from unclassified excavation shall be the best available materials as determined by the engineer meeting the requirements given in item numcnum .
b improved roadbed materials from borrow excavation .
materials for improved roadbed that are from borrow excavation shall meet the requirements given in item numcnum .
num construction requirements .
a general .
choice of equipment to perform the work required under this section shall in general be that of the contractor provided such produces the desired results .
construction of the roadbed shall be conducted so that earth or other material does not prevent immediate drainage of water to the side ditches .
b improved roadbed .
num .
preparation of roadbed .
both cuts and fills shall be graded to the elevation designated on the plans below subgrade elevation in accordance with the requirements of section num and to the typical section shown on the plans or directed .
no selected roadbed material shall be placed until the graded earth surface is satisfactory to grade cross section and density in accordance with section num .
if a contract requires an improved roadbed to be placed on an earth surface constructed under a previous contract the surface shall be repaired to the extent directed .
additional material required will be paid for under the proper classification of the material directed to be used .
num .
placement and processing of selected roadbed material .
after preparation as noted above the roadbed shall be brought up to subgrade elevation in maximum num inch num mm layers using the designated selected materials .
each of these layers except those specified in this subarticle shall be processed utilizing the item roadbed processing by thoroughly pulverizing blending and mixing until uniform in texture and appearance insofar as practical as determined by the engineer .
each layer shall be compacted to the density noted in subarticle numd for improved roadbed layers .
the section and density shall be maintained until placement of the next overlying improved roadbed subbase base or other layer .
num .
special conditions .
in grading contracts which do not provide a subbase base or other overlying layer the upper improved roadbed layer will not be processed as outlined above for roadbed processing but shall be brought to the required elevation typical section and density that specified in subarticle numd .
the required section shall be maintained until final acceptance however maintenance of the density will not be required .
c modified roadbed .
num .
preparation of roadbed .
the graded earth shall have been constructed to subgrade elevation in accordance with section num or may by previous contract have been constructed as an improved roadbed .
no roadbed shall be processed as outlined in this subarticle until the graded earth surface is section num roadbed processing num satisfactory to elevation and typical section .
if a contract requires roadbed processing on an earth surface constructed under a previous contract the surface shall be repaired to the extent directed .
additional material required will be paid for under the proper classification of the material directed to be used .
num .
processing of the roadbed material .
after preparation as noted above the top six inch num mm minimum layer except for those layers specified in this subarticle of the entire width of both cuts and fills shall be processed utilizing the item roadbed processing by thoroughly pulverizing blending and mixing until uniform in texture and appearance insofar as practical as determined by the engineer .
each layer shall be compacted to the density noted in subarticle numd for modified roadbed .
the section and density shall be maintained until placement of the next overlying subbase base or other layer .
num .
special conditions .
the work described for a modified roadbed is for the establishment of a proper subgrade before constructing an overlying subbase base or pavement layer or temporary surfacing .
in grading contracts which do not provide for one of the above the upper num inch num mm layer of subgrade will not be processed as outlined above for roadbed processing but shall be brought to the required elevation typical section and density that specified in section num .
the required section shall be maintained until final acceptance however maintenance of the density will not be required .
in addition to the above roadbed processing will not be required for those roadbeds which are to be stabilized as specified in section num or section num. d density requirements .
density for the layers of both improved and modified roadbed shall be as specified in section num for each type layer .
e surface requirements .
the graded earth surface and the finished subgrade surface after being properly compacted shall be checked by the use of bluetops strings and template and all portions not within the following tolerances shall be corrected variations from the designated grade up to plus num inch num mm or minus num inch num mm will be allowed provided the variation does not increase or decrease more than num inch num mm in num feet num m however at bridge structures a plus tolerance will require additional fine grading to prepare a suitable grade tie .
the finished surface shall not vary at any point more than num inch num mm in any num foot num m section from a taut string applied parallel to the surface and the roadbed centerline or more than num inch num mm from a template placed at right angles to the roadbed centerline .
the template shall be of a rigid frame adjustable metal type accurately set and at least as long as the width of roadbed being checked up to num feet num m. additional widths may be checked by the use of string and level .
the contractor shall furnish template string and necessary personnel to handle same under the direction of the engineer .
no subbase or other layer shall be placed on the roadbed until it meets specified requirements for alignment grades cross section and density .
where a permeable asphalt treated base patb layer is to be placed pay item nume the finished subgrade elevations shall not vary from design by more than num feet nummm based on rod and level survey readings taken at a minimum of five locations across each lane edge outer wheel path midlane inner wheel path and inside edge of lane at longitudinal intervals not greater than num feet num m. surface irregularities shall not exceed num inch num mm between two points longitudinally or transversely using a numfoot num m straightedge .
f protection and maintenance of roadbed .
the contractor shall be responsible for the protection and maintenance of any existing roadbed or any roadbed constructed during the contract .
the roadbed shall be maintained free from ruts and other depressions in a smooth and compacted condition and true to lines and grades .
any of the contractors hauling and other equipment used in such a way as to cause excessive rutting or raveling of the roadbed material shall either be removed from the work or suitable runways shall be provided to prevent rutting .
no payment will be made for the protection and maintenance of the roadbed such being considered incidental to the work .
however if a contract requires an improved roadbed to be placed on an earth surface constructed under a previous contract the surface shall be repaired to the extent directed under the requirements of section num .
section num stabilized roadbed num num method of measurement .
measurement and payment for the materials used in the construction of improved roadbed and modified roadbed will be at the contract unit price for unclassified or borrow excavation as provided in the contract .
measurement for the item of roadbed processing which is the additional processing over and above that normally required by section num will be in num foot num m roadbed stations for each layer processed .
the length of roadbed stationing will be in num foot num m stations and fractions thereof to the nearest foot meter of any main roadbed in accordance with the following on each roadbed separately for divided highways having more than one roadbed on each half of a roadbed of a four lane facility constructed with a positive divider between opposing traffic on ramps on frontage connecting and crossing roads and on widening work each roadbed as defined above whether widening is on one side or both sides .
no measurement will be made for increased widths lanes turnouts spurs or crossovers when shown on the plans or for variations in widths due to changes in slopes .
for additional areas over those shown on the plans measurement will be allowed in the ratio of the increase in width to the standard width shown on the plans .
the total measurement shall be the sum of the lengths measured along the center of the main roadbed or along each separate roadbed of divided highways plus the measured ramps from where the ramp centerline crosses the edge of shoulders plus if any the lengths of cross roads connecting roads and frontage roads .
the length of modified roadbed or improved roadbed constructed under a previous contract and actually reprocessed will be measured for payment .
no separate measurement will be made for reshaping of a roadbed constructed under a previous contract such being considered incidental to the work covered by this section however any additional material required to restore the roadbed to typical section will be measured and paid for under the appropriate item of material ordered used .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
each separate layer of roadbed processed and accepted and measured as noted above will be paid for at the unit price bid for num foot num m roadbed stations .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for the mixing remixing watering and reprocessing necessary to obtain and maintain the required grade section and density as noted herein in this section and includes all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work as described herein .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa roadbed processing per roadbed station section num stabilized roadbed num description .
this section shall cover the work of preparing a roadbed for receiving a base and pavement structure by stabilizing it with an approved local or commercial material .
the work shall consist of scarifying the roadbed incorporating the stabilizing material into the roadbed and compacting the roadbed to the proper grade section and density .
when stabilizing material is present on the roadway surface the work shall consist of incorporating the stabilizing aggregate into the roadbed and compacting the roadbed surface to the proper grade section and density .
num materials .
the stabilizing material to be incorporated shall be an approved local or commercial material of the type provided by the plans or proposal section num stabilized roadbed num num construction requirements .
a general .
choice of equipment to perform the work under this section shall in general be that of the contractor provided such produces the desired results noted herein and does not damage or injure any completed work or facility designated to be incorporated into the work .
b preparation of the roadbed .
the roadbed shall have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of section num .
the designated sections of the roadbed of the width specified on the plans of both cuts and fills shall then be scarified or otherwise loosened for the depth specified by the plans or as directed .
certain equipment capable of mixing the stabilizing material and the material in place without preworking the inplace material may permit combining this step with the requirements of subarticle c below .
c placement and processing of stabilizing material .
the approved stabilizing material shall be spread uniformly over the roadbed at the rate specified on the plans or as directed by approved spreading equipment .
the stabilizing material shall then be mixed with the subgrade material until uniform in color and texture as directed and compacted to the required grade section and density .
d density and surface requirement .
density and surface requirements shall be the same as specified in subarticle numd and e respectively .
e protection and maintenance of roadbed .
protection and maintenance of roadbed shall be the same as specified in subarticle numf .
num method of measurement .
all accepted stabilizing material ordered and accepted will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters loose measurement or per ton metric ton .
stabilizing roadbed with inplace material will be measured in units of roadbed station as described in article num .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted volume of roadbed stabilizing material measured as noted above in accordance with the method provided in the contract cubic yard cubic meter or ton metric ton will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the item complete in place on the roadbed .
said unit price shall include all cost of procurement hauling spreading scarifying mixing and processing as required to incorporate the stabilizing material to the specified depth to obtain and maintain the required grade section and density of the roadbed until covered by an overlying layer of ordered material and includes all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the contract unit price for stabilizing roadbed with inplace material shall be full compensation for all equipment tools labor and incidentals required for mixing and processing as required to incorporate the stabilizing material to the specified depth .
it shall also be full compensation for obtaining and maintaining the required grade section and density of the roadbed until covered by an overlying layer .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa roadbed stabilizing material type material per cubic yard cubic meter numb roadbed stabilizing material type material per ton metric ton numc stabilizing roadbed with inplace material per roadbed station section num lime stabilized roadbed num section num lime stabilized roadbed num description .
this section shall cover the work of preparing a roadbed for an overlying base and paving structure by stabilizing it with a lime treatment .
the work shall consist of scarifying the roadbed incorporation of lime and the necessary processing thereof in accordance with one of the following methods to the proper grade section and density .
class num lime stabilization shall consist of spreading and incorporating the specified percentage of lime in two increments in the following sequence spreading the first increment initial mixing mellowing spreading the second increment final mixing compacting and finishing in accordance with these specifications .
mellowing is defined as the process of softening to a loamy consistency .
class num lime stabilization shall consist of spreading the specified percentage of lime initial mixing mellowing final mixing compacting and finishing in accordance with these specifications .
class num lime stabilization shall consist of spreading the specified percentage of lime mixing compacting and finishing in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
all material furnished for use shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate sections of division num materials .
water shall meet the requirements of article num lime shall meet the requirements of section num .
the soil used in the stabilization shall consist of existing roadbed material or material added as directed .
particles of aggregate larger than those passing the num inch num mm sieve and deleterious substances such as roots stumps grass turfs and other vegetable matter shall be removed from the soil .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the basic requirement for work under this section is to obtain a completed layer or layers of roadbed material containing a uniform lime mixture with a smooth closely knit surface free from cracks loose or segregated areas and constructed to the proper depth width and surface requirement as specified .
quantities and percentages of lime shown on the plans and proposal are based on preliminary soil investigation and dry laboratory sample tests .
the actual application rate will be established from dry density tests made just prior to beginning stabilization work .
the initial tests are based on hydrated lime .
if quicklime is used and placed directly on the roadbed in pebble form the percentage will be adjusted by the engineer based on a factor of num times the hydrated lime percentage required .
while either hydrated lime or quicklime may be used on different segments of the project a second application of lime must be of the same type used in the first application .
it is necessary to the quality of lime treated materials that all such materials be kept moist at all times .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to provide sufficient equipment and keep all partially constructed or completed lime stabilized layers sufficiently and continuously moist until a succeeding layer has been placed thereon or until final acceptance of the project .
b equipment .
choice of equipment to perform the work required under this section shall in general be that of the contractor provided such produces the desired results .
c preparation of the roadbed .
the roadbed shall have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of section num .
the roadbed shall be scarified to the depth required for the stabilization prior to the lime application .
the depth of scarification shall be carefully controlled so that the surface of the roadbed below the scarified material shall remain undisturbed and conform to the established crosssection .
the scarified material shall be partially pulverized and all existing unsuitable material and material retained on a num inch num mm sieve shall be removed .
section num lime stabilized roadbed num d application of lime .
the rate of application of lime shall be as specified by the engineer .
when the lime is to be placed in two applications as designated for class num lime stabilization and the design percentage equals num num shall be placed in the first application unless noted otherwise on the plans .
when the lime is to be placed in two applications as designated for class num lime stabilization and the design percentage equals num at least num but not more than num shall be placed in the first application unless noted otherwise on the plans .
no lime shall be applied between october num and april num without written authorization of the construction engineer .
application of the lime shall be accomplished by either an approved dry application or slurry application method .
the slurry application method shall be used unless shown otherwise on the plans .
dry application lime applied by this method shall be spread uniformly and shall be sprinkled with water sufficient to prevent loss of lime by wind .
spreading of the lime when wind and weather conditions are unfavorable will not be permitted nor will spreading of the lime by motor patrol be acceptable .
slurry application lime applied by this method shall be mixed with water in approved agitating equipment and applied to the roadbed as a thin water suspension of slurry .
the distributing equipment shall be equipped to provide continuous agitation from the mixing site until applied on the roadbed .
the proportion of lime shall be such that the dry solids content shall be at least num percent by weight mass .
note when quicklime is used it shall be turned under by an approved means prior to application of water so as to reduce the harmful exposure to the heat of hydration by the quicklime .
the distribution of lime at the rate specified shall be attained by successive passes over a measured section until the specified percentage of lime has been spread .
after each successive pass the material shall be incorporated into the soil with the mixing equipment .
additional water if necessary shall be added and mixed into the mass to hasten mellowing .
payment will not be made for any lime that has been spread and exposed before mixing for a period of six hours or more .
such areas shall be treated again with the full required rate of application .
additional lime shall be added at the contractors expense to any section on which excessive loss has occurred due to washing or blowing prior to mixing .
the quantity of lime applied on any section shall be spread uniformly and shall not vary more than plus or minus five percent of the quantity ordered for that section .
no payment will be made for lime application exceeding the five percent plus tolerance .
when the quantity applied is deficient by more than the allowable minus tolerance additional lime shall be applied prior to mixing .
e mixing .
num .
initial mixing .
the lime and water shall be incorporated uniformly into the soil .
the mixing and watering operation shall be continued until a homogeneous mixture that will pass a num inch num mm sieve is obtained .
after satisfactory mixing is obtained the layer shall be reshaped to approximate line grade and section and sealed with a light roller if mellowing is required .
for class num and num stabilization the mixture shall be left to mellow for a minimum period of three days but not to exceed num days .
during this period the entire surface of the stabilized layer shall be kept moist by sprinkling and at no time allowed to become dry or dusty .
for class num stabilization the moisture content during the mixing operation shall not vary more than two percent plus or minus from the laboratory specified optimum moisture .
after mixing this material shall be compacted and finished as specified in subarticles f and g below .
num .
final mixing .
after the required mellowing period class num and num the layer shall be scarified and in the case of a class num treatment the second application of lime added .
the layer shall then be remixed as prescribed in the initial mixing operations adding water .
mixing shall be continued until num percent of material by dry weight mass exclusive of gravel and stone will pass a num inch num mm sieve and num percent will pass a number num num mm sieve .
the percent section num lime stabilized roadbed num moisture shall not vary more than two percent plus or minus from the laboratory specified optimum moisture during this mixing operation .
if mixing can not be completed in the same day begun the surface of the layer shall be sealed by rolling with a rubbertired roller before suspending that days operation and the processing continued the following day weather conditions permitting .
f compaction .
compaction of the mixture shall begin immediately after the required mixing operation noted above has been completed .
compaction operations shall be completed within num hours after it was begun and so conducted as to provide uniform compaction from bottom to top of the layer .
the mixture shall be aerated or watered as necessary to obtain the specified moisture content within two percent plus or minus of the laboratory specified optimum moisture .
if compaction can not be completed in the same day started the surface shall be sealed by rolling with a rubbertired roller before suspending that days operation and the compaction continued the following day .
throughout the entire compaction operation depressions defective areas or soft spots which develop shall be corrected immediately by scarifying the area adding lime when required or removing the material and reshaping and compacting in accordance with these specifications at the expense of the contractor .
density requirements will be as specified in section num .
standard weights masses will be established on the project using material from the completed mixture as directed by the materials and tests engineer .
the standard weight mass sample will be obtained and the standard weight mass established the same working day as the compaction tests are run .
if compaction can not be obtained within the num hour limit noted herein in this subarticle the section involved shall be reprocessed adding additional lime in the increment directed by the engineer and the compaction operation restarted all of which shall be at the sole expense of the contractor .
g finish and testing .
the surface of the layer shall be smooth and conform to the lines grades and cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
surface requirements shall be as specified in subarticle nume .
the thickness of the lime stabilized layer will be determined from measurements taken at intervals not to exceed num feet num m. the thickness of the entire layers shall not vary more than num inch num mm plus or minus from that shown on the plans .
any section deficient by more than num inch num mm shall be reconstructed immediately in accordance with these specifications .
any section exceeding the num inch num mm tolerance shall have additional lime added to correct the deficiency and shall be remixed to the specified depth and width in accordance with these specifications .
in each case such reconstruction and additional lime added shall be at the sole expense of the contractor .
h protection curing and maintenance .
upon completion of the compaction and finishing of each layer no vehicles or equipment other than watering equipment shall be permitted on the finished layer for a period of seven days unless otherwise authorized .
during this curing period the surface of the layer shall be lightly watered at frequent intervals to prevent drying .
the contractor may on a layer to be covered by a conventional base or subbase layer substitute at his expense an acceptable prime coat in lieu of watering during the curing period noted above .
regardless of the method of curing used the contractor shall be responsible for the protection and maintenance of the treated layer until it is covered by another layer or the completion of the project .
any damage to the treated layer due to other phases of construction or any cracking or other defects that may occur due to any cause or reason before being covered by the next layer shall be repaired without additional compensation .
num method of measurement .
the actual area of the roadbed stabilized as ordered for each specified compacted depth completed to the thickness and crosssection shown on the plans or directed will be measured in square yards square meters .
all calculations of areas measured for payment shall be based on measurements made to the nearest num yard num meter with areas calculated to the nearest square section num detour bridges num yard square meter .
the length will be measured along the surface of the completed roadbed at its center point .
the width will be the top surface width of the completed roadbed specified on the plans or directed measured perpendicular to the center line of roadbed .
additional areas required for cross overs turnouts etc .
shall be measured by length and width along the surface of area processed .
lime actually incorporated in the work will be measured by the ton metric ton .
in cases where pure quicklime cao is slaked on the jobsite to produce a lime slurry the pay quantity for lime will be measured in tons metric tons of hydrated lime as calculated using the certified lime purity for each truckload as follows total tons metric tons hydrated lime produced a x b x num a num b where a tons metric tons of quicklime delivered b certified percent purity note num ratio of molecular weights masses for hydrated lime num and pure quicklime num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the ordered and accepted area of lime stabilization measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter of the class and depth specified .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for all scarifying pulverizing mixing shaping watering compacting and application of lime and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete and maintain the work .
the accepted quantity of lime actually incorporated in the work except as noted herein measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton metric ton for lime which price shall be payment in full for furnishing transporting storing handling preparation of slurry and spreading and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals needed for completion of the work .
any additional soil material required to bring the roadbed to plan grade and section and any unsuitable material excavated will be measured and paid for under the appropriate item of unclassified excavation or borrow .
no direct payment will be made for blading shaping compacting and like operations .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa lime stabilization class ____ ___ inches mm thick per square yard square meter numb lime per ton metric ton section num detour bridges num description .
the work under this section shall cover the work of furnishing all materials construction maintenance and removal unless otherwise directed of any temporary detour bridge structure at the approximate location shown on the plans or directed .
num materials .
all timber used shall be a minimum of dense no .
num structure grade pine or equivalent grade of other wood .
steel or other types of bridging material may be used however the grade of material used must be approved by the bridge engineer .
other materials shall conform to the requirements noted elsewhere in these specifications for the type material used .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the alignment length of bridge grade and typical crosssection will be shown on the plans .
all construction shall be consistent with the requirements for the type work involved as noted in other portions of these specifications .
section num geosynthetics for slope and soft soil reinforcement num b bridge requirements .
if the detour bridge design is not shown on the plans then before construction of a detour bridge may be begun the contractor shall submit to the construction engineer a minimum of six prints of detailed drawings for the structure he proposes to furnish in accordance with num .
prior to submittal all drawings shall be checked stamped approved and signed by a licensed professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama and not employed by the alabama department of transportation .
the structure shall be designed to carry hsnum loading giving consideration to all vertical and lateral loads to be applied to the structure in accordance with the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges using the service load design method .
the contractor at his discretion may exceed these requirements to reduce his maintenance or replacement expense .
no work shall be performed on the structure until after distribution of the plans has been made to the area district and project managers .
the contractor will be required to comply with the details of the plans as approved .
the contractor shall take full responsibility for the proper structural design construction and maintenance of the facility .
the licensed professional engineer who signed the detour bridge submittal shall verify that the detour bridge as constructed meets all design criteria prior to any load being placed thereon .
a signed statement from the licensed professional engineer covering the verification shall be furnished to the project manager by the contractor .
num method of measurement .
no direct measurement or payment will be made for a detour bridge unless it is listed in the pay items of the contract .
the detour bridges listed in the proposal will be identified by the station number of its location and measured as a lump sum unit .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
detour bridges for which an item is provided in the proposal will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid .
said lump sum shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials equipment and labor necessary for the construction maintenance and removal if required of the detour bridge .
no direct payment will be made for detours which the contractor builds for his own convenience .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa detour bridge at station _______ per lump sum section num geosynthetics for slope and soft soil reinforcement num description .
this section covers the installation of geosynthetic soil reinforcement for the reinforcement of soil slopes and for soft soil stabilization .
a geosynthetic soil reinforcement material shall be any planar geosynthetic geogrid or geotextile material designed for the purpose of improving the shear strength of the soil matrix .
num materials .
the geosynthetic reinforcement either geogrid or geotextile shall be constructed of polyester polypropylene or polyethylene polymer resistant to all naturally occurring alkaline and acidic soil conditions resistant to heat ultraviolet light and to attack by bacteria and fungi in the soil .
applicable test methods for measuring strength and creep are astm d num standard test method for tensile properties of geotextiles by the wide width strip method section num geosynthetics for slope and soft soil reinforcement num astm d num standard test method for evaluating the unconfined tension creep behavior of geosynthetics astm d num standard test method for determining tensile properties of geogrids by the single or multirib tensile method reinforcement for soil slopes shall be any geosynthetic whose strength in the machine direction equals or exceeds the values shown in the following table soil slope reinforcement type creep reduced strength at a num total strain limit minimum pounds per foot knm test method num num num astm d num num num num num num num ultimate strength measured in accordance with astm d num or d num .
reinforcement for soft soil stabilization shall be any geosynthetic whose strength equals or exceeds values shown in the following table soft soil stabilization reinforcement type ultimate strength machine direction minimum pounds per foot knm ultimate strength cross machine direction minimum pounds per foot knm strength at num strain machine direction minimum pounds per foot knm strength at num strain cross machine direction minimum pounds per foot knm test method num num num num num num num num num astm d num astm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num receipt inspection and certification .
reinforcement geosynthetics delivered to aldot projects shall be packaged identified stored and handled in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num standard guide for identification storage and handling of geosynthetic rolls and samples .
each roll of delivered material shall be individually marked to permit direct correlation with the applicable production lot number .
delivered material shall be accompanied by a manufacturer certified copy of test results astm d num for geotextiles or astm d num for geogrids verifying the ultimate strength of the lots from which delivered rolls of reinforcement were obtained .
deliveries of reinforcement that are improperly packaged marked andor lack manufacturer certified lot test results astm d num for geotextiles or astm d num for geogrids will not be accepted by the project manager .
one sample per reinforced slope shall be taken in accordance with acceptance sampling and testing schedule section num .
num construction requirements .
all areas immediately beneath the installation area for the geosynthetic reinforcement shall be properly prepared as detailed on the plans specified elsewhere within the specifications or directed by the engineer .
in general the reinforcement shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and shall be placed within the layers of the compacted soil as shown on the plans or directed .
only that amount of geosynthetic reinforcement required for immediately pending work shall be placed to prevent undue damage to the reinforcement .
after a layer of geosynthetic reinforcement has been placed suitable means such as pins small piles of soil or other fixation means as recommended by the manufacturer shall be used to hold the geosynthetic reinforcement in position until the subsequent soil layer can be placed .
under no circumstance shall a tracktype vehicle be allowed on the reinforcement before at least num inches num mm of soil have been placed on the reinforcement .
soil layers shall be constructed in accordance with section num .
section num removal of underground storage tanks and contaminated soil num the overlapping of the geosynthetic reinforcement shall be as required by the plans .
if a specific overlap is not required by the plans individual pieces of reinforcement shall typically be installed side by side with the machine direction of the material oriented in the direction of required reinforcement .
when the delivered width is greater than the width of geosynthetic reinforcement required the reinforcement may be cut with a razor knife abrasion saw or similar tool .
as an alternate to cutting the contractor may be allowed to turn the excess portion of the reinforcement under provided an acceptable installation is obtained .
that portion of reinforcement cut off or turned under will not be measured for payment .
if a geotextile is required in conjunction with one or more layers of geosynthetic reinforcement it shall be installed as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of geosynthetic soil reinforcement measured for payment will be the number of square yards square meters of material installed and acceptably placed .
no measurement will be made for portions cut off overlaps or portions not needed but allowed to remain in the fill .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the quantity of geosynthetic soil reinforcement placed and measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa geosynthetic reinforcement for type per square yard square meter either reinforced slopes or soft soil stabilization enter type of reinforcement type num num num etc .
section num removal of underground storage tanks and contaminated soil num description .
this section shall cover the removal and disposal of underground storage tanks for petroleum based hydrocarbons and the removal and disposal of contaminated soil .
the term underground storage tank ust includes the ust and all components pump lines vent lines distribution lines etc .
of the tank .
this section shall also cover the removal and disposal of the contents of the ust and the backfilling of the areas of removal .
the approximate extent of the known contamination will be shown on the plans .
the actual limits of contamination will be determined in the field with verification sampling at the time of ust removal .
the treatment of groundwater after the removal of the usts will be done under a separate contract .
num materials .
material requirements are not given for the work required under this section .
the furnishing and placement of materials is covered under other sections .
num construction requirements .
a regulatory requirements and permits .
all work shall be in conformance with the rules and regulations of the alabama department of environmental management adem the environmental protection agency epa and the occupational safety and health administration osha .
for the purposes of conducting work for the aldot the term generator shall be defined as any person who utilizes any process that results in the production of a solid waste .
the section num removal of underground storage tanks and contaminated soil num contractor not the engineer will be responsible for signing all regulatory documentation as the generator .
if contaminated material is transported to or through another state work performed in that state shall be in conformance with any applicable regulatory requirements in the state involved .
the contractor shall obtain all permits that may be required for the handling hauling and disposal of the petroleum hydrocarbon liquids and sludge and contaminated soil .
b contractors notification of schedule to remove usts .
the contractor shall notify adem at least num calendar days before beginning the excavation work to remove a ust .
the contractor shall also provide the engineer with a copy of the notification and any acknowledgements of the notification returned by adem .
at least num calendar days in advance of excavation and removal the contractor shall notify the engineer to insure that appropriate personnel are on site to obtain samples and data as necessary for the verification testing .
the aldot will do all site assessment and verification testing .
c removal and disposal of ust and excavation pit contents .
the contractor shall remove liquids and sludges from a ust by pumping these materials out of the ust before it is removed from the ground .
usts may contain different types of petroleum hydrocarbons gasoline diesel sludge oil etc .. small amounts of liquids and sludges that can not be pumped from a ust and can not be removed from the appurtenances to the ust distribution lines pump lines etc .
shall be collected after the removal of the ust .
leakage from the ust onto the surrounding soil shall be avoided by properly pumping the contents of the ust into permitted transport vehicles .
any liquids or sludges associated with the ust system that are present or released into the excavated pit shall be removed and disposed .
the liquids and sludges shall be removed in accordance with the requirements given in the national fire protection association flammable and combustible liquids code nfpanum and adem requirements .
the contractor shall dispose the liquids sludges and other materials removed from the usts and the materials collected from the appurtenances to the usts .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a copy of the documentation of the disposal disposal receipts manifests weight tickets etc .. d excavation of potentially contaminated soil .
the contractor shall excavate the potentially contaminated soil to the extent designated by the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish install and maintain all hazard warning markings and devices at the areas of excavation that may be required by regulation .
the soil shall be placed in separate loads for testing .
a typical load for testing shall not be greater than num cubic yards num cubic meters but may be a larger or smaller load that the engineer designates as being acceptable for testing .
loads shall be kept separate to maintain the integrity of the testing and disposal .
loads shall be isolated by plastic sheeting minimum thickness num mils or by being placed in holding bins or other containers to prevent further contamination .
the stockpiled material shall be placed so that soils are not released into the surrounding environment by erosion .
after the results from the verification testing have been obtained the engineer will inform the contractor of what should be done with the soil .
if the engineer determines that the level of contamination does not warrant the disposal of the soil as contaminated soil it shall be incorporated into the earthwork or shall be disposed by the contractor in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
contaminated soil shall be kept separate from soil that is not contaminated .
e removal and disposal of usts .
usts shall be removed after the liquids and sludges have been removed from the usts and the appurtenances to the usts .
usts and connections shall be completely empty prior to disposal .
all lines product lines vent lines etc .
connections and other appurtenances shall be removed .
the method of ust disposal shall be submitted to the engineer for approval .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a copy of the documentation of the disposal of the ust and appurtenances disposal receipts manifests weight tickets etc .. f disposal of contaminated soil .
the contractor shall deliver the contaminated soil to a disposal site landfill incinerator etc .
that meets all regulatory requirements for the disposal of the contaminated soil .
section num removal of underground storage tanks and contaminated soil num documentation receipts manifests mass tickets etc .
of the delivery shall be provided to the engineer .
contaminated soil shall not be treated on site prior to disposal and shall not be removed to an alternate site for remediation prior to disposal .
g backfill .
backfilling the excavated areas will not be permitted until authorized by the engineer .
backfill within the limits of the roadway shall be in conformance with the requirements given in section num .
all other backfill shall be placed tamped and compacted to the consistency of the surrounding material .
backfill shall be compactable soil of an acceptable quality .
num method of measurement .
a disposal of hydrocarbon contaminated soil .
the disposal of hydrocarbon contaminated soil will be measured by the cubic yard cubic meter .
soil that is not disposed as contaminated soil and is incorporated into the earthwork or disposed by the contractor will be measured by the cubic yard cubic meter .
b underground storage tank removal .
the removal of a tank will be measured per each tank removed .
c removal and disposal of tank contents .
the quantity of tank contents removed and disposed will be measured in gallons liters as metered or computed from field measurements .
this pay item does not include liquids generated during the tank cleaning process .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
disposal of hydrocarbon contaminated soil .
the contract unit price for the disposal of hydrocarbon contaminated soil shall be full compensation for the excavation and handling of the soil securing the site hauling disposal and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the contract unit price shall also be full compensation for all expenses required for compliance with rules statutes laws and regulations that cover the removal and disposal of the contaminated soil .
the contract unit price for the disposal of the hydrocarbon contaminated soil shall also be full compensation for incorporating uncontaminated soil into the earthwork or disposal of uncontaminated soil .
the quantity of uncontaminated soil will be reduced by num to allow payment to be made at the same price as the disposal of hydrocarbon contaminated soil .
backfilling of excavated areas will be covered under other items of work .
num .
underground storage tank removal .
the contract unit price for the removal of an underground storage tank shall be payment in full for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary for the removal and disposal of the tank and appurtenances .
the contract price shall include cleaning the tank and all appurtenances .
num .
removal and disposal of tank contents .
the contract unit price for the removal and disposal of tank contents shall be full compensation for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary for removing and disposing the tank contents .
b payment will be made under item no .
numb disposal of hydrocarbon contaminated soil specialty item per cubic yard cubic meter numc underground storage tank removal specialty item per each numn removing and disposing tank contents specialty item per gallon liter specify gasoline diesel sludge oil etc .
if required .
section num cement mortar flowable backfill num section num cement mortar flowable backfill num description .
this section shall cover the work of placing a low strength flowable cement mortar as a backfill at driven piles drainage structures utility cuts and at other locations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall comply with the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the requirements noted hereinafter in this section .
specific reference is made to the applicable portions of the following sections section num fine aggregates section num mineral admixtures section num water section num air entraining additives section num cement unless approved otherwise by the engineer the following materials shall be used fine aggregate shall be concrete sand fly ash shall be either class c or class f ash and cement shall be type i for mixes num num num and num and type ii for mix num .
cement mortar shall be proportioned in accordance with the requirements given in table num master proportion table .
variations to the amounts of the components in a mix may be requested in writing from the materials and tests engineer to achieve a more desirable consistency workability or stability in the mix .
requests to reduce the amount of cement fly ash or air entrainment will not be approved .
table num master proportion table one cubic yard cubic meter proportions .
mix designation num num num num num cement lbs .
kg minimum num num num num num num num num num num fly ash lbs .
kg minimum num num num num num num num num fine aggregate lbs .
kg num num num num num num num num water lbs .
kg num num num num num num num num num num air oz .
g minimum num num accelerator oz .
g num num the accelerator dosage will vary from brand to brand .
adjust for desired results .
class f fly ash with a maximum loi of num and a maximum moisture of num cement mortar shall have the physical properties given in table num cement mortar physical property table .
section num cement mortar flowable backfill num table num cement mortar physical property table mix designation num num num num num compressive strength numday psi kpa minimum num num num num num num num num num num numday psi kpa minimum num num num num num num num num num num numday psi kpa minimum num num num num num num num num num num num num penetration resistance numhr .
psi kpa minimum num num num num num num numhr .
psi kpa minimum num num num num num num num num numhr .
psi kpa minimum num num num num num construction requirements .
a equipment .
the contractor shall furnish equipment capable of producing mortar meeting the requirements noted in this section .
all equipment must be in good working order and so maintained throughout the requirement for its use .
unless authorized otherwise in writing by the engineer the mixing and transporting equipment shall meet the requirements of item numbnum .
b preparation of mortar .
during the mixing operation the sand fly ash and cement shall be introduced in that order .
the water and any admixtures shall be added and the mortar allowed to mix for three minutes .
c weather limitation .
no mortar shall be placed when the ambient air temperature is below num f num c without written permission of the engineer .
d placement of mortar .
the mortar may be placed by direct discharge from the transporting vehicle by pumping or by any other method approved by the engineer .
the mortar material shall be brought up uniformly to the elevation or fill line shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
to prevent damage to the low strength mortar the freshly placed mortar shall not be subjected to load and shall remain undisturbed by construction activities for the following time periods unless approved or directed otherwise by the engineer mix num num hours mix num num hours mix num num hours mix num num hours mix num num hours .
num method of measurement .
cement mortar flowable backfill will be measured for payment in cubic yards cubic meters of mortar of the designated mix as ordered and approved by the engineer and acceptably placed .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
cement mortar flowable backfill will be paid for at the contract unit price for the designated mix .
this price shall be full compensation for furnishing of the mortar including all ingredients for the mixing placing and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa cement mortar flowable backfill mix ___ per cubic yard cubic meter section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num division num bases section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num description .
a general .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing all materials and the construction of soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbase courses complete in place on the roadbed .
typical cross section thickness number and material classification of the course will be shown in the plans or proposal .
b classification .
the base or subbase materials are established by general classifications such as selected materials granular soils soil aggregate processed reef shell and aggregates and consist of natural soil natural soil and natural aggregate combinations or manufactured commercial aggregates either used separately or blended in any combination with or without a stabilizing agent .
additional classification of the material by type according to the required gradation and composition of the material in the completed base or subbase course have been tabulated in sections num selected materials for bases num granular soil materials num drainage plane materials num soil aggregate materials num processed reef shell base materials and num crushed aggregate base materials .
the bases and subbases will be further established by the method of mixing road yard or plant as described in article num .
the general classification type and method of mixing will be shown in the proposal .
special details will be shown on the plans .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall comply with the requirements of the applicable sections of division num materials except as modified by the plans or proposal .
attention is directed to section num water section num cement section num lime for roadbed base stabilization section num selected materials for bases section num granular soil materials section num drainage plane materials section num soil aggregate materials section num processed reef shell base materials section num crushed aggregate base materials preliminary tests of optional sources shown on the plans indicate that the materials from these sources will meet plan requirements either in their natural composition or by blending with additional material .
however whether sources are shown on the plans or not the contractor shall supply whatever components are needed in whatever proportions are necessary to meet specified requirements of the plans and specifications for the item complete in place .
the processed materials in addition to complying with the requirements noted above must be capable of being compacted to the density requirements noted in this section .
any material furnished regardless of compliance with all other requirements which can not be compacted to the densities specified shall be either removed and replaced with more suitable material or corrected .
testing of material will be as provided in article num .
section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num num construction requirements .
a general .
the roadbed must be in an approved condition before placement of any base or subbase will be permitted .
approval shall be based on satisfactory completion of the roadbed in accordance with the requirements of sections num and num and if required by the plans or proposal the additional modification of the roadbed in accordance with the provisions of either section num or num .
the roadbed shall be checked carefully for elevations established by the engineer and shall be true to alignment and grade within the limits specified in subarticle nume .
control elevation stakes will be set as provided in article num .
on a contract for base and pavement only the roadbed in addition to the check for continuity of grades shall be checked for density as required by the process used in construction of the subgrade section num num or num .
loss of density shall require reprocessing of the top layer num inches num mm of the subgrade in accordance with section num by the method prescribed by the plans for the roadbed treatment .
low areas shall be corrected by the addition of material and reprocessing under the method prescribed for the roadbed treatment minor high spots shall be eliminated during the dressing of the processed roadbed .
material ordered used for the correction of low areas in the subgrade shall be measured and paid for under the appropriate classification of the material ordered used .
if no item for an acceptable type material is provided in the contract such shall be furnished under the provisions of article num .
a base of up to num inch num mm plan designated compacted thickness may be constructed in one layer .
unless otherwise shown on the plans a base of over num inch num mm thickness shall be constructed in approximately equal layers each of not over num inch num mm compacted thickness .
protection of base layers during construction shall be the contractors responsibility .
b equipment .
in general it shall be the contractors responsibility to select and furnish the proper size and amount of equipment that will produce and deliver to the roadbed mix spread shape and compact the base material .
when cement or lime additives are required all equipment necessary for the proper prosecution of the work shall be assembled on the site approved and in good working order before permission to start processing the layer will be given .
all equipment approved for use will be on a trial basis and if after a short test section the equipment should prove unsatisfactory it shall be removed replaced or supplemented as deemed necessary to accomplish the desired work .
c mixing .
num .
general .
there are three methods of mixing base and subbase materials they are road mixing yard mixing and plant mixing .
yard and plant mixing are considered as premixing .
the contractor may substitute yard or plant mixing in lieu of road mixing or plant mixing in lieu of yard mixing if so requested in writing .
all mixing shall be performed in such a manner that all materials or component parts are thoroughly blended and mixed to a uniform gradation and color with equipment and operation thereof producing consistently satisfactory results .
mixing water shall be added in a manner that will provide uniform blending with the material being mixed .
soft or unsatisfactory spots shall be removed andor repaired as directed by the engineer at no expense to the department .
num .
road mixing .
a .
general .
roadmixing shall be performed by a motor grader supplemented if necessary by other approved mixing equipment that will produce consistently satisfactory results .
base materials may be dumped directly on the subgrade subbase or underlying layer .
the contractor is encouraged but not required to use adjustable aggregate spreaders to place and spread commercial or crushed aggregates .
the dumping operation shall be limited to the amount of materials which can be mixed by the end of the next day .
this material shall be shaped and compacted no later section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num than the day after mixing .
in no instance shall the shaping and compacting be later than the second day after the dumping operation .
no deviation from the above will be allowed without written permission of the engineer .
the bottom layer shall be mixed without disturbing more than num inch num mm of the roadbed or underlying layer .
mixing of subsequent layers shall include scratching lightly of the surface of the underlying layer for bonding effect .
mixing shall be sufficiently performed to distribute all component parts of the layer uniformly throughout the mass producing a material of uniform color and gradation throughout the depth width and length insofar as practical as determined by the engineer of the layer .
mixing shall include but not be limited to the windrowing and blading of the material as necessary to obtain the required consistency .
water shall be applied as necessary during the mixing operation to provide at the time of compacting a uniform moisture content within two percentage points of optimum as established by the required laboratory test .
the material shall be aerated as often as necessary to correct excess moisture conditions by scarifying plowing harrowing blading or by using special suitable equipment .
b .
stabilization using additives .
num general .
it is necessary to the quality of the stabilization operation that careful control of the volumes of the base material the additive and moisture be exercised and that equipment furnished be capable of producing the desired results within the time frame noted herein of the type treatment involved otherwise the resultant product will be unsatisfactory .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to provide suitable equipment adequately sized and in sufficient numbers to process the materials as required .
each layer of base or subbase with an additive shall be processed through a test section utilizing equipment and methods noted for the type treatment involved .
this test section shall be used to establish acceptability of the contractors equipment and processing technique along with determining the correct volume of materials necessary to obtain the required depth shown on the plans or ordered in writing .
the length of the test section shall be determined by the engineer to best fit the required type of processing specified by the plans or proposal but shall not exceed onehalf mile num m nor be less than num feet num m. the material shall be placed and spread mixed if not premixed and processed through the entire operation normally required for the type of layer involved .
the layer shall then be checked for proper additive content density and depth and any deficiencies corrected as provided in article num .
satisfactory completion and acceptance of the test section will be required before the remaining work on the layer being tested is permitted .
the data thus obtained from the test section shall be applied to the placement procedure of the remainder of the layer involved .
num placing and mixing .
all materials except the additive shall be placed as noted in subitem a. above .
placement of the additive will be allowed only after the initial mixing and blending described in subitem a. above has been accomplished .
upon completion of the above operation the additive shall be spread uniformly over the area to be treated using approved methods and equipment .
the additive shall then be incorporated with the material to be treated in such a manner as to provide uniform distribution of the additive throughout the designated width and depth of treatment .
control of moisture shall be so exercised that the optimum moisture content num is present during the initial mixing of the materials to be treated and the additive .
section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num the use of lime and cement additives require special handling in accordance with the following lime treatment .
lime treatment shall not be performed between october num and april num without written permission of the engineer .
lime shall be spread only on that area which can be processed in the same working day .
any lime that has been spread and exposed to the air before mixing for a period of six hours or more or any section of the work on which excessive loss of lime has occurred due to washing or blowing will not be accepted for payment .
such areas shall be treated again with the full required rate of application before acceptance .
after preparation of the material to be treated has been accomplished the application of the lime shall be accomplished by either the dry application or the slurry application method described in subarticle numd except that the dry application method shall not be used where the resultant dust from the dry method would affect the visibility of the traveling public or affect adjacent property owners .
the actual rate of application of the lime will be set by the engineer based on the standard density of the material to be treated as determined by aashto t num .
the quantity of lime applied on any section shall be spread uniformly and shall not vary more than plus or minus five percent of the quantity ordered for that section .
no payment will be made for lime application exceeding the five percent plus tolerance .
when the quantity applied is deficient by more than the allowable minus tolerance additional lime shall be applied and the deficient section reconstructed in accordance with these specifications for the full depth and width at no extra compensation .
the mixing of the lime with the base materials shall be accomplished utilizing traveling mixers capable of handling the required depth of material loose the lime and the water necessary to provide the designated optimum moisture content .
the blended material shall then be processed in the same manner noted in item numdnum for lime treated bases .
deficiencies in the thickness of the lime stabilized layer in excess of those specified in subarticle numd shall be reconstructed immediately adding additional lime if deemed necessary by the engineer .
any additional lime and such reconstruction shall be at the sole expense of the contractor .
cement treatment .
cement treatment shall not be performed when the ambient ground temperature in the shade is below num f num c. should the air temperature drop below num f num c after incorporation of the cement protection shall be provided to prevent damage of the processed layer .
cement shall only be spread on the area that can be processed in the same working day .
any cement that has been spread and exposed to the air before mixing in excess of six hours or more or any section on which excessive loss of cement has occurred due to wind or rain will not be accepted for payment .
such areas shall be reconstructed with the required rate of treatment before acceptance at the sole expense of the contractor .
after the placement and processing of the base material to be treated the cement shall be spread utilizing equipment specially designed for the purpose .
the actual rate of application of the cement will be set by the engineer based on the standard density of the material to be treated as determined by aashto t num .
the quantity of cement shall be spread uniformly over the area to be treated and shall not vary more than five percent from the specified rate .
care shall be exerted to prevent loss of cement due to wind or other unfavorable conditions .
the mixing of the cement with the base material shall be restricted to traveling mixers capable of handling the required depth of material loose the cement and the water necessary to provide the designated optimum moisture section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num content .
when the mixer will handle only a part of the roadbed width the successive increments shall be of such length that the full width of material may be promptly mixed compacted and finished with not more than num minutes between mixing adjacent widths lanes .
the base and cement mix shall then be processed in the same manner noted in item numdnum for the cement treated bases .
should the thickness of treatment be found to be outside the tolerance noted in subarticle numd within two hours after completion of compaction and shaping the engineer may allow the reprocessing of the section provided additional cement is added in an amount to be designated by the engineer without additional cost to the department or handled as noted in item numdnum .
num .
yard mixing .
unless otherwise provided on the plans the mixing yard shall be furnished by the contractor .
yard mixing shall be accomplished by spreading each component in a layer of uniform width and thickness before placing the next component then thoroughly mixing the materials by means of a motor grader supplemented if necessary by other approved mixing equipment that will produce consistently satisfactory results .
the mixing shall be sufficient to combine all components into a mixture of uniform color and gradation adding water as necessary to obtain a uniform moisture content within two percentage points of optimum as established by the required laboratory test .
the mixture shall then be loaded into transporting vehicles by means that will prevent segregation of materials .
if calcium chloride or another similar additive is specified as a component of the mix the additive shall be spread in the amount specified in the proper mixing sequence and mixing continued until the additive has been thoroughly mixed uniformly into the mixture .
num .
plant mixing .
a .
general .
all of the following construction procedures are required for the base and subbase materials to be classified as plant mixed materials mixing material in a plant or pugmill dumping material directly into a truck hauling material to the project site and dumping material directly into a spreader that will spread the material into uniform layers of the required cross sections and thicknesses .
material that is dumped stockpiled andor rehandled prior to spreading will be classified as road mixed or yard mixed material .
b. mixing plant requirements .
the mixing plant requirements are as follows however any other mixing plant equipment developed that will produce equally satisfactory results will be acceptable for use with the approval of the engineer .
num the plant shall be an approved contrarotating twinshaft pugmill type central mixing plant of proven performance and adequate capacity .
the plant shall be equipped to proportion accurately by volume or weight mass .
if proportioned by volume component materials shall be fed onto a primary belt by a separate secondary belt for each component .
accurate proportioning shall be secured by positive control of secondary belt speed or by adjustable locking gates feeding onto the belt the mixed materials shall be discharged through a surge hopper of at least num cubic yard num m capacity .
the mixer also shall have an approved accurate mechanicallyfed device for adding cement or other additive at a specified rate when such components are required .
if proportioned by weight mass equipment used to determine the weight mass of aggregates shall meet the requirements of article num .
weight mass type mixers shall be equipped with a locking batch timer adjusted for a minimum num second net mixing time .
num the controls that operate the mixing plant shall be positioned so that the operator will have unobstructed vision of all phases of the operations that affect the proportioning of materials .
the plant shall be equipped with an approved device for section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num signaling the control operator to stop the plant when any malfunction occurs in the feedin system .
num the mixer shall be equipped with an accurate adjustable water meter device for controlling moisture content .
num storage bins shall be equipped with overflow pipes or chutes and shall be so partitioned that there can be no spillover into adjacent bins .
storage bins for calcium chloride lime or cement shall be water tight .
c. mixing plant operation .
num during the mixing operation the aggregate shall be introduced into the mixer in a way that will insure the proportion of each type of material to be used will be in the final mixture .
num water shall be added to the mix in an amount that will produce a uniform moisture content based on dry weight mass of the mixture within two percentage points of optimum as established by the required laboratory test .
num when required cement shall be added to the other components of the mix in the proportions as directed except that the engineer may vary the amount of cement by as much as num percent plus or minus .
after the required amount of cement has been set by the engineer the rate shall not vary more than num pounds num kg .
when required lime shall be added to the other components of the mix in the proportions as directed .
the quantity and percentage of lime shown on the plans or proposal are based on preliminary investigations and dry laboratory samples .
the actual rate or amount to be added will be determined from density tests made just prior to beginning mixing operations .
after the required amount of lime has been set by the engineer the rate shall not vary more than five percent .
num when directed to be used calcium chloride shall be added during the mixing operation by an approved metering device or by separate scales as required for cement at the rate of approximately num pounds num kg per loose cubic yard cubic meter of mixture based upon flake form .
if other forms of calcium chloride are used proportionate adjustment of rate of use and payment will be made .
the amount of calcium chloride may be reduced or eliminated entirely as directed by the engineer when weather conditions do not justify its use .
no calcium chloride shall be added when cement is used .
num if other additives are specified they shall be added as directed .
num the mixing plant shall not be operated at a speed or capacity that exceeds the manufacturers rated capacity established before mixing begins .
num after the plant has been set and calibrated the contractor shall give the engineer sufficient notice in advance of starting operations and shall make available sufficient skilled operators for checking the calibrations before actual start of operations .
materials and personnel used in checking the calibration shall be furnished without additional compensation .
d placing of base materials .
num .
general .
the operational procedure must be such that placement and processing of a layer will not damage the underlying layer or layers .
any material to be paid for by the cubic yard cubic meter shall be hauled in dump trucks whose volume may be readily determined .
premixed base and subbase materials shall be placed and spread by spreading equipment that will produce uniform layers of the required cross sections and thickness .
num .
cement treated bases .
cement treated bases and subbases shall be delivered and spread within num minutes after mixing .
mixtures containing cement that have not been shaped except for final finishing and compacted within three hours after mixing will be rejected and shall be removed promptly from the roadway and replaced at the contractors expense .
for each base layer the surface and thickness testing required in article num shall be performed immediately upon compaction of the layer and any variations from requirements shall be corrected immediately as specified in article num .
all such base layers shall be kept moist section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num enough for proper curing until covered by the next layer or the prime .
the top layer shall be primed as soon as the compacting shaping thickness and surface requirements have been met and in no case later than the next day after the surface is approved by the engineer unless weather conditions prevent .
prime shall be applied in accordance with section num except that item numbnum will not apply .
base material containing cement shall not be placed when the ground temperature in the shade is below num f num c. num .
lime treated bases .
lime treated bases and subbases shall be delivered spread shaped and compacted in the same day mixing occurs .
materials not compacted in the same day it is placed shall be reprocessed as directed at no additional cost to the state .
each base layer shall be tested for surface and thickness immediately after compaction in accordance with the provisions of article num and any variations corrected as noted therein .
the base layers shall be kept moist until covered by the next layer .
any cracking or other defects that may occur due to any cause or reason in any layer prior to being covered by the next plan layer shall be corrected immediately at no extra compensation .
base materials containing lime shall not be placed where the ground temperature in the shade is below num f num c unless authorized by the engineer .
e watering and compaction .
each layer of base and subbase shall be compacted to density as specified in section num .
where base and shoulder layers are constructed separately the contractor shall select and employ whatever method or procedure is necessary to produce required density at the edges of the base layers and to prevent lateral movement of the base material during compaction .
compaction tests will be made on each base layer and each layer shall be brought to required density before the next layer is placed .
additional watering in connection with compaction will be required to obtain required density at a uniform moisture content within two percentage points of optimum as determined by the required laboratory test except that the moisture content for crushed aggregate base layers shall be a minimum of five percent or as directed .
num shoulder construction requirements .
a general .
shoulder construction requirements will be the same as provided for in article num except as noted in this article .
shoulders will be of two general types standard or special design .
shoulder construction shall be so conducted that the base shoulder and adjacent side ditch will drain freely at all times .
the shoulder slopes and ditches shall be dressed to reasonably close conformity to the designated lines grades and cross section .
b standard shoulders .
this type shoulder where shown on the plans shall be constructed by extending each subbase and base layer the full width from front slope to front slope in one operation .
materials and construction details for layers placed in the shoulder area will be the same as for base layers .
c special design shoulders .
this type shoulder will consist of one or more layers of specified materials placed separately from the roadway base layers .
this type shoulder may also include a drainage plane layer or a bituminous pavement or both .
the composition and gradation of the materials and the width thickness and number of layers shall be as specified on the plans .
the sequence of the construction for the layers placed in the shoulder area will be at the option of the contractor provided such will accomplish the desired results and is kept abreast of roadway base construction .
the drainage plane layer and the bituminous base andor pavement shall be constructed in compliance with section num and the appropriate sections for the bituminous base or pavement .
the layers placed in the shoulder area shall be constructed in compliance with specifications for base layers of the same materials .
in spreading the next overlying layer of shoulder material on a drainage plane layer special precaution shall be taken to prevent displacement of or mixing with the drainage plane material .
this layer shall be placed by a spreader that will not touch or otherwise disturb the drainage plane layer .
in order to accomplish the above multiple passes will be permitted on wide shoulders .
section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num placement of this layer shall be so controlled that not more than num feet num m of drainage plane material will remain uncovered at any time .
use of any equipment that might mix the shoulder material into the underlying drainage plane layer will not be permitted .
layers placed in the shoulder area shall be compacted to the density specified in section num .
num sampling and testing .
a general .
all sampling and testing except inplace density will be performed on the complete inplace base or subbase layers after final mixing and spreading on the roadway has been completed except as noted in subarticle numc for cement treated base material .
inplace density will be performed on the layers after final shaping and compacting has been completed .
any necessary sample holes etc .
required to satisfactorily establish the acceptability of any base layer shall be repaired by the contractor immediately with like material .
the cost of such repairs is considered to be incidental to the work and shall be performed without additional compensation .
b surface requirements .
the finished surface of each subbase or base layer shall not vary more than num of an inch num mm in any num foot num meter section from a taut string applied parallel to the surface and roadbed centerline at the following locations num foot num mm inside the edges of subbase or base at the centerline and at other points as designated .
the finished surface shall not vary more than num of an inch num mm from the required section measured with a template placed at right angles to the roadbed centerline .
the template shall be of a rigid frame adjustable metal type accurately set and at least as long as the width of base layer being checked up to num feet num m. additional widths may be checked by the use of string and engineers level .
the contractor shall furnish template string and necessary personnel to handle same under the direction of the engineer .
where a permeable asphalt treated base patb layer is to be placed pay item nume the finished base layer elevations shall not vary from design by more than num feet num mm based on rod and level survey readings taken at a minimum of five locations across each lane edge outer wheel path midlane inner wheel path and inside edge of lane at longitudinal intervals not greater than num feet num m. surface irregularities shall not exceed num inch num mm between two points longitudinally or transversely using a numfoot num m straightedge .
c gradation and density .
testing for compliance will be made as specified in subarticle numa except that a layer with a cement additive will require the pretesting of the blended components prior to the addition of the cement additive on the primary belt at the mixing plant .
the gradation of each layer will be checked at intervals as currently scheduled by the department to determine compliance with the material specifications .
material falling outside of the specified bands of the general composition table shall be evaluated in accordance with the following for each failing test the price reduction will be five percent plus one percent for each percent for which the material failed to meet the required specifications .
this applies to each sieve percent clay liquid limit ll or plasticity index pi requirement .
these percentages are cumulative and apply to all material represented by that sample .
if the resulting reduced unit price is less than num of the original unit price the contractor will be given the option of modifying the in place material or removing and replacing the material .
in either case the gradation of the material will be retested for compliance with the material specifications .
the density of each layer will be checked at intervals as currently scheduled by the department to verify compliance with specification requirements .
density requirements are specified in section num. d thickness .
the thickness of each layer will be checked at intervals as currently scheduled by the department and at closer intervals if necessary to determine the limits of any section found to be outside of the tolerance limits .
num .
for a layer placed under a square yard square meter item the compacted thickness of the layer shall not be more than num of an inch num mm less nor num inch num mm more than the thickness specified on the plans or directed .
a thickness greater than the num inch section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num num mm tolerance may be accepted if uniform over a sufficient length to not materially affect the riding surface or reduce any required clearances and is within surface smoothness tolerances specified in subarticle numb .
num .
for a layer placed under a cubic yard cubic meter item the compacted thickness of the layer shall not exceed eight percent of each layer plus or minus of the designated thickness .
excess thickness above the eight percent noted above may be permitted to remain in place provided the riding surface is not affected and any required clearances are maintained the excess material above the eight percent tolerance allowed will be deducted from the pay quantities .
num .
if the base layer contains cement areas below required thickness or elevation shall be corrected by increasing the thickness of the next layer or for the top layer the surface may be brought to proper elevation and thickness with layers of bituminous plant mix of appropriate gradation where the pavement is to be a bituminous type .
these leveling layers shall be placed ahead of a plant mix pavement layer or after a liquid surface treatment layer if any .
these layers shall be placed without additional compensation or the contractor may at his option remove and replace the deficient areas at his own expense .
low areas in the subgrade under concrete pavement shall be corrected as specified under subarticle numc .
e width .
the widths shown on the plans or directed shall be the widths used for determining the area for pay purposes of square yard square meter layers .
widths in excess of the designated width may be acceptable if not detrimental to the appearance or design of the project however no deviation in excess of num feet num mm less than the designated dimension for each side of a roadway will be acceptable .
num maintenance of the work .
each base layer shall be maintained as provided herein without extra compensation until it is covered by a succeeding layer or acceptance of the contract .
the surface shall be kept free of ruts ridges holes and substantially true to profile grade and crosssection .
each base layer must have the required density and moisture at the time it is covered by another layer .
however maintenance requirements for moisture will be waived for crushed aggregate base after the layer has been properly compacted with proper moisture content .
no layer of base shall be covered by another layer or primed until it has been approved by the engineer .
special attention is directed to the fact that lime or cement treated bases require special care to insure proper curing .
daily watering rolling or maintenance of curing material is considered an integral part of the work until the treated layer is covered by another layer or completion of the contract .
the engineer may retest a primed base layer where he suspects that it does not have the required density and moisture .
all areas found deficient shall be corrected by the contractor at his expense prior to the placement of the next overlying layer .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to protect the base from damage and to protect the prime from being picked up or damaged by traffic and to replace promptly any base or prime so damaged .
num method of measurement .
a base materials .
measurement of base materials will be made in accordance with the particular item provided in the contract in accordance with the following num .
square yards square meters .
measurement by the square yard square meter will be made of a completed accepted layer of base constructed to the thickness and cross section shown on the plans or directed .
all calculations of areas for payment shall be based on computations made to the nearest num of a square yard num square meter .
the length will be measured along the surface of the layer at the centerline of the roadbed to the nearest num of a foot num m. for transitions in thickness the thickness will be measured to the midpoint of the transition .
the width will be the top surface width of the layer as specified on the plans or directed .
each layer of crossovers turnouts and the like will be measured in square yards square meters by lengths section num soil soil aggregate and aggregate base and subbases num and widths along the top surface of the layer involved .
no measurement will be made for the necessary bevel or wedge of material shown on the plans along the edge of each layer .
where the engineer directs in writing that the thickness of a layer be changed from that specified on the plans the accepted layer shall have an adjusted unit price derived by arriving at an increase or decrease to the contract unit price bid in direct proportion to the increased or decreased thickness of the adjusted layer .
no payment shall be made for a layer completely eliminated .
num .
cubic yards cubic meters .
measurement by the cubic yard cubic meter will be the loose volume of the material measured in the hauling vehicle at the point of use .
num .
tons metric tons .
measurement by the ton metric ton will be the quantity of material placed in a completed accepted layer of base constructed to the thickness and cross section shown on the plans or directed and measured in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numh .
b cement .
measurement of cement will be by the ton metric ton for cement actually used in the work as directed except cement used to repair or replace defective work .
c lime .
measurement of lime will be by the ton metric ton for lime actually used in the work as directed except for lime used to repair or replace defective work .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
the contract unit price bid shall be full compensation for furnishing or producing all component material except cement and lime in whatever proportions necessary to produce and place the base material in accordance with the requirements specified complete in place on the roadbed .
it includes all costs for procurement operations compaction watering equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
cement and lime used as directed in completed and accepted layers will be the only other item for which separate payment will be made under this section .
num .
payment for cement and lime measured as noted above will be at the contract unit price per ton metric ton .
this payment shall be payment in full for furnishing and incorporating the cement and lime into the base material .
b price adjustments .
when layers failing to meet the gradation band requirements are permitted to remain in place as specified in subarticle numc unit price adjustments will be made as specified therein .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa t course type tt ttt mixed inches mm compacted thickness per square yard square meter numb t course type tt ttt mixed per cubic yard cubic meter numc cement per ton metric ton numd lime per ton metric ton nume t course type tt ttt mixed per ton metric ton base classification selected materials etc .
granular soil soil aggregate processed reef shell crushed aggregate t base or subbase tt type insert with cement or lime additive if required ttt road yard or plant section num full depth reclamation with portland cement num section num full depth reclamation with portland cement num description .
full depth reclamation with portland cement shall consist of pulverizing and mixing the in place existing materials as shown in the plans with portland cement and water to produce a uniform mixture and then compacting the mixture to serve as a base course for pavement .
num materials .
a cement .
cement shall meet the requirements given in section num cement for type i or type ii portland cement .
b water .
water shall meet the requirements given in section num .
num construction requirements .
a offset reference for the establishment of the roadway alignment .
the contractor shall establish offset reference points before beginning of construction so that the original alignment of the roadway centerlines edges of pavement etc .
will be restored during construction .
b job mix design .
a job mix design is a listing of all components of the mixture required for the full depth reclamation .
if a job mix design is shown on the plans the contractor shall use that mix design for the full depth reclamation work .
if a job mix design is not shown on the plans the contractor shall determine the composition of the job mix design and submit it to the engineer for review .
the engineer will forward the proposed job mix design to the materials and tests engineer for approval .
job mix designs shown on the plans and submitted job mix designs approved by the materials and tests engineer shall not be changed without written approval of the engineer .
the contractor shall submit the proposed changes to the engineer with an analysis of the need for the change .
the engineer will forward the proposed change to the materials and tests engineer for approval .
c submittal of a proposed job mix design by the contractor .
the contractor shall submit a proposed job mix design no later than num calendar days after the date of notice to proceed .
the department will be allowed num calendar days to complete the verification and approval of the job mix design .
the composition of a job mix design submitted by the contractor shall be established in accordance with the requirements given in aldot num laboratory design of soilcement and fulldepth reclamation mixes .
more than one job mix design may be required due to the variability of the existing roadbed materials .
each proposed job mix design and samples of the roadbed materials for each design shall be submitted for evaluation and approval .
the contractor shall submit five copies of each proposed job mix design to the materials and tests engineer for approval. . all of the requirements given in aldot num shall be addressed in the contractors submittal of the job mix designs .
construction of full depth reclamation shall not begin until the engineer returns a copy of each approved job mix design to the contractor .
the contractor shall submit num pounds of composite representative samples of the existing roadbed materials and num pounds of the cement proposed for each proposed job mix design .
the contractor shall sample the existing roadbed materials at least every num feet along the roadbed .
samples shall be obtained from all layers to be reclaimed .
these materials shall be submitted to the materials and tests engineer with the job mix design submittal .
d quality control .
the contractor shall provide and maintain a quality control system to provide assurance that the full depth reclamation is constructed in accordance with the contract requirements .
the contractor shall submit six copies of a quality control plan for full depth reclamation to the engineer for review prior to the preconstruction conference .
this plan shall include the following minimum requirements section num full depth reclamation with portland cement num the procedure equipment and frequency for monitoring the amount of cement placement .
the procedure equipment and frequency for monitoring the material characteristics of the reclaimed material .
the procedure equipment and frequency for monitoring the amount of water and depth of pulverization of the reclaimed material during mixing .
the procedure equipment and frequency for monitoring the reclaimed material moisture during production .
the procedure equipment and frequency for monitoring the density and moisture content of the inplace full depth reclamation .
list of all equipment to be used during the construction of full depth reclamation .
production rates .
the procedure for correcting problems such as equipment breakdown weather related failures and poor workmanship as determined by the engineer the procedure and equipment for repairing full depth reclamation no meeting the project requirements .
other information requested by the engineer during the preconstruction conference .
the contractor shall present weekly documentation to the engineer that the work is being monitored in accordance with the requirements given in the quality control plan .
the engineer will not approve the contractors quality control plan for full depth reclamation but will review it for completeness .
an incomplete plan will be returned to the contractor .
construction shall not begin until the engineer returns one copy of the plan to the contractor and informs the contractor in writing that no further information will be required .
the engineer will stop the production of full depth reclamation if the contractor does not perform the work in accordance with the submitted plan .
e weather limitations .
all full depth reclamation operations including pulverizing mixing compaction finishing and curing shall be continuous and completed during daylight hours .
no full depth reclamation shall be constructed when the ambient temperature is below num f without written permission of the engineer .
working on full depth reclamation construction will not be allowed when it is raining or the possibility or rain is imminent .
the engineer will decide base on weather reports if the possibility of rain exists .
f equipment .
the engineer will prohibit the use of any piece of equipment that will not or does not produce acceptable results .
the contractor shall not begin the distribution of the cement until the engineer informs the contractor that the proposed equipment and method of monitoring cement placement is adequately described in the quality control plan .
equipment shall include a mechanical cement spreader of a type that has an adjustable rate of flow and will distribute the cement uniformly at the required rate in one pass .
pneumatic distribution of cement is prohibited .
a mechanical mixer shall be used that is capable of pulverizing and mixing the existing pavement base and subgrade to the required depth .
the mechanical mixer shall be capable of pulverizing the material so that num passes a num inch sieve .
the mixer shall have a metered water system for adding water directly into the mixing chamber .
water shall not be applied from equipment that is not a part of the mixer .
g length of roadbed allowed to be processed .
except by written permission of the engineer the length of roadbed pulverized at any time shall not exceed the length that can be completely pulverized mixed and compacted in the same working day .
section num full depth reclamation with portland cement num h initial pulverizing and mixing .
the width and depth of the required pulverizing and mixing will be shown on the plans .
the depth of pulverizing shall be controlled to insure that the finished thickness will be within the required tolerance limits .
the pulverizing and mixing shall break up the existing roadbed to the extent that num by weight passes a num inch sieve a minimum of num passes a num inch sieve and a minimum of num passes the no .
num sieve .
the moisture content shall be maintained within num of the theoretical optimum moisture content unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
the engineer will check the gradation at least once for each num linear feet or fraction thereof of each lane .
preliminary pulverization and mixing of the roadbed materials will be allowed prior to final pulverization and mixing of the roadbed materials and cement to ensure uniformity of the mixture .
the engineer will monitor the pulverization in accordance with bmtnum rate of spread and pulverization of cement stabilized soil .
i spreading of cement .
spreading of the cement shall be done to produce a uniform distribution .
the amount of cement placed shall not vary more than num by weight from the approved job mix design .
cement dust shall be controlled by the contractor so that dust is kept within the confines of the construction limits .
spreading of the cement when the wind or other weather conditions are unfavorable will not be permitted .
spreading of the cement by motor grader will not be acceptable .
cement shall be applied in a limited area so that all the operations including compaction finishing and curing can be continuous and completed in daylight hours within three hours of the application of the cement .
only the equipment that is used in spreading and mixing will be allowed to pass over the spread cement before it is mixed into the existing materials .
cement that has been displaced shall be replaced before mixing is started .
j mixing water with cement and pulverized materials .
water shall be mixed into the mixture of cement and pulverized roadbed materials .
the addition of water and the mixing shall be completed in one continuous pass .
the mixture of the water cement and pulverized roadbed materials shall be within the tolerance limits of theoretical optimum moisture content and shall be suitable for immediate compaction without further mixing or grading .
a gage or gages shall be provided to allow the continuous monitoring of the amount of water that is applied .
when the mixer will handle only a part of the roadbed width within a single lane the successive increments shall be limited in length so that a cold joint will not be formed within the lane being constructed and the full width of lane of treated material will be promptly mixed compacted and finished .
when the moisture content of the uncompacted mixture exceeds the specified tolerance for compaction the entire affected section shall be reconstructed at the contractors expense .
k compaction and finishing .
the pulverizing mixing and compaction shall be a continuous operation .
the compaction of the mixture of water cement and roadbed materials shall begin within num minutes after the final mixing .
the mixture shall be compacted to num of theoretical maximum density as established in the approved job mix design in accordance with aashto t num .
the inplace density will be measured in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num direct transmission method only .
the inplace density will be measured at least once for each num linear feet or fraction thereof of each lane .
compaction and finishing shall be completed within a period of two hours after the initial mixing of the cement .
after the mixture has been compacted the surface shall be shaped to the required lines grades and cross sections and within the required tolerances .
during the shaping light scarifying may be necessary to prevent the formation of compaction planes .
broom dragging or clipping of the surface may be required as a part of the process of shaping the surface during compaction .
the surface material shall be maintained at the specified moisture content during finishing operations .
at the end of each days construction a clean straight vertical transverse construction joint shall be formed by cutting back to the full width and thickness of completed work .
section num full depth reclamation with portland cement num l testing tolerance and deficiency correction .
num .
general .
areas of the full depth reclamation that are not within the required tolerances of thickness density and surface finish shall be reconstructed as directed by the engineer without additional compensation .
the amount of cement required for reconstruction will be in accordance with the approved job mix design .
num .
cement spread rate .
the contractor shall furnish and use a square piece of canvas that is one square yard in size for checking the spread rate .
the canvas shall be weighed prior to cement placement each time placement rates are checked .
after weighing the canvas shall be placed ahead of the spreading operation .
the canvas and cement shall be weighed after the spreader has passed over the canvas .
the contractor shall perform this measurement in the presence of the engineer and report the measured spread rate to the engineer .
adjustments shall be made and repeated testing will be required to insure that the required rate is being placed .
the cement spread rate shall be checked each day before beginning production placement and for each num linear feet or fraction thereof of spreading in each lane .
the engineer will record the amount of cement placed in accordance with bmtnum rate of spread and pulverization of cement stabilized soil .
num .
thickness .
the thickness of the reconstructed roadbed will be checked by the engineer at intervals of one test per num feet or fraction thereof of lane or more often if necessary .
the thickness of the entire reconstructed layer or layers shall not vary by num inch from that shown on the plans .
any section deficient by more than num inch shall be immediately reconstructed in accordance with all of the requirements given in this section for full depth reclamation .
any section out of tolerance shall have additional cement added to correct the composition of the full depth reclamation mixture and shall be remixed and recompacted to the required depth width and density .
num .
surface finish .
the contractor shall be responsible for roadbed grade controls .
the finished surface shall not vary more than num of an inch from a num foot straightedge placed anywhere on the surface parallel to the centerline of the roadbed .
the finished surface shall not vary more than  of an inch from a num foot straightedge placed anywhere on the surface perpendicular to the centerline of the roadbed .
the cross slope shall not vary by num from the required slope as shown on the plans .
the surface finish shall be checked at least twice within an intervals not to exceed num feet along the roadway .
high spots in the finished surface may be corrected by motor grader or planer without additional compensation provided the resulting thickness is within the allowable tolerances .
m curing .
the contractor shall cover the finished surface with a prime coat within num hours from completion of compaction .
the prime coat shall be maintained until a pavement layer or additional surface treatment is applied .
the prime coat shall be as specified in the plans and shall be placed and paid in accordance with the requirements given in section num. n workmanship .
any subgrade deficiencies shall be determined by the engineer .
the contractor will be given a specific time to repair any deficiencies without any additional compensation .
o opening to traffic .
completed sections of the full depth reclaimed roadbed may be opened when necessary to lightweight local traffic provided the surface has hardened sufficiently to prevent marring or distorting of the surface and provided the curing is not impaired .
construction equipment shall not operate on the full depth reclamation sections except as necessary to discharge into the spreader during paving operations .
if the full depth reclaimed roadbed is impaired by premature opening to traffic the entire affected section shall be reconstructed at the contractors expense .
section num soil and aggregate materials for miscellaneous use num num method of measurement .
full depth reclamation will be measured in units of square yards .
the length of a lane will be measured along the center of the lane .
the width of a lane will be the width shown on the plans .
additional areas required for crossovers turnouts etc .
will be determined by the measurement of the length and width along the surface of the reclaimed area .
cement will be measured in units of tons .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract unit price for full depth reclamation shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials except portland cement and bituminous treatment for curing equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the contract unit price for portland cement for roadbed reclamation shall be full compensation for furnishing and applying the cement to complete the work of full depth reclamation .
payment will only be made for the actual amount of cement applied to the reclaimed roadbed .
additional soil or aggregate material required to construct the roadbed to the required plan grade and section and any unsuitable material excavated will be measured and paid for under the appropriate item of unclassified excavation or borrow .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa full depth reclamation ___ inches thick per square yard numb portland cement for full depth reclamation per ton section num soil and aggregate materials for miscellaneous use num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and incorporating a soil or aggregate material of the type specified into the work at the locations shown on the plans or designated by the engineer .
the type material may be a local material such as borrow or selected soil or commercial material such as crushed aggregate or any combination thereof to produce a material consistent with the requirements of the type material specified .
the intent of this section is to provide a material for use in localized areas for patching leveling or minor widening work .
layers of material of a nominal depth and width should be placed under the appropriate section of the standard specifications .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate sections of the standard specifications except as modified by the plans or proposal .
special attention is directed to sections num and num through num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the work of placing the material in this section includes surface preparation including the scarification of the existing material the addition of the material and the processing of the new material with the existing material to form an installation meeting plan requirements .
b surface preparation .
surface preparation shall include any work necessary to clean the surface of the area on which the new material is to be placed along with scarifying the surface of the existing material to promote an acceptable bond of the new and old material .
section num density requirements for compaction num c placing of the material .
the material shall be placed spread and incorporated into the work at the locations shown on the plans or directed .
the new material shall be mixed with the old material to the extent necessary to provide for an acceptable bond between the new and old material .
strict moisture and density controls will not be required however the material shall be mixed and compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of material placed will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numi or per ton metric ton measured in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numh .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
aggregate material ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for each type material which shall be full compensation for the material complete in place and includes all costs incident to furnishing and producing the material all hauling surface preparation spreading mixing watering compacting and shaping and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa for miscellaneous use per cubic yard cubic meter numb for miscellaneous use per ton metric ton kind of material borrow section num coarse aggregate section num selected materials section num granular soil section num drainage plane section num soil aggregate section num processed reef shell section num crushed aggregate section num type of material if specified section num density requirements for compaction num description .
the density requirements for earth work subbase base shoulders surface and pavement layers are given in this section .
compensation for obtaining the required densities shall be included in the contract price for the material being compacted .
this section shall also cover the work of furnishing a portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device nuclear testing device for use by department personnel .
num materials .
a materials subject to compaction requirements .
the compaction requirements given in this section shall be applicable to materials required to be furnished under other sections when a reference to the compaction requirements is given in those sections .
b nondestructive testing devices .
num .
utilization of nondestructive testing devices .
nondestructive density testing of hot mix asphalt hma will be allowed for quality control testing purposes only and will not be used for acceptance testing .
all acceptance density testing of hma will be done by coring the pavement aashto t num .
num .
nuclear testing device .
section num density requirements for compaction num the department has established a list of acceptable nuclear testing devices .
devices that are not shown on this list shall not be used .
the list is list iinum nuclear testing devices and is given in the departments manual material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
num .
electronic surface contact device .
an electronic surface contact device will be allowed for the measurement of the density of hot mix asphalt hma pavement layers .
the test method and apparatus described in aashto tp num num density of in place hot mix asphalt hma pavement by electronic surface contact devices method c core calibration method shall be used for this testing .
num construction requirements .
a contractors responsibility for compaction .
the materials soils hot mix asphalt selected by the contractor will be sampled and tested to establish the density requirements for compaction .
the contractor shall compact the materials to the required density .
in place density will be measured for acceptance in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num inplace density and moisture content of soil and soilaggregate by nuclear methods shallow depth direct transmission method only as modified by the following method a probe access pivot hole is required for the direct transmission method .
moisture and density counts shall be obtained by taking two one minute readings with each reading being performed at a num interval from the prior reading .
the moisture and density reading shall be the average of the results of the two counts .
the surface under the gauge shall be examined to make sure that it is flat and level and that the access pivot hole is perpendicular to the base plane before placing the density gauge over the pivot hole .
the first oneminute reading of moisture and density counts shall be taken and recorded .
the gage shall then be rotated numover same center point and the second oneminute reading of moisture and density counts shall be taken and recorded .
all measurement counts shall be repeated if any count is not within a range of values set by an upper limit that is the average plus five times the square root of the average and a lower limit that is the average minus five times the square root of the average .
b embankment layers .
num .
determination of maximum density and optimum moisture content .
the maximum density and optimum moisture content for the compaction of materials for embankments will be determined in accordance with the test methods given in aashto t num moisturedensity of soils using a num kg num pound rammer and a num mm num inch drop .
method a will be used when num or less of the embankment material is retained on the number num num mm sieve .
method c will be used when more than num is retained on the number num num mm sieve and less than num is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
method d will be used when num or more is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
num .
required inplace density .
the contractor shall compact the embankment layers to within num of the maximum density .
the inplace density will be measured in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa .
there will not be a measurement of the inplace density of embankment layers that are composed predominantly of rock approximately num or greater .
these layers shall be rolled until firm as determined by the engineer .
num .
required moisture content .
strict moisture control will not be required .
compaction in a semidry condition will not be permitted .
c modified and improved roadbed layers .
num .
determination of maximum density and optimum moisture content .
section num density requirements for compaction num the maximum density and optimum moisture content for the compaction of materials for modified and improved roadbed layers will be determined in accordance with the test methods given in aashto t num .
method a will be used when num or less of the modified and improved roadbed material is retained on the number num num mm sieve .
method c will be used when more than num is retained on the number num num mm sieve and less than num is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
method d will be used when num or more is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
num .
required inplace density .
the contractor shall compact the modified and improved roadbed layers to num of the maximum density .
the inplace density will be measured for acceptance in accordance with the requirements given in numa .
num .
required moisture content .
the moisture content during compaction shall be within num of the optimum moisture content .
d roadbed or lime stabilization .
num .
determination of maximum density and optimum moisture content .
the maximum density and optimum moisture content for the compaction of materials selected for the construction of a roadbed utilizing materials without lime additive will be determined in accordance with the test methods given in aashto t num .
the test methods given in aldotnum establishing moisturedensity controls for soils andor aggregates with chemical additives excluding bituminous materials will be used for lime stabilized roadbeds .
method a will be used when num or less of the modified and improved roadbed material is retained on the number num num mm sieve .
method c will be used when more than num is retained on the number num num mm sieve and less than num is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
method d will be used when num or more is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
num .
required inplace density .
the contractor shall compact the roadbed or lime stabilized layers to num of the maximum density .
the inplace density will be measured for acceptance in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa .
num .
required moisture content .
the moisture content during compaction shall be within num of the optimum moisture content .
e subbase and base layers .
num .
determination of maximum density and optimum moisture content .
a .
materials containing natural soil binders without chemical additives .
the maximum density and optimum moisture content will be determined in accordance with the test methods given in aashto t num moisturedensity of soils using a numkg numlb rammer and a nummm numin .
drop .
method a will be used when num or less of the modified and improved roadbed material is retained on the number num num mm sieve .
method c will be used when more than num is retained on the number num num mm sieve and less than num is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
method d will be used when num or more is retained on the num inch num mm sieve .
b .
materials containing natural soil binders with portland cement calcium chloride or other chemical additives excluding bituminous materials .
the maximum density and optimum moisture content will be determined in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum .
c. materials composed of all crushed aggregates with or without chemical additives excluding bituminous materials .
the maximum density and optimum moisture content will be determined in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num for method d or aldotnum .
section num density requirements for compaction num d. bituminous mixtures .
the maximum density will be determined in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num theoretical maximum specific gravity and density of bituminous paving mixtures .
e. all soil or aggregate base layers with or without chemical additives excluding bituminous materials control strip method .
the control strip method may be allowed for establishing a target maximum density and target optimal moisture if allowed in writing by the engineer .
the target maximum density and optimum moisture content shall be determined in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum construction of moisturedensity control strips for soil andor aggregate base layers .
num .
required inplace density .
a .
materials containing natural soil binders without chemical additives .
the contractor shall compact the materials to within num of the maximum density for method a and to num of maximum density for methods c and d aashto t num .
the inplace density will be measured in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa .
b .
materials containing natural soil binders with portland cement calcium chloride or other chemical additives excluding bituminous materials .
the contractor shall compact the materials to within num of the maximum density measured using method a of aldotnum and to num of maximum density measured using method b of aldotnum .
the inplace density will be measured in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa .
c. materials composed of all crushed aggregates with or without chemical additives excluding bituminous materials .
the contractor shall compact the roadbed or lime stabilized layers to num of the maximum density determined in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num for method d or aldotnum .
the inplace density will be measured in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa .
d. bituminous mixtures .
the contractor shall compact the bituminous mixtures to the density that is given in section num .
the inplace density will be measured for acceptance in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num. e. all soil or aggregate base layers with or without chemical additives excluding bituminous materials control strip method .
the contractor shall compact the roadbed or lime stabilized layers to num of the maximum density aldotnum .
the inplace density will be measured in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa .
num .
required moisture content .
moisture content during compaction shall be within num of the optimum moisture content .
this moisture content requirement shall not apply to bituminous materials for base and subbase .
num .
control strip for soil and aggregate layers only .
the control strip method aldotnum shall only be used for soil and aggregate layers .
it shall only be used if it is shown to be required in the contract or if it is requested by the contractor and allowed by the engineer .
the contractor shall make a substantial effort to achieve the required density prior to requesting a control strip .
the request for a control strip shall be submitted by the contractor to the engineer in writing .
the engineer will forward this request to the materials and tests engineer for approval .
the written request shall include a description of the efforts made to achieve the required density .
the description shall include the types size settings of rollers rolling patterns for each roller and the results of compaction for each roller .
the description shall also include all results of laboratory and field testing soil analysis maximum density optimum moisture content actual densities and moisture contents .
any other pertinent section num density requirements for compaction num information concerning the material other equipment used and actions taken in an effort to achieve the required density shall be included .
each control strip constructed to acceptable density and surface tolerances shall remain in place and become a section of the completed roadway .
unacceptable control strips shall be corrected or removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
the cost of the construction of the control strip is considered incidental to the testing method and shall be done without extra compensation .
f blank .
g density for bituminous pavement layers .
num .
determination of maximum theoretical density .
the maximum theoretical density will be determined in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num .
num .
required inplace density and determination of inplace density .
the required inplace density is given in section num .
the inplace density will be measured for acceptance in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num .
num .
density of layers placed on bituminous surface treatment .
for layers that are placed on bituminous surface treatment the achievement of a designated percentage of the maximum theoretical density will not be required when the designated placement rates are num pounds or less per square yard num kg or less per square meter .
these layers shall be thoroughly compacted as directed by the engineer .
a reduced density requirement will be allowed for layers that are placed on bituminous surface treatment at designated placement rates of num pounds per square yard or greater num kg per square meter or greater and less than num pounds per square yard num kg per square meter .
the allowable reduction in density is given in the acceptance schedule of payment for inplace density table iv given in section num .
num .
density of layers not placed on bituminous surface treatment .
for layers that are not placed on a bituminous surface treatment the achievement of a designated percentage of the maximum theoretical density will not be required when the designated placement rate is num pounds or less per square yard num kg or less per square meter .
these layers shall be thoroughly compacted as directed by the engineer .
h portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
num .
contractor furnished nuclear testing device .
the contractor may be required to furnish a nuclear moisturedensity testing device or recondition a device for use by aldot personnel .
this will be required if a pay item for a nuclear testing device is a part of the contract .
num .
radiological safety manual .
the operation of the nuclear moisturedensity testing device shall be in accordance with the requirements given in the aldot radiological safety manual for the use of nuclear moisturedensity and asphalt content gauges .
num .
license for owning radioactive materials .
the alabama state department of public health requires a license for owning radioactive materials .
a nuclear testing device will not be returned to the contractor when returning the device is a contract requirement until the contractor obtains this license .
num .
service warranty for contractor furnished device new and reconditioned .
the contractor shall provide a service warranty from the manufacturer of the nuclear testing device or an authorized service center for parts and services required for the continuous serviceability of the device furnished by the contractor .
a service warranty shall be furnished for all devices new or reconditioned .
the service warranty shall not be voided by aldot employees removing repairing and exchanging modules .
section num density requirements for compaction num num .
inoperable contractor furnished nuclear testing device .
the contractor shall be responsible for all delays to the prosecution of the work that are due to a malfunctioning device that was furnished by the contractor .
this responsibility extends to all devices new or reconditioned .
the engineer will order the replacement of a continually malfunctioning device .
the contract price for a contractor furnished device will be reduced by a prorated amount that is calculated from the amount of time that the contractor furnished device is inoperable .
the contractor shall immediately replace a malfunctioning nuclear testing device without extra compensation when the work is delayed because of the malfunction .
the compensation for the device will be reduced by a percentage amount calculated from the number of days that the device was not suitable for use and the total number of days in the contract .
num .
serviceability and ownership of contractor furnished nuclear testing device .
the final ownership of the nuclear testing device will be based on the requirements given for the pay item for the device .
when the engineer determines that the device is no longer needed it shall be transferred to the department or the contractor will be notified by certified letter to pick up the device .
the contractor shall retain ownership of a device if the device is furnished under pay item numa portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
the contractor shall retain ownership of a device for the duration of the need of the device if it is furnished under pay item numb state retained portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
this device shall be a new nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
when the device is no longer needed the contractor shall be responsible for the reconditioning verification and if necessary recalibration of the device and the transfer of device and title of ownership to the department .
the contractor shall retain ownership of a device for the duration of the need of the device if it is furnished under pay item nume state retained portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device includes disposal of existing device .
this device furnished by the contractor shall be a new nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
when the device is no longer needed the contractor shall be responsible for the reconditioning verification and if necessary recalibration of the device and the transfer of device and title of ownership to the department .
a department owned device will be designated for disposal .
the contractor shall take ownership of the device designated for disposal and shall pick up the device at the aldot central laboratory .
the department will pack the device and have it ready for transport .
the title of ownership will be transferred to the contractor .
transfer of the device will be in accordance with health department regulations and under no circumstances will a nuclear device be transferred to an unlicensed agent or company .
if the contractor is required to take possession of a device that is not designated for disposal num calendar days will be allowed from the date of the notification for the contractor to present a valid license for owning radioactive material from the alabama state department of public health and then obtain possession of the device .
the device shall become aldot property and the title of ownership shall be transferred to the aldot if the contractor fails to present the proper license and obtain possession of the device within the num calendar days .
num method of measurement .
nuclear testing devices will be measured per each device .
num basis of payment .
a compaction .
separate payment will not be made for the work of compaction to meet the density requirements given in this section .
this work shall be incidental to the requirements of the placement of the material for which density requirements are given .
b portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
num .
pay item numa portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
the contract price for a device shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the device with all required accessories and services .
this contract price shall be for exclusive section num drainage plane layer num use of the device for the duration of the contract or until engineer determines that there will be no further need for the device .
num .
pay item numb state retained portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device .
the contract price for a device shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the device with all required accessories and services and for the exclusive use of the device by the department .
the contract price shall also be full compensation for the maintenance of the device the reconditioning verification and if necessary recalibration and transfer of the device and title of ownership to the department .
num .
pay item nume state retained portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device includes disposal of existing device .
the contract price for a device shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the device with all required accessories and services and for the exclusive use of the device by the department .
the contract price shall also be full compensation for the maintenance of the device the reconditioning verification and if necessary recalibration and transfer of the device and title of ownership to the department .
the contract price shall also be full compensation for the contractor to take ownership of a device designated for disposal by the department and full compensation for the costs of obtaining transporting and disposing the device .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device per each numb state retained portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device per each nume state retained portable nuclear moisturedensity testing device includes disposal of existing device per each section num drainage plane layer num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing a drainage plane layer composed of an approved freedraining material .
this layer normally is used to facilitate drainage from the pavement structure layer through the shoulders however it may be used at other locations when shown on the plans or directed .
num materials .
materials for use shall meet the appropriate requirements of division num materials with specific reference to section num .
num construction requirements .
the drainage layer shall be constructed in reasonably close conformity to the cross sections and dimensions shown on the plans and in the sequence noted in subarticle numc .
the thickness shown on the plans will be loose measurement before covering with another layer .
the drainage plane materials shall be spread by approved equipment capable of providing a single layer of uniform thickness uncompacted and continuous from the inner base layer edge through the shoulder line .
the equipment must be capable of spreading this layer without damaging or disturbing the underlying and contiguous layers .
multiple passes may be permitted on wide shoulders .
there will be no density requirement for this layer .
care shall be taken to insure firm contact between drainage layer and the contiguous base layers .
any disturbance to or loss of drainage plane material while uncovered shall be corrected prior to placing the overlying layer .
num method of measurement .
measurement of drainage plane material will be in accordance with article num .
section num plant mix bituminous base and patb num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
drainage plane material measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the item of work involved in accordance with article num. b payment will be made under item no .
numa drainage plane material ___ inches mm thick per square yard square meter section num plant mix bituminous base and patb num description .
the work under this section shall consist of constructing a plant mix bituminous base layer composed of an aggregate and bituminous material hot mixed in a central plant and hot laid on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications and in close conformity with the lines grades typical section mix and average weight per square yard shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the work under this section shall also include the construction of a permeable asphalt treated base patb layer to serve as a drainage layer in the pavement structure .
num materials .
a plant mix bituminous base .
num .
compliance with the requirements given in section num .
the material requirements for plant mix bituminous base shall conform to the requirements given in section num unless noted otherwise by the requirements given in this section .
num .
mix design .
the type of required mix will be shown on the plans .
the minimum allowable vma shall be num .
the job mix shall be designed by the marshall method to produce a minimum of num pounds num kn stability at num blows unless shown otherwise on the plans .
num .
aggregate .
fine aggregate shall meet the requirements given in article num .
coarse aggregate shall be gravel processed reef shell crushed slag crushed stone or a combination thereof meeting the requirements given in section num unless noted otherwise by the requirements given in this section .
the coarse and fine aggregates shall be combined in a total blend that will produce an acceptable job mix within the gradation limits shown in the following table .
the blend shall be made from at least two stockpiles of different gradations .
at least num of the blend shall be taken from each of the stockpiles .
the requirements for allowing the use of rap and ras are given in article num .
section num plant mix bituminous base and patb num aggregate for plant mix bituminous base and permeable base sieve percent passing by weight mass plant mix bituminous base permeable base square mesh type mix num mix num patb num inch num mm sieve num num inch num mm sieve num num num num num inch num mm sieve num num num num num inch num mm sieve num num num num num inch num mm sieve num num num num num inch num mmsieve num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num no .
num num msieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num num num no .
num num m sieve num num num num no .
num num m sieve num num num num num num mix num is intended to be used as a narrow width buildup in widening projects .
all design criteria on mix num is waived due to the size of the coarse aggregate .
the m t engineer will determine the liquid asphalt binder content and gradation within the general composition of the mix .
num .
liquid asphalt binder .
if the grade of liquid asphalt binder is not shown on the plans the contractor shall use pg num liquid asphalt binder .
the proportion of liquid asphalt binder to total sample by weight shall be num to num for mix num and num to num for mix num .
the exact proportion shall be fixed by the job mix formula .
additives or modifiers shall be used to prevent stripping of liquid asphalt binder if stripping is observed during design production or laydown .
these additives or modifiers shall be furnished and used at no additional cost to the state .
b permeable asphalt treated base mix patb .
num .
compliance with the requirements given in section num .
the material requirements for patb shall conform to the requirements given in section num unless noted otherwise by the requirements given in this section .
the laying temperature for the mixture shall be as directed by the engineer .
num .
mix design .
patb shall be open graded hot laid central plant mixed asphalt base material with no requirement for density air voids vma or stability .
the mix shall be designed with a target liquid asphalt binder content of num to num .
num .
aggregate .
patb shall be made with crushed stone meeting the requirements given in section num unless noted otherwise by the requirements given in this section .
the crushed stone shall meet the gradation requirements given in the table aggregate for plant mix bituminous base and permeable base in this section .
the blend shall be made from at least two stockpiles of different gradations .
at least num of the blend shall be taken from each of the stockpiles .
the requirements for allowing the use of rap and ras are given in article num .
num .
liquid asphalt binder .
if the grade of liquid asphalt binder is not shown on the plans the contractor shall use pg num liquid asphalt binder .
the proportion of liquid asphalt binder to total sample by weight shall be num to num .
during the drying process the aggregate shall not be heated to a temperature greater than num f num c. section num plant mix bituminous base and patb num the liquid asphalt binder and the dried aggregate shall be mixed in such a manner that the finished mixture shall not exceed num f num c. additives or modifiers shall be used to prevent stripping of liquid asphalt binder if stripping is observed during design production or laydown .
these additives or modifiers shall be furnished and used at no additional cost to the state .
num .
geotextile filter .
the geotextile filter shall comply with the requirements given in section num geotextiles in permeable asphalt treated base application .
c sampling and testing frequency .
the sampling and testing requirements for plant mix bituminous base and permeable asphalt treated base are given in article num .
num construction requirements .
a plant mix bituminous base .
the construction requirements for plant mix bituminous base shall be the requirements given in section num unless noted otherwise by the requirements in this section .
the edges shall be trimmed immediately after final rolling using an accurately aligned string or wire to a tolerance of num inches num mm outside the theoretical edge of the layer and to a slope not flatter than num .
any edge distorted by rolling shall be promptly corrected .
b permeable asphalt treated base mix patb .
the construction requirements for permeable asphalt treated base shall be the requirements given in section num unless noted otherwise by the requirements in this section .
a static steel wheel roller shall be used to compact the permeable base applying num to num tons per foot of roller width num to num metric tons per meter of roller width .
the roller shall make one to three passes as directed by the engineer when the temperature of the mixture reaches approximately num f num c. no portion of the patb layer shall be exposed to the elements between laydown and cover for more than five calendar days .
when required the geotextile filter shall be furnished and installed to comply with the requirements of section num or as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
if rutting of patb occurs when placing the next layer due to grade of roadway temperature of the patb etc .
the engineer may require the use of a tracked paver .
no traffic shall be allowed to operate or park on the travel lane or outside shoulder portion of the permeable base .
limited operation of equipment e.g .
delivery vehicles may be permitted on the inside edge .
num method of measurement .
measurement of the work included under this section will be as provided in article num .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment for the work included under this section will be as provided in article num .
for pay item nume payment for furnishing and installing a required geotextile filter will not be included in this item of work .
the payment for furnishing and installing a required geotextile filter will be included in pay item numa separative geotextile .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa plant mix bituminous base mix per ton metric ton numb plant mix bituminous base patching mix per ton metric ton numc plant mix bituminous base leveling mix per ton metric ton numd plant mix bituminous base widening mix per ton metric ton nume permeable asphalt treated base per ton metric ton section num bituminous surface treatments num division num surfacing and pavements section num bituminous surface treatments num description .
a general .
the work covered by this section consists of basic bituminous treatments such as prime coat asphalt flush coats liquid seals and bituminous surface treatments .
this section also covers the work of applying a bituminous surface treatment containing a polymer additive .
each bituminous treatment shall consist of one or more hot applications of bituminous material and except for prime coats includes a specified cover aggregate which shall be spread after each bituminous application .
the work also includes the cleaning of the existing surfaces as well as furnishing and applying all materials and necessary incidental work thereto all in accordance with plan details and these specifications .
b bituminous treatment table .
the following table shows the amount of bituminous material and the size and amount of cover aggregate required for the various types of bituminous treatments .
the types are designated in the table by letters of the alphabet such as a b c d etc .
the proposal will designate in the pay item description which of the various types are to be used .
the kind of bitumen may also be specified or if none is specified the contractor may select one of the kinds if not in conflict with other provisions of these specifications permitted by the table .
all other requirements of the tabular line opposite the type designation shall apply .
example a bituminous treatment type akg specifies a prime coat with the quantities specified on line a covered by a single surface treatment with the quantities specified on line k covered in turn by a seal treatment with the quantities shown on line g. bituminous materials shall be placed within the tolerance specified by the table for the type treatment involved unless otherwise ordered by the engineer in writing .
any variation outside of the designated limits shall be cause for ordering the treatment to be removed and replaced or corrected as directed by the engineer all without additional cost to the department .
the rate of aggregate coverage shown by the table is the approximate rate found to produce an acceptable coverage when properly applied .
regardless of the rate shown the contractor shall provide aggregate in sufficient quantities and so spread the aggregate that the bitumen is uniformly and evenly covered .
the engineer will notify the contractor in writing should it become advisable to change the amounts of any material from the limits specified in the table .
in such event an adjustment in the contract unit price will be made as specified in subarticle numa .
section num bituminous surface treatments num bituminous treatment table subarticle numb aggregates gallons liters of bituminous material per square yard m of treatment designated letter type treatment size cu .
ft. sq .
yd .
mm liquid asphalt binder emulsified petroleum resin cutback or emulsified asphalt a prime coat num num num num b flush coat b sand num num num num num num c flush coat c num num num num num num num d liquid seal d num or num num num num num num num num num num e liquid seal e num num num num num num num num num num f liquid seal f num num num num num num num num num num g liquid seal g num or num num num num num num num num num num h liquid seal h num num num num num num num num num num j surface treatment j num num num num num num num num num num k surface treatment k num num num num num num num num num num l surface treatment l numst application num num num num num num num num num num dry choke num num num numnd application num num num num num num num num num num on cement treated layer reduce prime bituminous amounts num percent .
for shoulders different amounts of aggregate and bitumen may be shown on plans or in the proposal .
aggregate for this treatment shall be crushed aggregate .
approximate rate of application for uniform coverage .
minor adjustments to these rates may be ordered by the engineer to fit the physical properties of aggregates furnished for use .
multipurpose and cationic emulsified asphalts shall be in the same quantities as shown above for emulsified asphalt .
conversion of aggregate volume to weight mass when required shall be in accordance with aashto t num .
the application rates of bituminous materials shown above are based on the material being at num f num c. num materials .
all materials shall comply with the requirements of division num materials except as noted herein .
special reference is made to the following a bituminous materials section num .
the grade of bituminous material shall be within the following limits unless the kind and grade are specified on the plans or in the proposal .
num .
prime emulsified asphalt aep crsnumh cmsnumhp or ntssnumhm cutback asphalt mc numo or mc numo for tight bases mc num rc numo or rc num for open bases .
emulsified petroleum resin epr section num bituminous surface treatments num this material shall not be used as a prime on processed reef shell base courses crushed aggregate base courses or rubblized concrete .
this material shall not be left exposed for more than four days before placing a base layer of asphalt over it .
this material shall also be supplied from the producer in the form in which it shall be placed .
material in a concentrated form that requires dilution after delivery will not be allowed .
num .
asphalt flush coat emulsified asphalt crs num num .
liquid seals and surface treatments without polymer additive liquid asphalt binder pg num cutback asphalt rc num rc num mc num emulsified asphalt crs num crs numh num .
liquid seals and surface treatments with polymer additive liquid asphalt binder pg num emulsified asphalt crs nump crs numhp crsnuml this liquid binder shall be manufactured from pg num with polymer additive to achieve the pg num grade .
where the plans require the placement of a bituminous plant mix overlay over a bituminous surface treatment or liquid seal the overlying layer shall not be placed until the asphalt in the bituminous surface treatment or liquid seal has cured to the satisfaction of the engineer .
curing time is dependent upon several factors including temperature humidity and wind velocity .
when emulsified asphalt is used curing begins with a distinct change in color from brown to black and proceeds until the asphalt satisfactorily retains the aggregate .
traffic stripe on each layer shall be provided and paid for in accordance with section num. b aggregate .
coarse aggregates for bituminous surface treatments shall be crushed aggregate meeting the requirements of section num .
the kind of aggregate materials used shall be at the contractors option within the following limits num .
the use of carbonate stone such as limestone dolomite or aggregate tending to polish under traffic shall be restricted as follows based on the average daily traffic adt count in both directions num vehicles or less per day no restrictions apply .
more than num but less than or equal to num vehicles per day carbonate stone shall not be used in the final application .
aggregates for the final application wearing layer shall be limited to siliceous aggregates such as granite quartzite blast furnace slag or lightweight aggregates expanded clays or shales produced by the rotary kiln method .
over num vehicles per day carbonate stone shall not be used in any application .
the above will not apply to shoulder surfacing or detours or to bituminous surface treatments which are to be covered over with a bituminous plant mix layer .
num .
crushed gravel may be used for all applications which are to be covered with a bituminous plant mix layer for all applications on roads having an average daily traffic count adt of less than num vehicles and for all applications of shoulder surface treatment work .
c polymer additive .
the polymer additive shall meet the requirements of section num .
the polymer additive shall be comilled into the emulsified asphalt at the manufacturers facility by premixing the polymer into the liquid asphalt binder before the material is emulsified .
this method of adding the polymer shall be at the rate of num by volume of the asphalt emulsion.any change to the above must be approved in writing by the engineer .
the temperature of the emulsified asphalt shall be between num f num c and num f num c at the time of introduction of the polymer additive .
section num bituminous surface treatments num num construction requirements .
a equipment .
in general it shall be the contractors responsibility to select the proper sizes and amount of equipment to provide the desired results but the following basic items shall be provided .
in addition all equipment necessary for the proper prosecution of the work shall be assembled on the site and must be approved and in good working order before permission to start any treatment will be given .
all equipment approved for use shall be on a trial basis and should after a short test section the equipment prove unsatisfactory it shall be removed replaced or supplemented as deemed necessary to accomplish the desired results .
num .
cleaning equipment .
cleaning equipment shall be capable of cleaning the surface thoroughly without cutting tearing or otherwise damaging the surface .
num .
pressure distributor .
a pressure distributor shall be required and shall be so designed and operated that it will distribute the contents at a pressure between num psi num kpa to num psi num kpa in a uniform spray for the full width of the treatment area without atomization at the rate and within the limits specified .
heating equipment shall be provided .
distributors shall be capable of circulating or agitating the bitumen throughout the heating process providing a uniform temperature with the ranges specified herein and suitable means shall be provided for determining such temperatures .
suitable measuring equipment for accurately measuring the volume of the contents shall be provided .
the distributor shall be equipped with a spray bar of adjustable height hand hose and nozzle .
heating equipment will not be required for the application of emulsified petroleum resin prime .
num .
aggregate spreader .
a selfpropelled aggregate spreader with mechanically actuated spreading attachments and adjustable widths of satisfactory design and performance will be required however when the area to be processed is of such size or shape that to require the use of a mechanical spreader would be impractical the engineer may permit the aggregate to be spread manually .
num .
rollers .
a selfpropelled steel wheel roller having a weight mass between num tons num metric tons and num tons num metric tons shall be required immediately behind the aggregate spreader followed by a selfpropelled pneumatic tired roller .
only one coverage shall be made with the steel wheel roller .
b temperature and weather limitations for placement of surface treatments .
all bituminous treatments shall be applied in strict conformity with the following num .
seasonal no bituminous surface treatment which will be exposed to traffic including shoulder paving shall be placed between the dates of october num and may num in north alabama and between the dates of november num and april num in south alabama regardless of weather conditions .
for the purpose of identification south alabama shall be referred to for projects lying partly or wholly in the area of the state lying south of latitude numn and with north alabama encompassing the remaining or northern portion of the state .
this seasonal limitation will not apply to prime coat .
num .
weather .
bituminous surface treatments shall not be placed on a wet surface or when the engineer will not allow the placement due to existing unfavorable weather conditions .
they shall not be placed when the temperature is expected to fall below freezing during the night regardless of daytime temperature when the ground is frozen or when the surface temperature is less than num f num c. bituminous surface treatment a prime coat shall not be placed when the air temperature is below num f num c. all other bituminous surface treatments b c d etc .
shall not be placed when the air temperature is below num f num c. section num bituminous surface treatments num num .
moisture in aggregate .
aggregates spread when the temperature is num f num c and above may be surface damp but not wet .
aggregates spread when the temperature is below num f num c shall be surface dry .
aggregates found by the engineer to contain excessive moisture or free water at the time of use shall be rejected .
the above limitations shall not be waived unless approved in writing by the engineer .
c preparation of existing surface .
loose material dust dirt caked clay or any foreign material shall be removed .
cleaning shall be continued until the surface is clean or in case of application on a soil or aggregate surface all the loose dirt is removed and the surfaces of the larger size aggregate in the road surface are exposed but not dislodged .
all cleaning of the area to be treated shall be completed before any bituminous material is applied .
d application of bituminous material .
num .
general .
no bituminous material or treatment shall be applied until the base or underlying surface has been approved .
num .
preparation of bituminous material .
bituminous materials used for each treatment shall be heated as previously noted .
the material shall be maintained within the specific temperature range during application .
any material which has not been maintained within the specified range shall be rejected .
the following temperature f c ranges shall apply type of bitumen prime hot application liquid asphalt binder num f num f num c num c cutback asphalt rcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum num f num f num c num c rcnum num f num f num c num c rcnum mcnum num f num f num c num c rcnum mcnum num f num f num c num c emulsified petroleum resin ambient temperature emulsified asphalt num f num f num c num c num f num f num c num c emulsified asphalt with polymer additive num f num f num c num c it is recommended that in general liquid asphalt binders be used june through september and either emulsified asphalt or cutback be used the remainder of the season .
emulsified petroleum resin prime will not be required to be heated and shall be applied at ambient temperature .
no emulsified petroleum resin prime shall be placed when the ambient temperature is below freezing .
num .
application of bitumen .
the bitumen shall be applied uniformly over the area to be treated .
where the treatment width is num feet num m or less the entire width shall be treated in one application unless otherwise directed .
where only a partial width is treated in one application extreme care shall be used to insure a slight overlap of adjacent treatments but not in excess of num inches num mm .
the spray bar shall be adjusted to the proper height for exact single or double overlap of spray area without partial overlap .
uniformity of discharge shall be checked before beginning application and at other times as directed .
streaked areas and any other areas lacking uniform distribution shall immediately be made uniform .
in all cases the distributor shall be stopped before the application begins to run light just before the distributor tank is completely empty .
a method of making joints shall be used that will insure that in beginning section num bituminous surface treatments num and ending the distribution of each load a proper junction is made with the preceding and succeeding work without excessive bituminous material at the joints .
in applying bituminous materials the contractor shall use effective means to protect structures walls curbs etc .
from discoloration or spattering .
num .
special details .
before applying a prime coat the surface shall be prepared as provided in subarticle numc above and if necessary it shall be sprinkled with water .
after the prime coat has been applied the contractor shall keep all traffic off the road until in the opinion of the engineer the prime coat is dry and cured .
when directed the contractor shall without extra compensation spread the minimum necessary amount of approved clean coarse sand over the bituminous prime to prevent its breaking up under traffic or to speed up curing .
no overlying surface shall be placed until the prime coat has been approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall without extra compensation maintain the prime treatment and the surface of the base intact until it is covered by an application of a surfacing material .
maintenance shall include satisfactory repair to all holes ravels depressions and areas deficient in prime so that the prime surface shall be smooth and of uniform texture before placing of an overlying surface .
e spreading and embedding aggregate .
the size and amount of aggregate used shall be in accordance with provisions of subarticle numb for the type treatment required by the plans or proposal .
spreading of aggregate shall follow application of bituminous material as closely as practicable using mechanical aggregate spreaders inaccessible areas shall be covered as directed .
sufficient aggregate to cover each distributor load in loaded trucks along with an adequate crew of workmen equipped with brooms standing by shall be at the site before bituminous application begins .
spreading of the aggregate shall begin and continue immediately behind the application of the bituminous material .
however if excessive rolling of the aggregate occurs during spreading the engineer may allow the chip spreader to delay slightly in order to hold aggregate rolling to a minimum .
rolling shall begin immediately behind the spreading operation .
sufficient rollers shall be furnished to insure that the initial pass of the roller is made within five minutes of the spreading of the aggregate .
rolling shall be continuous providing coverage of the entire area of treatment to insure thorough embedment of the aggregate .
unless a sufficient number of rollers are in operation to complete the above requirement the next load of bituminous material shall not be applied until the rolling of the previous application is completed .
when the engineer determines the aggregate has been thoroughly embedded rolling shall cease and the contractor shall without delay remove all excess aggregate from the treatment area .
f special construction requirements for placing of bituminous treatment l. when placing surface treatment l special emphasis will be placed on not allowing either public or construction traffic over the work while placing of the treatment if this can not be avoided it shall be well controlled and kept to a minimum .
the sequence of placement of the material shall be as follows numst step cleaning of surface and applying the first application of bitumen at the rate shown in subarticle numb .
numnd step placement of cover aggregate so as to have a uniform cover in contact with the asphalt .
the surface should then be rolled with a light roller to key the aggregate with the asphalt .
numrd step place dry choke aggregate and continue rolling and brooming until voids are filled .
numth step apply numnd application of hot bitumen at rate shown in subarticle numb .
numth step apply numnd application of aggregate and continue brooming and rolling until the voids are filled and the aggregate is keyed to the asphalt .
section num slurry seal coat num num maintenance and protection of surface and traffic .
maintenance shall include immediate repair of any failures or defects that occur repeated as often as is necessary to keep the surface continuously intact and acceptable .
maintenance shall be performed without direct compensation .
unless otherwise specified on the plans or in the proposal the contractor shall handle traffic through the work and over the surface except while bituminous material is actually being applied and covered with aggregate .
it shall be his responsibility to take whatever steps are necessary or directed to protect both the work and the traveling public .
num method of measurement .
measurement will be made of the number of square yards square meters of accepted bituminous treatment complete in place .
the length shall be the actual length measured along the surface of the treatment .
the width shall be the designated width of completed surface .
where the pay item specifies a prime coat plus an overlying treatment the measurement will not include the additional width of the prime coat .
where the pay item specifies a prime coat only the width will be the specified width of the prime coat .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment for accepted bituminous surface treatment or bituminous surface treatment with polymer additive pay item no .
numb measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter complete in place for the type of bituminous treatment specified in the proposal by the type designation letter or letters except that adjustments in the contract unit price shall be made as follows when changes in amounts of treatment materials are ordered as provided in article num the contract unit price will be adjusted upward or downward accordingly .
adjustment will be based on the increase or decrease in amounts per square yard square meter at the verified cost f.o.b .
delivery point plus num cents per gallon num cent per liter for the bitumen and the verified cost per square yard cubic meter for the aggregate delivered to the spreader .
the contract unit price or adjusted contract unit price for the accepted area complete in place shall be payment in full for furnishing all material placement of materials maintenance thereof and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa bituminous treatment type designation letterletters type of bitumen if specified per square yard square meter numb bituminous treatment type designation letterletters type of bitumen if specified with polymer additive per square yard square meter section num slurry seal coat num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing a surface course approximately num to num of an inch num to num mm in thickness placed on existing paved surfaces in accordance with these specifications and within reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and widths shown on the drawings and as specified .
num materials .
a asphalt emulsion .
cqsnumh or cqsnumhp shall meet the requirements of section num. b aggregate .
aggregate shall meet the appropriate requirements of section num and num with lightweight aggregate and manufactured sand made from limestone added to the list of approved stones .
c filler .
filler if required shall meet the requirements of section num .
section num slurry seal coat num d water .
the water shall be potable and free from harmful soluble salt .
e composition of mixtures .
the aggregate asphalt emulsion water and if required filler meeting the requirements herein specified shall conform to the composition by weight mass percentages as specified by the engineer but within the limits of table a of this section .
type i .
this aggregate blend is used to seal cracks and fill voids .
it should be used on areas where a minimum wearing surface and a maximum seal is desired .
this fine gradation requires an application rate of num to num pounds num to num kg of dry aggregate per square yard square meter .
type ii .
this aggregate blend is used to give crown corrections and a moderate wearing surface .
this surface course shall be used in areas that require this size of aggregate to fill in voids and leave a substantial wearing surface .
this gradation requires an application rate of num to num pounds num to num kg of dry aggregate per square yard square meter resulting in a surface thickness of approximately num to num of an inch num to num mm .
the slurry seal shall meet the requirements of subarticle numb where applicable .
table a composition by weight mass percentages based on square opening laboratory sieves combined aggregate gradations passing sieve type i type ii num num mm num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num m num num num num no .
num num m num num num num asphalt residue percent by weight mass num num num num num construction requirements .
a weather limitations .
the weather limitations as specified in item numbnum shall apply except that slurry seal shall not be placed when the air temperature is num f num c or lower nor when the temperature of the pavement on which it is to be placed is num f num c or lower .
b equipment requirements .
the slurry seal mixing equipment shall be an approved selfpropelled continuousflow apparatus consisting of a composite of all the required units herein described .
the apparatus shall be capable of proportioning combining and mixing accurately the specified components into a homogeneous mixture with an asphalt film of sufficient thickness to furnish the desired binding properties .
this apparatus shall contain bins tanks and receptacles of sufficient size and volume proportioning feeders liquid measuring meters or devices mechanical mixer and distributor for placing the finished mixture .
all units shall be integrated mechanized and synchronized to deliver the component to the mixer simultaneously and in time adjusted sequence .
c mixer .
the mixer shall be of the spiraled multiblade type or other type as approved by the engineer .
the mixing chamber shall have a stated capacity which shall not be exceeded and it shall be mechanically equipped to regulate the mixing time up to but not to exceed four minutes .
it shall be equipped to prewet the aggregate prior to aggregate contact with the asphalt emulsion .
it shall have a gate for controlling the discharge of the mixture into the distributor spreader .
d spreading equipment .
a mechanically operated type squeegee distributor shall be integrally assembled with the slurry mixer .
the strikeoff shall be lined with a flexible material to prevent loss of the slurry mixture during spreading .
the strikeoff shall have vertical adjustment available for changing grade and crown to assure uniform spreading of the mixture .
the apparatus shall be equipped with section num slurry seal coat num a pressure system and a fog type spray bar adequate for placing a complete fog coat of water with a maximum application of num gallons per square yard num lm over the pavement surface immediately preceding the spreading of the mixture .
hand squeegees shovels surface cleaning machines and hand equipment as necessary shall be provided to perform the work .
e conditioning of existing surface .
conditioning of the existing surface shall be in accordance with subarticle numc .
f placement .
the temperature of the components of the completed mixture shall be so controlled that the application temperature of the slurry seal shall be within the range designated by the engineer but not less than num f num c nor more than num f num c . g joints .
num .
transverse joints .
transverse joints shall be constructed by either overlapping the previously cured slurry with num to num feet num to num m of fresh slurry or by lightly wetting the area that the spreader box will touch while the slurry is still in a completely uncured semifluid condition .
num .
longitudinal joints .
longitudinal joints shall be constructed when the slurry is completely uncured or when it is totally cured .
should the slurry be completely cured the cured slurry at the joint area shall be wetted by the spray bar .
should the slurry be completely uncured the slurry shall not be wetted .
a burlap drag or other suitable device that will cause the fresh slurry coming from the spreader box to distribute itself evenly over the joint shall be pulled along the joint seam .
h curing .
treated areas shall be allowed to cure until such time as the engineer or inspectorincharge shall permit their opening to traffic .
all traffic shall be diverted up to a maximum of num hours to permit undisturbed curing of the slurry or until such time as curing has taken place and rolling has been completed .
i rolling .
any rolling required for the slurry seal shall be done with a pneumatic roller .
the roller shall be capable of exerting a contact pressure during rolling of num to num kpa .
rolling shall consist of not less than four complete coverages over the specified areas .
j tack coat .
when specified a tack coat shall be placed in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement .
the amount of slurry seal coat applied as directed and accepted will be measured in square yards square meters .
the length will be the actual length measured along the surface .
the width will be the actual width sealed as shown on the plans or directed .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the number of square yards square meters measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the item of slurry seal coat of the type specified on the plans complete in place which price shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials and constructing the slurry seal coat and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa slurry seal coat type per square yard square meter indicate i or ii section num microsurfacing seal coat num section num microsurfacing seal coat num description .
this section covers the materials equipment construction and application procedures for placing microsurfacing material for filling ruts and for surfacing existing paved surfaces .
the microsurfacing shall be a mixture of a polymer modified asphalt emulsion num percent crushed mineral aggregate mineral filler water and other additives for control of set time in the field .
all ingredients shall be properly proportioned mixed and spread on the paved surface in accordance with the specification and as directed by the engineer .
num materials .
all materials shall comply with the requirements of division num materials except as noted herein .
special reference is made to the following a aggregate .
num .
coarse aggregates for microsurfacing seal coat shall be crushed aggregate meeting the requirements of section num .
the kind of aggregate materials used shall be at the contractors option within the following limits .
num .
the use of carbonate stone such as limestone dolomite or aggregate tending to polish under traffic shall be restricted as follows based on the average daily traffic adt count in both directions num vehicles per day or less no restrictions apply .
num to num vehicles per day carbonate stone shall be limited to a maximum of num of the blended gradation .
over num vehicles per day carbonate stone shall not be used in any application .
aggregates shall be limited to siliceous aggregates such as granite quartzite blast furnace slag or lightweight aggregates expanded clays or shales produced by the rotary kiln method .
crushed gravel shall have a bulk specific gravity greater than num aashto t num .
the aggregate shall meet the appropriate requirements of sections num and num and the following test property test method specification sand equivalent on material passing no .
num sieve aashto t num num min la abrasion aashto t num num max sodium sulfate soundness aashto t num num max num .
aggregates shipped to the project shall be uniform and shall not require blending or pre mixing at the storage area before use and shall meet the appropriate gradation as shown in table no .
num in article num .
all aggregates shall be thoroughly screened directly into the support vehicles prior to the application of any mixture to eliminate the potential of oversized and deleterious materials .
b mineral filler .
the mineral filler may be any recognized brand of nonair entrained portland cement or hydrated lime that is free of lumps or any other mineral additive approved by the engineer .
it shall be accepted upon visual inspection .
the amount of mineral filler needed shall be determined by the laboratory mix design and shall be considered as part of the material gradation requirement .
the mineral filler shall not exceed num of the weight of the aggregate and shall have a mixture control tolerance of num. c asphalt emulsion .
the emulsified asphalt shall be either a cationic type cqsnumhp meeting the requirements of section num or a cationic type cssnumh meeting the requirements of section num .
the cssnumh shall also be polymer modified containing a minimum of num polymer by volume .
the polymer shall conform to the requirements given in section num .
section num microsurfacing seal coat num d water .
the water for the microsurfacing mixture shall be potable and free from any contaminants detrimental to the mixture .
e other additives .
the emulsion manufacturer shall provide other additives as required to control the set time of the mixture in the field .
num composition of mixture .
a constituents the microsurfacing material shall be a uniform mixture of aggregate polymer modified emulsified asphalt mineral filler water and other additives as required to control set time in the field .
the engineer will require immediate adjustments or replacement of any constituent as needed to produce an acceptable mixture .
the constituents shall be proportioned to produce a uniform mixture meeting the requirements of table no .
num .
section num microsurfacing seal coat num table no .
num microsurfacing design limits gradation requirements mixture control tolerances sieve size percent passing type ii type iii num num inch num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num design requirements num range for residual asphalt num num num num specification test method mixing time test secs num f num c num minimum issa tb num mix time num and num f num c and num c informational issa tb num set time tests num minutes num kgcm minimum issa tb num early rolling traffic time num minutes num kgcm minimum issa tb num wet stripping test coating num minimum issa tb num wet track abrasion test loss in gftnum gmnum num num max num days num num max .
num hour issa tb num measurement of excess asphalt max .
num gramsftnum num gramsmnum sand adhesion num cycles numlbs .
num kgs issa tb num classification compatibility num pt .
minimum issa tb num note num percent residual asphalt based on weight of dry aggregate .
note num type ii for spread rates of num num pounds per square yard based on dry aggregate weight .
note num type iii for spread rates of num num pounds per square yard based on dry aggregate weight .
note num if more than num pounds per square yard of mixture is required additional lifts shall be applied .
note num the gradation and percent residual asphalt as shown on the microsurfacing design or as established by the engineer shall be maintained with the listed mixture control tolerances .
the microsurfacing type and target spread rate will be as shown in the plans and shall be controlled to within plus or minus num pounds per square yard except in no case shall a spread rate be less than the minimum be allowed .
scratch courses and rut filling applications are exempt from this specifications as rates will vary based upon the depth of the ruts and shall be spread as separate lifts .
b mixture design .
at least three weeks prior to beginning work the contractor shall submit to the materials and tests engineer a mix design with certified test results along with representative samples of each ingredient to be used in the microsurfacing mixture .
the sample shall include information relative to sources type of materials and project number .
the job mix formula shall be designed in accordance with the international slurry surfacing association issa recommended guidelines and technical bulletins .
mixing tests shall pass at the maximum expected air temperature in accordance with issa t num .
if aggregate proportions are changed a new job mix formula shall be submitted for approval .
no microsurfacing work shall begin nor shall any mixture be accepted unless the bureau of materials and tests has evaluated the microsurfacing design .
section num microsurfacing seal coat num num equipment .
a general .
all equipment tools and machines used in the performance of this work shall be approved by the engineer .
no work shall be attempted with equipment that is malfunctioning .
the engineer may order that the work be discontinued if sufficient equipment and tools are not in use to place the materials satisfactorily .
b mixing equipment .
the paving mixture shall be mixed by a selfpropelled microsurfacing mixing machine which shall be a front feed continuous flow mixing unit able to accurately deliver and proportion the aggregate emulsified asphalt mineral filler field control additives and water to a revolving multiblade twin shafted mixer and discharge the mixed product uniformly on a continuous flow basis .
additionally the mixing machine shall be equipped with dual side driving stations of original equipment manufacturers design that will assist in proper alignment when applying mixture .
a spray bar shall be provided to completely wet the aggregate entering the pugmill with additive if used and water .
the contractor shall provide a computerized material monitoring system with integrated materials control devices that are readily accessible and positioned so the amount of each material used can be determined at any time .
each material control device shall be clearly marked and calibrated prior to mix application .
the mixer shall be equipped with a backup electronic materials counter that is capable of recording running count totals for each material being monitored . .
the mixer shall have the capability to record and display the following information individual sensor counts for emulsion aggregate mineral filler water and additive aggregate emulsion and mineral filler output in lbs .
per minute ground travel distance spread reate in lbs .
per square yard percentages of emulsion mineral filler water and additive cumulative totals of aggregate emulsion mineral filler water and additive scale factor for all materials .
the contractor shall calibrate the mixing machine for each material type with a minimum of num tests .
the mixing machine shall be calibrated every time a material component is changes .
additional calibrations may be required during production as directed by the engineer .
num .
water pressure system .
the mixing machine shall be equipped with a water pressure system and nozzle type spray bar to provide a water spray ahead of and outside the spreader box when required .
num .
proportioning devices .
individual volume or weight controls for proportioning each material to be added to the mix shall be provided and properly marked .
these proportioning devices shall be used in materials calibration and for determination of materials output at any time .
each mixing unit shall be calibrated prior to commencement of the work .
num .
emulsion pump .
the emulsion pump shall be a heated positive displacement type pump .
c spreading equipment .
the microsurfacing mixture shall be spread uniformly by means of a hydraulically adjustable type spreader box with a positive screed adjustment and equipped to expand as necessary for varying pavement widths attached to the mixer equipped with ribbon flighted augers to agitate and spread the materials throughout the box .
these augers shall be designed to maintain sufficient turbulence in the mixture to prevent the material from settingup in the box or causing buildup and lumps .
a front seal shall be provided to ensure no loss of the mixture at the road contact surface .
the rear seal shall act as a final strikeoff and shall be adjustable .
the spreader shall be maintained to prevent the loss of the paving mixture in surfacing superelevated curves .
the spreader box and rear strikeoff shall be designed and operated so that a uniform consistency is achieved to produce a free flow of material to the rear strikeoff without causing skips lumps or tears in the finished surface .
section num microsurfacing seal coat num d rutfilling equipment .
microsurfacing materials may be used to fill ruts utility cuts depressions in the existing surface and minor surface blemishes .
ruts less than num inches in depth shall be filled with a leveling course pulled full width with the spreader box .
ruts equal to or greater than num inches in depth shall be filled independently with a rutfilling box .
ruts greater than num inches in depth may require multiple applications with the rutfilling box to restore the crosssection .
the rut filling box shall be either num foot or num foot in width .
all rutfilling material shall be allowed to cure under traffic for at least num hours before any additional material is placed .
e auxiliary equipment .
suitable crack and surface cleaning equipment barricading equipment hand tools and other support equipment shall be provided by the contractor as necessary to perform the work .
f equipment calibration each mixing unit shall be calibrated in the presence of the engineer prior to the start of the project .
any component replacement affecting material proportioning requires that the machine be recalibrated .
no machine will be allowed to work on the project until the calibration has been completed andor accepted .
additional calibrations may be required during production as directed by the engineer .
calibrations shall be performed in accordance with aldot procedure num calibration of microsurfacing equipment .
the contractor shall provide a copy of the of the calibration worksheets to the engineer .
num construction .
a weather limitations .
the microsurfacing mixture shall be spread only when the ambient temperature for the num hours prior to placement is at least num f. the current pavement surface and ambient temperature is at least num f and rising .
the weather is not foggy or rainy and there is no forecast of temperatures below num f within num hours from the time of placement .
the microsurfacing mixture shall be spread at the discretion of the engineer if the relative humidity exceeds num percent or the weather is overcast .
b surface preparation .
the area to be surfaced shall be thoroughly cleaned of vegetation loose aggregate and soil .
all cracks shall be cleaned to the satisfaction of the engineer prior to overlay .
traffic markings and stripe shall be removed flush with the pavement surface .
whenever conditions are such as to require prewetting the surface the water shall be sprayed ahead of and outside of the spreader box at a rate sufficient to dampen the surface without any free flowing water ahead of the spreader box .
c application .
the paving mixture shall be spread on the prepared surface in such a way as to leave a uniform finished surface .
care shall be taken when filling ruts to restore the designed profile of the pavement cross section .
excess crowning or overfilling of the rut area will not be permitted .
the contractor shall use squeegees and lutes to spread the mixture in areas inaccessible to the spreader box and areas requiring hand spreading .
a sufficient amount of material shall be carried at all times in all parts of the spreader box to ensure complete coverage .
no lumping balling or unmixed aggregate shall be permitted .
no segregation of the emulsion and aggregate fines from the coarse aggregate will be permitted .
if the coarse aggregate settles to the bottom of the mix the mix will be removed from the pavement .
the paving mixture shall have proper consistency so that excessive splattering and excessive free water is avoided .
the paving mixture shall be applied based on dry aggregate weight as specified on the plans .
adjustments to the additive will be permitted if necessary to provide a slower setting time when hand spreading is needed .
if hand spreading is necessary the mixture shall be poured in a small windrow along one edge of the surface to be covered and then spread uniformly by a hand squeegee or lute .
a smooth neat seam shall be provided where two passes meet .
excess material shall immediately be removed from ends of each run .
section num microsurfacing seal coat num d joints longitudinal joints and transverse joints shall have no more than  inch vertical space over the joint when measured with a num ft. straightedge placed perpendicular to the joint .
a maximum of num inches shall be allowed for overlap of the longitudinal lane line joints .
the edge lines shall be repaired if the edges vary more than num inches from a num foot straight line or from a num foot arc on a curved section .
e traffic control .
traffic shall not be allowed on the microsurfacing mixture until it has cured sufficiently to prevent pick up andor marring of the surface .
curing of the microsurfacing with the ability to carry rolling traffic shall be within num minutes of placement .
the contractor shall maintain traffic control as necessary to prevent damage to the mixture .
any such damage done by traffic to the mixture shall be repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
application of the surfacing mixture shall be suspended early enough each day to permit traffic to safety travel over the completed work before sunset .
work required or materials used in controlling of traffic will not be paid for directly but shall be considered subsidiary obligations of the item of micro surfacing seal coat .
f quality control the contractor shall produce a mixture in compliance with the mix design mixture control tolerances and spread rate placement tolerances .
the contractor shall maintain all quality control documentation .
quality control documentation shall be made available to the engineer upon request or at the completion of work .
num .
asphalt cement the contractor shall calculate the asphalt content of the mixture from the equipment computer display readings a minimum of num times a day .
num .
application rate the contractor shall calculate the yield of the course being placed from the equipment computer display readings a minimum of num times a day .
num .
daily report the daily report shall include aggregate used in tons asphalt emulsion used in tons mineral filler used in tons water used in mixture in gallons and additive used in mixture in gallons .
g test strip prior to production application the contractor shall place a num foot test section to verify the mix design and the ability to carry rolling traffic within num minutes .
if rolling traffic can not be carried within num minutes the emulsion or mixture must be adjusted and another test strip shall be required .
the test section shall be placed at the same time as the paving is to take place night or day and under the same ambient conditions .
h testing and lots .
the engineer will take samples of the aggregate and liquid asphalt emulsion for every num tons of aggregate used in production and as otherwise deemed appropriate .
a bmtnum is required for all aggregates shipped for use on the project .
aggregates will be sampled in accordance with aashto t num .
if tests on either component material or the mixture fails the operation shall cease .
it will be the responsibility of the contractor to prove that the problems have been corrected and that a satisfactory operation can be accomplished before work can be started again .
a lot is normally defined as numsquare yards .
for each lot the contractor shall provide a lot sheet containing the following information lot number job number route inspector date air temperature control settings calibration values unit weight of emulsion in lbs .
per gallon percent residue in emulsion beginning and ending intervals computer display readings for materials usage beginning and ending and total length width total area in square yards of aggregate pounds of emulsion and pounds of cement section num tack coat num percent of each material percent of asphalt cement application rate and combined application rate in lbs.sy .
mix design percentages of materials required calibration forms contractors authorized signature num method of measurement .
the quantity of microsurfacing mixture of the type specified used and accepted will be measured in tons .
a means suitable to the engineer for confirmation of the weights of the materials shall be furnished by the contractor .
the weight of the dry aggregate asphalt emulsion and the cement used in the mixture shall be calculated and included in the total weight measured for payment .
additional materials such as mineral fillers water and chemical additives shall be included in the contract price for microsurfacing seal coat and will not be measured separately for payment .
deductions in measurement will be made for all material wasted or lost or applied beyond the limits of the work .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
compensation for the microsurfacing material measured as provided above will be made on a tonnage basis and the contract unit price per ton shall be full compensation for construction of the microsurfacing complete in place as shown on the plans or directed .
this price shall include all materials procurement handling hauling and processing and includes all equipment tools labor and incidentals required to complete the work with the following exception tonnage placed in excess of the amount shown on the plans or directed in writing plus two pounds per square yard will be paid for at eighty percent of the contract unit price bid .
no payment will be made for unacceptable material for material furnished or used in excess of the amount indicated or directed except as provided above for material used in replacing defective or condemned work for material wasted in handling hauling or otherwise or for maintaining the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numb microsurfacing seal coat type per ton specify type ii or iii .
section num tack coat num description .
the work under this section shall cover the furnishing and placing of a bituminous tack coat on an existing surface which is to be covered by a bituminous plant mix material in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the work shall include cleaning the existing surface prior to application of the tack coat .
the area of treatment and the rate of application of a tack coat shall be based on the plans and specifications after evaluating the actual surface condition on which the plant mix overlay is to be placed .
num materials .
bituminous material for tack coat shall be emulsified asphalt or one of the performance graded pg asphalt binders shown in article num .
the cationic grades crsnumh crsnum crsnumh cmsnumhp cssnum cssnumh cqsnumh cqsnumhp crsnump crsnuml cbcnumht or cnttnumhs or the anionic grade ntss numhm or the nonionic grade ntqsnumhl shall be used .
emulsified asphalts shall not be diluted prior to application .
unless shown otherwise on the plans the contractor shall have the option of using any of the allowable bituminous materials subject to other limitations of these specifications .
in making the selection of materials the contractor shall take into consideration seasonal weather temperature and other placement conditions while keeping in mind that ss stands for slow setting rs stands for section num tack coat num rapid setting and qs stands for quick setting qs is the faster setting or breaking emulsion .
low temperatures and humid or damp conditions will retard the breaking or setting of all emulsions .
the mixing of a cationic and an anionic emulsion will result in failure of emulsion materials .
all materials shall meet the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements .
a equipment .
in general it shall be the contractors responsibility to select the proper size and amount of equipment to provide the desired results .
equipment furnished shall meet the requirements of subarticle numa .
b seasonal nighttime weather and temperature limitations .
num .
seasonal limitations for the placement of tack .
grades cssnum and cssnumh emulsified asphalts shall not be placed between the dates of october num and may num in north alabama and between the dates of november num and april num in south alabama regardless of weather conditions .
for the purpose of identification south alabama shall be referred to for projects lying partly or wholly in the area of the state lying south of latitude num n with north alabama encompassing the remaining portion of the state .
these seasonal limitations shall not apply to the placement of other bituminous materials for tack allowed by article num .
the tack may be placed if allowed by the engineer when the pavement temperature is numf and rising .
num .
nighttime limitations for the placement of tack .
grade cssnum and cssnumh emulsified asphalts shall not be used for tack during nighttime paving operations .
num .
weather limitations for the placement of tack .
tack material shall not be applied on a wet surface or when in the engineers opinion weather conditions are not suitable .
ntssnumhm may become slippery when wet .
num .
temperature limitations for the placement of tack .
temperature limitations for the placement of tack coat material shall be the same as specified in subarticle numb for plant mixed pavements .
ntssnumhm material shall not be used for cold applied asphalt pavement .
c preparation of existing surface .
loose material dust dirt and all foreign matter shall be removed from the surface to be treated .
all existing surfaces new pavement milled pavement old pavement or concrete shall be clean and dry prior to the tack coat application .
cleaning operations can be achieved either through mechanical brooming by flushing with water vacuuming blowing off debris using high pressure air or other methods as determined by the contactor unless otherwise shown on the plans .
the existing surface shall be approved by the engineer before application of the tack material .
d application .
tack coat material application rate shall meet the requirements given in the table below material type undiluted application rate galydnum application temperature f emulsified asphalt num num cationic num anionic num nonionic num pg asphalt binder num num num tack coat shall be applied uniformly to the pavement surface to obtain full coverage .
tack coat applications that are streaky or striped in appearance will not be allowed and shall be reapplied .
an asphalt distributor shall be provided for use on all accessible areas inaccessible areas such as around manholes etc .
may be coated by other methods approved by the engineer .
section num joint sealant for hma pavement num when applying tack coat it shall be applied to all contact surfaces of curbs gutters and manholes .
tack shall also be applied to all adjacent pavement edges except the pavement edges where joint sealant is required .
adjacent surfaces such as gutters and the like that are not to be in contact with the mix shall be adequately protected from the spray by means of heavy paper securely fastened in place or by other satisfactory means .
any such surface soiled by tack coat material shall be cleaned and restored to its previous condition without additional compensation .
e curing tack coat materials shall be fully cured before application of the overlying asphalt pavement layer is placed .
emulsified asphalt materials are considered as cured when the emulsion color has completely turned black .
the ntssnumhm asphalt emulsion shall be covered as soon as practical .
tack coat material shall be spread only far enough in advance to permit the construction to progress consistently uniformly and continuously after the curing period and shall not be applied so far in advance that the viscous quality will be reduced by traffic prior to construction thereon .
tack coat that loses its viscous quality before being covered shall be renewed and any which has been damaged shall be replaced without extra compensation .
num method of measurement .
the amount of bituminous material used as directed for tack coat will be measured in gallons liters as specified in article num .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the amount of bituminous material used as directed for tack coat measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per gallon liter which shall be full compensation for furnishing the bituminous material hauling heating application curing and maintaining and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa tack coat per gallon liter section num joint sealant for hma pavement num description .
this section shall cover the sealing of longitudinal joints in hot mix asphalt pavements by the spraying or rolling of joint sealant on the vertical face of the joint ahead of the asphalt spreader .
joint sealant application shall be a separate construction operation from the tack coat application joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between hma pavement and paved shoulders unless shown otherwise on the plans .
joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between hma pavement and curbs unless shown otherwise on the plans .
num materials .
a sample of the sealant will be taken by the engineer and tested in accordance with the requirements established by the department for sampling and testing bituminous surface treatments given in section num .
the contractor shall have the option of using the following materials for the joint sealant pg num performance graded asphalt binder pg num performance graded asphalt binder crsnumh emulsified asphalt cmsnumhp emulsified asphalt cqsnumhp emulsified asphalt cbcnumht emulsified asphalt ntssnumhm emulsified asphalt ntqsnumhl emulsified asphalt pavon crafco pavement joint adhesive part no .
num .
section num joint sealant for hma pavement num pg num shall meet the material requirements given in table num of section num .
pg num shall meet the material requirements given in table num of section num .
ntqsnumhl ntssnumhm cqsnumhp cmsnumhp cbcnumht and crsnumh shall meet the requirements given in table num of section num .
cqsnumhp shall be a cationic emulsion blended with a minimum of num polymer meeting the requirements given in article num and the requirements given in the following tables .
pavon is a proprietary product that shall also meet the requirements given in the following tables .
required properties from the testing of pavon parameter test method value residue by distillation aldot num num min .
viscosity sf num f sec .
aashto t num num sf min .
num sf max .
sieve test aashto t num num max .
particle charge aashto t num positive required properties from the testing of distillation residue from pavon parameter test method value penetration num g num secs .
num f aashto t num num mm min .
num mm max .
ductility cms .
num f aashto tnum num cms min .
elastic recovery num f aashto tnum num min .
crafco pavement joint adhesive part no .
num is a proprietary product that shall meet the requirements given in the following table .
required properties from the testing of crafco pavement joint adhesive part no .
num parameter test method value cone penetration num f astm dnum num flow num f astm dnum num mmmaximum resilience num f astm dnum num minimum ductility num f aashto tnum num cmminimum ductility num f aashto tnum num cmminimum softening point aashto tnum num f minimum num construction requirements .
unless shown otherwise on the plans joint sealant shall only be applied to the joints in the wearing layers of section num superpave and section num stone matrix asphalt mixes and to the joints in the surface layers between existing hma pavement and new hma pavement .
joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between hma pavement and paved shoulders unless shown otherwise on the plans .
joint sealant shall not be applied to the joints between hma pavement and curbs unless shown otherwise on the plans .
surface preparation shall be in accordance with subarticle num c. as a separate application from the tack coat the sealant shall be applied by being sprayed or rolled on the face of the vertical joint of the previously placed asphalt layer ahead of the asphalt spreader to seal the joint between the previously placed layer and the newly placed layer .
joint sealant shall be placed at the rates and temperatures given in the following table .
section num planing milling of existing pavement num joint sealant application rates and temperature joint sealant application rate application temperature pg num num gallons per mile per inch of lift with a num tolerance num f to num f pg num num gallons per mile per inch of lift with a num tolerance num f to num f crsnumh cmsnumhp ntqsnumhl num gallons per mile per inch of lift with a num tolerance num f to num f cbcnumht ntssnumhm num gallons per mile per inch of lift with a num tolerance num f to num f cqsnumhp pavon num gallons per mile per inch of lift with a num tolerance ambient temperature crafco pavement joint adhesive part no .
num num gallons per mile per inch of lift with a num tolerance num f num the engineer will limit the length of placement ahead of the asphalt spreader usually no more than num feet to reduce the possibility of damage to the sealant .
the engineer will also require the placement of cbcnumht emulsified asphalt cqsnumhp emulsified asphalt ntssnumhm emulsified asphalt ntqsnumhl emulsified asphalt and pavon far enough ahead of the asphalt spreader to allow the curing of the sealant .
num method of measurement .
the application of joint sealant will be measured by the mile for each joint .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
joint sealant will be paid for at the contract unit price per mile for each joint which shall be full compensation for furnishing the joint sealant material applying the sealant and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numb joint sealant for hot mix asphalt pavement per mile section num planing milling of existing pavement num description .
this section shall cover the work of removing existing asphalt pavement by either planing or micromilling .
micromilling is required to provide a more uniform surface than can be achieved by planing .
num equipment .
the planing and micromilling machines shall be selfpropelled of a size and shape that allows traffic to pass safely through areas adjacent to the work equipped with automatic grade and cross slope controls equipped with a means to prevent dust from escaping the milling operation capable of maintaining the required depth of cut and cross slope furnished with a lighting system for night work if night work is required or allowed by the engineer provided with conveyors capable of removing the milled material and emptying it directly into trucks to be hauled away from the roadway .
micromilling equipment shall be capable of removing pavement to an accuracy of num of an inch .
section num planing milling of existing pavement num num construction requirements .
a pavement removal .
the existing pavement shall be removed to varying depths in a manner which will restore the pavement surface to a uniform longitudinal profile and cross section as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the approximate depths of required removal are shown on the plans .
the depth of removal shall be increased or decreased across the width of the pavement to obtain the required roadway cross slope .
the contractor may make multiple cuts to achieve the required depth of cut .
the pavement removal shall be done to effectively minimize the amount of airborne dust .
wetting of the pavement may be required to minimize the airborne dust .
the contractor shall provide a means of drainage to prevent water accumulation on the surface where the pavement has been removed .
unless otherwise noted on the plans the pavement removal shall be limited to an area that will be covered with a surface treatment or a layer of pavement within the time shown below for planing within seven calendar days after removal has begun .
for micromilling within num calendar days after removal has begun .
the contractor shall collect transport and dispose the removed pavement material .
the removed material shall become the property of the contractor unless otherwise noted on the plans .
after pavement removal and immediately prior to resurfacing or opening to traffic the surface shall be thoroughly swept with a power broom to remove fine material and dust particles .
sweeping shall be conducted in a manner that will minimize the potential for creation of a traffic hazard and minimize the creation of airborne dust .
material removed by sweeping shall be collected transported and disposed by the contractor .
b final planed surface .
the final planed surface shall be a uniform finish on the grade and slope shown to be required on the plans .
the finished surface shall also not vary more than num of an inch from a num foot straightedge placed anywhere on the surface of the milled area .
the contractor shall make adjustments to the planing equipment if these surface tolerances are exceeded .
c test section for micromilling .
micromilling shall be performed on a test section prior to beginning the micromilling work .
the size of the test section shall be the width of the micromilling machine and a length of num feet num m. the difference between the ridge and valley of the milled surface shall not exceed num of an inch when measured anywhere on the surface of the milled area .
production micromilling shall not begin until the engineer approves the results of the micromilling of a test section .
the contractor shall make adjustments to the micromilling equipment and micromill another num foot num m long test section for evaluation by the engineer until an acceptable test section has been produced .
the contractor will not be allowed to start production micromilling until an acceptable test section has been produced .
repeated test sections shall be located in areas that have not been milled .
if the surface of the micromilling is determined to be unacceptable at any time after production begins the engineer will require the contractor make adjustments to the equipment and produce another test section for evaluation and approval .
payment will not be made for micromilling test sections that are unacceptable .
payment will be made after adjustments have been made and the surface of the test section is milled to an acceptable finish .
d final micromilled surface .
the final micromilled surface shall be a uniform finish on the grade and slope shown to be required on the plans .
the finished surface shall also not vary more than num of an inch from a num foot straightedge placed anywhere on the surface of the milled area .
the difference between the ridge and valley of the milled surface shall not exceed num of an inch .
the contractor shall make adjustments to the micromilling equipment and construct a test section for evaluation and approval if these surface tolerances are exceeded .
section num triple layer bituminous surface treatment num num method of measurement .
the planing of pavement will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest num of a foot num m on the planed pavement .
the micromilling of pavement will be measured in square yards computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest num of a foot num m on the micromilled pavement .
in areas where a nonuniform layer of thickness is removed the approximate layer thickness will be computed by averaging the depth of cut at opposite lane edges for each travelway at longitudinal measurement intervals of approximately num feet num m or as directed by the engineer .
this average depth will be used to establish the item number under which payment will be made .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the planing and micromilling of pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for removing the pavement collecting transporting and disposing of the removed pavement and other debris the removal and disposal of pavement markers sweeping the pavement and collecting transporting and disposing of the swept debris and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .. b payment will be made under item no .
numa planing existing pavement approximately inches mm thru inches mm thick per square yard square meter numb micromilling existing pavement approximately inches thru inches thick per square yard lower limit of approximate thickness to be removed .
upper limit of approximate thickness to be removed .
section num triple layer bituminous surface treatment num description .
this section covers the materials equipment construction and application procedures for placing three applications of bituminous materials and aggregate for surfacing previously prepared bases or existing paved surfaces .
bituminous materials shall be placed within the tolerance specified unless otherwise ordered by the engineer in writing .
any variation outside of the designated limits shall be cause for ordering the treatment to be removed and replaced or corrected as directed by the engineer all without additional cost to the department .
the rate of aggregate coverage shown by the table is the approximate rate found to produce an acceptable coverage when properly applied .
regardless of the rate shown the contractor shall provide aggregate in sufficient quantities and so spread the aggregate that the bitumen is uniformly and evenly covered .
the engineer will notify the contractor in writing should it become advisable to change the amounts of any material from the limits specified in the table .
in such event an adjustment in the contract unit price will be made as specified in subarticle numa .
num materials .
all materials shall comply with the requirements of division num materials except as noted herein .
special reference is made to the following a bituminous materials .
sources for bituminous materials surface treatments shall meet the requirements given in article num .
section num triple layer bituminous surface treatment num the contractor shall have the option of the following material for the triple layer surface treatment crsnump crsnumhp crsnuml crsnump crsnumhp and crsnuml shall meet the specific requirements given in article num and subarticle nume .
b aggregate .
coarse aggregates for bituminous surface treatments shall be crushed aggregate meeting the requirements of section num and section num .
the kind of aggregate materials used shall be at the contractors option within the following limits num .
the use of carbonate stone such as limestone dolomite or aggregate tending to polish under traffic shall be restricted as follows based on the average daily traffic adt count in both directions num vehicles per day no restrictions apply .
num but num vehicles per day carbonate stone shall not be used in the final application .
aggregates for the final application wearing layer shall be limited to siliceous aggregates such as granite quartzite blast furnace slag or lightweight aggregates expanded clays or shales produced by the rotary kiln method .
num vehicles per day carbonate stone shall not be used in any application .
the above will not apply to shoulder surfacing or detours or to bituminous surface treatments which are to be covered over with a bituminous plant mix layer .
num .
crushed gravel may be used for all applications which are to be covered with a bituminous plant mix layer for all applications on roads having an average daily traffic count adt of less than num vehicles and for all applications of shoulder surface treatment work .
num .
layer num shall be a washed manufactured sand meeting the following gradation aggregate size number description percent passing by weight sieve size num inch no .
num no.num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num wnum manufactured sand num num num num num num num construction requirements .
a equipment .
in general it shall be the contractors responsibility to select the proper sizes and amount of equipment to provide the desired results but as a minimum the following basic items given below shall be provided .
in addition all equipment necessary for the proper execution of the work shall be assembled on the site and must be approved and in good working order before permission to start any treatment will be given .
all equipment approved for use shall be on a trial basis and if after a short test section the equipment proves to be unsatisfactory it shall be removed replaced or supplemented as necessary to accomplish the desired results .
num .
cleaning equipment .
cleaning equipment shall be capable of cleaning the surface thoroughly without cutting tearing or otherwise damaging the surface .
num .
pressure distributor .
a pressure distributor shall be required and shall be so designed and operated that it will distribute the contents at a pressure between num psi num kpa to num psi num kpa in a uniform spray for the full width of the treatment area without atomization at the rate and within the limits specified .
distributors shall be equipped with a tachometer to indicate the application rate .
heating equipment shall be provided .
distributors shall be capable of circulating or agitating the bitumen throughout the heating process providing a uniform temperature within the ranges specified herein and suitable means shall be provided for determining such temperatures .
suitable measuring equipment for accurately measuring the volume in gallons of the bituminous materials before and after application shall be provided .
section num triple layer bituminous surface treatment num the distributor shall be equipped with a spray bar of adjustable height hand hose and nozzle .
num .
aggregate spreader .
a selfpropelled aggregate spreader with mechanically actuated spreading attachments and adjustable widths of satisfactory design and performance will be required however when the area to be processed is of such size or shapes that to require the use of a mechanical spreader would be impractical the engineer may permit the aggregate to be spread manually .
num .
rollers .
a selfpropelled steel wheel roller having a weight mass between num tons num metric tons and num tons num metric tons shall be required immediately behind the aggregate spreader followed by a selfpropelled pneumatic tired roller .
the contractor shall ensure that the roller weights within these limits can properly seat the aggregate without fracturing the aggregate .
only one coverage shall be made with the steel wheel roller .
a selfpropelled two axles pneumatictired rollers with smoothtread rubber tires aligned such that gaps between the tires on one axle are covered by the tires of the other axle shall be required .
the contractor shall ensure that all tires are of the same size and ply rating and inflated to a minimum of num psi num kpa .
the contractor shall maintain tire pressure such that the difference in pressure between any two tires does not exceed num psi num kpa .
b temperature and weather limitations for placement of surface treatments .
all bituminous treatments shall be applied in strict conformity with the following num .
seasonal .
no bituminous surface treatment which will be exposed to traffic including shoulder paving shall be placed between the dates of october num and may num in north alabama and between the dates of november num and april num in south alabama regardless of weather conditions .
for the purpose of identification south alabama shall be referred to for projects lying partly or wholly in the area of the state lying south of latitude numn and with north alabama encompassing the remaining or northern portion of the state .
num .
weather .
bituminous surface treatments shall not be placed on a wet surface or when the engineer will not allow the placement due to existing unfavorable weather conditions .
they shall not be placed when the temperature is expected to fall below freezing during the night regardless of daytime temperature when the ground is frozen or when the surface temperature is less than numf numc .
triple layer bituminous surface treatment shall not be placed when the air temperature is below num f numc .
the above limitations shall not be waived unless approved in writing by the engineer .
all three layers of the bituminous surface treatment shall be placed prior to allowing traffic on the new surface when the air temperature is equal to or greater than numf numc and the relative humidity is num or greater num .
moisture in aggregate .
aggregates spread when the temperature is num f numc and above may be surface damp but not wet .
aggregates spread when the temperature is below num f numc shall be surface dry .
aggregates found by the engineer to contain excessive moisture or free water at the time of use shall be rejected .
the above limitations shall not be waived unless approved in writing by the engineer .
c preparation of existing surface .
loose material dust dirt caked clay or any foreign material shall be removed .
cleaning shall be continued until the surface is clean or in case of application on a soil or aggregate surface all the loose dirt is removed and the surfaces of the larger size aggregate in the road surface are exposed but not dislodged .
all cleaning of the area to be treated shall be completed before any bituminous material is applied .
section num triple layer bituminous surface treatment num d application of bituminous material .
num .
general .
no bituminous material or treatment shall be applied until the base or underlying surface has been approved .
num .
preparation of bituminous material .
bituminous materials used for each treatment shall be heated as previously noted .
the material shall be maintained within the specific temperature range during application .
any material which has not been maintained within the specified range shall be rejected .
the application temperature f c range for the emulsified asphalt with polymer additive shall be num f num f numc numc .
the bitumen shall be applied uniformly over the area to be treated .
where the treatment width is num feet num m or less the entire width shall be treated in one application unless otherwise directed .
where only a partial width is treated in one application extreme care shall be used to insure a slight overlap of adjacent treatments but not in excess of num inches num mm .
the spray bar shall be adjusted to the proper height for exact single or double overlap of spray area without partial overlap .
uniformity of discharge shall be checked before beginning application and at other times as directed by the engineer .
streaked areas and any other areas lacking uniform distribution shall immediately be made uniform .
in all cases the distributor shall be stopped before the application begins to run light just before the distributor tank is completely empty .
a method of making joints shall be used that will insure that in beginning and ending the distribution of each load a proper junction is made with the preceding and succeeding work without excessive bituminous material at the joints .
in applying bituminous materials the contractor shall use effective means to protect structures walls curbs etc .
from discoloration or spattering .
num .
application of bituminous materials .
rates of application for each layer shall be as follows layer gallons liters of bituminous material per square yard mnum of treatment crsnump crsnumhp crsnuml num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num e spreading and embedding aggregate .
the aggregate stone size and application rate of aggregates used shall be as follows layer aldot stone size application rate cu.ft.sq.yd .
mnummnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num w num num num num num spreading of aggregate shall follow application of bituminous material as closely as practicable using mechanical aggregate spreaders inaccessible areas shall be covered as directed .
sufficient aggregate to cover each distributor load in loaded trucks along with an adequate crew of workmen equipped with brooms standing by shall be at the site before bituminous application begins .
spreading of the aggregate shall begin and continue immediately behind the application of the bituminous material .
section num asphalt pavements num rolling shall begin immediately behind the spreading operation .
sufficient rollers shall be furnished to insure that the initial pass of the roller is made immediately behind the spreading of the aggregate .
rolling shall be continuous providing coverage of the entire area of treatment a minimum of three num passes for each layer of aggregate to insure thorough embedment of the aggregate .
unless a sufficient number of rollers are in operation to complete the above requirement the next load of bituminous material shall not be applied until the rolling of the previous application is completed .
when the engineer determines the aggregate has been thoroughly embedded rolling shall cease and the contractor shall without delay remove all excess aggregate from the treatment area .
the contractor shall stage his days work such that all three layers are placed at the end of each days work .
num maintenance and protection of surface and traffic .
maintenance shall include immediate repair of any failures or defects that occur repeated as often as is necessary to keep the surface continuously intact and acceptable .
maintenance shall be performed without direct compensation .
unless otherwise specified on the plans or in the proposal the contractor shall handle traffic through the work and over the surface except while bituminous material is actually being applied and covered with aggregate .
it shall be his responsibility to take whatever steps are necessary or directed to protect both the work and the traveling public .
both the first application layer and the second application layer shall be completed before opening the road to traffic .
traffic control shall be established such that traffic is not allowed to sit on the newly applied bituminous surface treatment .
num method of measurement .
measurement will be made of the number of square yards square meters of accepted triple layer bituminous treatment complete in place .
the length shall be the actual length measured along the surface of the treatment .
the width shall be the designated width of completed surface .
where the pay item specifies a prime coat plus an overlying treatment the measurement will not include the additional width of the prime coat .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment for accepted triple layer bituminous surface treatment pay item no .
numa triple layer bituminous treatment measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter complete in place except that adjustments in the contract unit price shall be made as follows when changes in amounts of treatment materials are ordered as provided in article num the contract unit price will be adjusted upward or downward accordingly .
adjustment will be based on the increase or decrease in amounts per square yard square meter at the verified cost f.o.b .
delivery point plus num cents per gallon num cent per liter for the bitumen and the verified cost per square yard cubic meter for the aggregate delivered to the spreader .
the contract unit price or adjusted contract unit price for the accepted area complete in place shall be payment in full for furnishing all material placement of materials maintenance thereof and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa triple layer bituminous treatment per square yard square meter section num asphalt pavements num description .
the work under this section covers the general requirements that are applicable to all types of hot and warm mix asphalt pavements of the plant mix type .
deviations from these general requirements section num asphalt pavements num will be indicated in the specific requirements for various types of mixes noted in the following sections of these specifications .
this work shall consist of one or more courses of hot and warm mix asphalt plant mix constructed in accordance with these specifications and the specific requirements of the type of mixture required and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
the contractor may use either hot mix or warm mix for all superpave esal range mixes in section num .
warm mix asphalt shall be defined as the use of an approved warm mix technology in the plant mix at the time of production .
this work shall also include the preparation of the underlying surface on which the plant mix is to be placed including patching andor leveling as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
in addition this work shall also include the placing of widening at locations shown on the plans andor directed by the engineer .
in general widening shall consist of num narrow width buildups three feet or less one meter or less required for widening existing pavement num paving for turnouts beyond three feet one meter from the edge of pavement num pavement crossovers and num turning lanes of less than num feet num m for crossovers .
paving used on turnouts for intersecting paved roads and shoulder paving will not be considered as widening unless shown on the plans .
surface layers and wearing layers are defined as those layers where the pay item contains the wording wearing surface .
all aldot procedures referenced are applicable to both hot and warm mix asphalt .
num materials .
a applicable sections of specifications .
materials shall conform to requirements given in sections num num num and num. b products and processes for the production of warm mix asphalt .
warm mix asphalt products and processes shall be selected from list iinum warm mix asphalt products and processes of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
c antistripping agents .
all warm mix asphalt mixtures shall include an antistripping agent .
the warm mix additive supplier may certify that an antistripping agent is an integral part of the warm mix additive .
all hot mix asphalt mixtures except num and num shall be tested during design to determine if an antistripping agent is needed .
during design and production all other mixes shall have a tensile strength ratio tsr of at least num when tested in accordance with aashto t num as modified by aldotnum .
if any tsr value falls below the minimum specified above plant operations shall cease until corrective measures are taken .
however if any visual stripping occurs in the design or field production an antistripping agent shall be required if deemed necessary by the engineer .
should it become necessary for the contractor to include an antistrip agent in the mix due to the occurrence of visual stripping during field production of the mix after the design tests indicated that the same mix met the above listed tsr requirement such work will be paid for as extra work as defined by article num .
additional payment for the antistrip agent will not be made in cases where the same mix has been previously used in field production and visual stripping occurred .
num .
amines .
for amine based materials the amount of antistripping agent when required shall be num to num by weight mass of the liquid asphalt binder content for liquid agents and num to num by weight mass of the total aggregate for powdered agents .
liquid antistripping agent shall be added to the liquid asphalt binder within num of the specified rate either at the refinery or the contractors mixing plant using approved online blending equipment .
num .
hydrated lime .
for hydrated lime materials the amount of antistripping agent when required shall be num to num by weight mass of the total aggregate for powdered agents .
hydrated lime materials shall meet the requirements as given in section num .
num .
organosilanes .
for organosilane based materials the amount of antistripping agent when required shall be num to num by weight mass of the liquid asphalt binder content for liquid agents .
section num asphalt pavements num liquid antistripping agent shall be added to the liquid asphalt binder by approved online blending equipment either at the refinery or the contractors mixing plant within num of the specified rate .
num .
silicone silicone may be used in liquid asphalt binder not to exceed num ounces per num gallons num ml per num l. except when producing warm mix asphalt other additives shall not be added to the liquid asphalt binder unless expressly authorized in writing by the materials and tests engineer .
the use of any unauthorized additive will be cause for rejection of the mixture .
d composition of mixtures .
num .
adjustments to rate of placement .
the project designated rate per square yard square meter of the plant mix layers are designed assuming a compacted mix unit weight mass of not greater than num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum for dense graded mixes light weight aggregates excepted .
hence a correction to the plan designated rate per square yard square meter will be made in accordance with the following if the compacted mix density as determined in the job mix formula design exceeds num or is below num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum or is below num kgmnum the correction will be based on the formula x abnum x abnum where x corrected rate per square yard square meter a laboratory compacted mix unit weight in pounds per cubic foot density in kilograms per cubic meter as shown in the job mix formula and b project designated rate per square yard square meter of plant mix as shown on the job plans .
if the laboratory compacted density is between num pounds per cubic foot and num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum and num kgmnum no correction will be made to the pounds per square yard kilograms per square meter designated by the plans or proposal .
if the plans provide for the use of lightweight aggregate expanded clay or shale the pounds per square yard kilograms per square meter of the layer shown by the plans or proposal will not be adjusted .
if the plans provide for the use of an open graded plant mix layer the pounds per square yard kilograms per square meter of the layer shown by the plans or proposal will not be adjusted .
num .
requirement for approved job mix formula jmf .
work shall not be started under this section on a specific project until the contractor has submitted and received approval of a job mix formula from the materials and tests engineer and the job mix formula has been checked by the area materials engineer for use on the project .
a change in aggregate sources will require a new job mix formula before the new material is used .
a change in liquid asphalt binder source and antistripping agent will be allowed without a new job mix formula provided the design criteria is met by a onepoint check of the mixture .
the onepoint check shall include the air void content vma stability flow and tsr tensile strength ratio and may be determined during the production of the mix .
however no change in the grade of liquid asphalt binder will be allowed without the written approval of the materials and tests engineer .
num .
contractors responsibility for job mix formula .
designs for all mixes shall be the responsibility of the contractor and shall be submitted by the contractor for approval .
refer to applicable sections num num etc .
for design criteria .
the submitted formula shall have been designed by a certified technician level iii designer in a laboratory that has been certified by the department .
num .
approval of job mix formula by materials and tests engineer .
the contractor shall submit to the materials and tests engineer for approval a job mix formula jmf for each mixture to be supplied from a specific plant .
the contractor shall allow at least four weeks for the evaluation and approval of the job mix formula .
section num asphalt pavements num the submitted formula shall include any additive by type and trade name and be accompanied by samples from the material sources the contractor proposes to use in producing the mix .
the job mix formula for each mixture shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size a single percentage of liquid asphalt binder to be added to the aggregate a single percentage of any additive and a mixing temperature range suitable for the type grade etc .
of liquid asphalt binder to be used in the mix .
each job mix formula shall be accompanied by a test report from an approved laboratory certifying that all current departmental design test parameters have been met copies of the departmental current design test parameters may be obtained from the office of the materials and tests engineer .
there will be no charge for the departments checking of the contractors job mix formula .
the approved job mix formula for each mixture shall be in effect for a maximum of four years from the approval date on the job mix formula or until the materials and tests engineer withdraws approval by written order .
num .
approval of job mix formula by area materials engineer .
at least two full working days prior to beginning the production of asphalt mix for a specific project the contractor shall submit a mix design approved by the materials and tests engineer to the area materials engineer .
the project number shall be inserted on the approved job mix formula .
the area materials engineer will review the mix design to determine if the job mix formula is appropriate for the specific project .
if the job mix formula is appropriate for the project the area materials engineer will sign the mix design as being approved will note the date of approval and will distribute copies for inspection of the asphalt production .
a copy of this approved job mix formula with the materials and tests engineers approval and the area materials engineers approval with the date of approval shall be available at the plant any time material is being delivered to the state .
num .
establishment of delivery temperature .
the engineer will check and record the temperature of the mixture upon delivery to the project site .
the minimum delivery temperature for warm mix asphalt shall be num f num c. the minimum delivery temperature for hot mix asphalt shall be num f num c. the engineer should monitor the work to ensure that there is not high variability in the delivery temperatures or isolated loads of temperature differentials that appear extreme .
for pay items that do not require density as a pay factor patching widening etc .
and for mixes that do not require density as a pay factor ogfc patb etc the contractor shall provide a num of num oc delivery temperature range .
no loads will be accepted at a temperature greater than num f num c for hot mix or warm mix asphalt .
num .
conformance to approved job mix formula .
all mixtures furnished for use on the project shall conform to the approved job mix formulas within the following ranges of tolerances all liquid asphalt binders used shall meet the requirements given in section num .
see appropriate pay factor table for liquid asphalt binder content requirements .
the mixing temperature shall not exceed num f num c. tolerances for num num and num mixes plus or minus num for the num num mm and larger sieve requirements .
plus or minus num for the num through num num mm through num m sieve requirements .
plus or minus num for the num num m sieve requirement .
see section num for gradation requirements for num mixes .
the initial setting of the controls for all materials shall be those amounts shown on the job mix formula .
the above tolerances are provided for slight variations inherent in job control applications .
the contractor shall make changes as necessary to ensure that the mixture produced is as close as practical to the job mix formula .
num .
consistency of mix design in placement of wearing layer .
more than one job mix formula may be submitted and approved for a layer of pavement .
the placement of the entire wearing layer shall be from the same job mix unless otherwise section num asphalt pavements num approved in writing by the engineer .
for layers other than the wearing layer the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing of the mix design change prior to changing production .
e recycled asphalt plant mix rap and reclaimed asphalt shingles ras .
num .
compliance with aldotnum .
on all projects utilizing recycledreclaimed material in the mixture the contractors paving operation and rap and ras processing shall conform to the requirements given in aldotnum .
the recycled hot and warm mix asphalt shall be a homogeneous mixture of reclaimed material new aggregate fine or coarse aggregate or a mixture of fine and coarse aggregate and new liquid asphalt binder material .
num .
allowable usage of rap and ras .
the contractor shall have the option to use rap and ras in accordance with the requirements given in the following table unless shown otherwise on the plans allowable use of rap and ras maximum allowable percent of rap and ras by mass of total aggregate content type of mix maximum rap content maximum rap and ras content num plant mix bituminous base num ras not allowed nume permeable asphalt treated base num ras not allowed num open graded friction course num rap shall not contain chert ras not allowed num stone matrix asphalt num superpave maximum aggregate size   num num  surface layers num with no more than num containing chert all other layers num surface layers num all other layers num num superpave maximum aggregate size num surface layers num all other layers num ras not allowed this limitation applies even if the surface layer is to be covered by an open graded friction course section num .
if the aggregate is chert gravel with a bulk specific gravity that is less than num a maximum of num of the rap will be allowed .
rap containing chert gravel shall be crushed so that num of the rap passes the num inch num mm sieve .
additional rap that does not contain chert gravel may be added to the mixture through a separate feeder .
ras shall be limited to num by mass of the total aggregate content for surface layers and num by mass of the total aggregate content for all other layers .
for projects where the adt is less than num or the surface to be paved is nontrafficked ras may be allowed at the contents given for the other num superpave maximum aggregate sizes .
num .
processing and restrictions for aggregate in rap .
rap used in num inch num mm section num superpave maximum aggregate size mix shall be processed so that num of the rap passes the num inch num mm sieve .
for all other mixes the maximum size of the aggregate in the rap shall meet the maximum size for the mix specified .
the aggregate in the rap shall meet the aggregate requirements of the mix it is used in and the requirements given in sections num and num no gravel in section num patb section num and section num mixes .
rap used in section num patb and section num mixes shall be processed so that num of the rap is retained on the no .
num num mm sieve .
num .
reclaimed asphalt shingles ras .
reclaimed asphalt shingles ras shall be handled stored and used in accordance with the requirements given in aldot num and the following requirements .
the ras shall be materials produced as a byproduct of the manufacturing process for roofing shingles andor scrap shingle from roofing materials .
the ras shall be free from foreign materials such as paper nails wood and metal flashing .
the ras shall be shredded or ground prior to being incorporated into the mixture .
section num asphalt pavements num the shredded ras shall have num passing the num inch num mm sieve in any dimension and a minimum of num passing the num inch sieve .
in addition to the requirements set forth in aldotnum rap stockpiles utilized for job mix formulas with rap content greater than num shall also meet the following requirements .
additional rap stockpile requirements for rap used in a job mix formula with increased rap content control parameter standard deviation asphalt content num passing num sieve num sieve with num rap passing num based on a minimum of num tests testing for rap stockpile shall be included as part of the design jmf submittal .
f liquid asphalt binder draindown .
num .
fiber stabilizer .
a fiber stabilizer is required for some mix types section num num etc .
a fiber stabilizer may be used on other mix types where asphalt binder cement draindown is a problem .
where ras is included in the job mix formula fiber stabilizer shall not be required provided the draindown requirements of num or less are met when tested at numf numc and numf numc in accordance with aashto tnum .
when fiber is used the dosage rate shall produce a maximum liquid asphalt binder cement draindown of num or less when tested at numf numc and numf numc in accordance with aashto tnum .
when fiber is used the sampling and testing frequency for all mixes for both contractor and department testing during production shall be one test for each num tons metric tons or portion thereof .
the fiber shall be listed on list iinum fibers for use in hot mix asphalt from the materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements msdsar manual .
if pelletized fibers are used the fiber within the pellet shall be listed on list iinum .
all fibers listed on list iinum shall meet the requirements of either item num num or num of this subarticle .
num .
cellulose fibers .
the maximum length of the fiber shall be num inches num mm .
a representative num gram sample when heated in a crucible between num and num f num and num c for at least num hours shall show between num and num nonvolatiles .
a representative num gram sample when stirred into num ml of distilled water shall have a ph between num and num after sitting for num minutes .
a representative num gram sample when saturated with mineral spirits for num minutes and then sieved for num minutes on a no .
num num m sieve shall absorb between num and num its own weight of mineral spirits .
a representative num gram sample when weighed and placed into a num f num c oven for two hours shall lose less than num by weight when weighed immediately upon removal from the oven .
sieve analysis of the cellulose fiber shall be either of the following methods using an alpine air jet sieve type ls a representative num gram sample of the fiber is sieved for num minutes at a controlled vacuum of num psi num kpa .
the fibers remaining on the screen are weighed .
the results of this analysis shall indicate that num to num of the fiber passes the no .
num num m sieve .
or using a mesh screen analysis a representative num gram sample of the fiber is sieved using a shaker with two nylon brushes on each screen .
the results of this analysis shall indicate that the fiber has the following amounts passing the specified screens num to num on the no .
num num m sieve num to num on the no .
num num m sieve and num to num on the no .
num num m sieve .
num .
mineral fibers .
when tested in accordance with the bauermcnett classifier bcm fractionation method process procedure the fiber length shall have a maximum mean test value of num inches num mm .
by using a phase contrast microscope and a representative test sample of at least num fibers the fiber diameter shall have a maximum mean test value of num inches num m. the shot content passing the no .
num num m sieve shall be num to num .
the shot section num asphalt pavements num content passing the no .
num num m sieve shall be num to num .
this is a measure of non fibrous material determined on vibrating sieves for further information see astm c num .
num .
synthetic fibers .
synthetic fibers shall include but are not limited to one or a combination of the following polyolefins such as polyethylene and polypropylene and aramids such as kevlar twaron and nomex .
fibers shall be twisted fibrillated flat fibrillated or monofilament with a maximum fiber length of num inches num mm num .
placing fiber in mix .
a. manual method .
provided it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the proper dosage of the fibers is uniformly distributed into the mix manual introduction of fibers is acceptable when a batch plant is used to make the mix .
when the fibers are available in prepackaged weighed containers proper dosage may be predetermined per batch .
a device is required to interrupt mixture production and warn the plant operator if the operator manually feeding the fiber fails to introduce it properly .
dry mixing time shall be increased at least five seconds to insure adequate blending .
wet mixing time shall be increased at least five seconds for cellulose fibers and up to five seconds for mineral fibers .
manual introduction of fibers shall not be used in drum plants .
b .
automatic method .
methodology and equipment for metering bulk loose and pelletized fiber into asphalt plants has been developed by the fiber suppliers .
whenever the fiber suppliers recommendations are more stringent than this specification the fiber suppliers recommendations are controlling .
this specification requires specialized equipment that can accurately proportion and meter by weight mass the proper amount per batch for batch plants or continuously in a steady uniform manner for drum plants .
fiber pelletized or loose shall not be fed through the cold feed bins or through the rap bin .
these proportioning devices shall be interlocked with the plant system and controlled to num of the weight of the fibers required so as to maintain the correct proportions for all production rates and batch sizes .
during the test strip an equipment calibration check which shows the fiber is being accurately metered and uniformly distributed into the mix shall be performed to the satisfaction of the engineer .
these metering devices shall provide in process high flow num or more and low flow num or less plant operator notification and interrupt the mix production where the fiber rate is not properly controlled .
the fiber metering system shall also provide a record of feed rate weight or mass per time and include a section of translucent pipe for visual confirmation of consistent flow rates .
care shall be taken to insure that the fibers are not entrained in the plants exhaust system .
if there is any evidence of fiber in the bag house or wetwasher fines the liquid asphalt binder line andor the fiber line shall be relocated so that the fiber is captured by liquid asphalt binder spray and incorporated into the mix .
if there is any evidence of clumps of fibers or pellets at the discharge chute the contractor shall increase the mixing time andor intensity .
this may entail extending the liquid asphalt binder and fiber feeding lines further into the drum .
g sampling and inspection .
aggregates will be accepted in stockpiles in accordance with the departments testing manual provided there is no segregation or contamination but production of required gradation in the mix shall be the contractors responsibility .
liquid asphalt binder will be accepted in accordance with the requirements given in aldot num .
the right is reserved to take samples including aggregates from stockpiles plant mix from the hot elevator plant mix from the spreader liquid asphalt binder from storage tanks at the plant etc .
and to make further tests as needed as a basis for continued acceptance of the materials .
samples of the mixture in use will be taken and tested in accordance with subarticle numb .
when directed the contractor shall use mechanical equipment to cut samples for testing from the compacted pavement .
samples not smaller than num inches num mm square or num inches num mm in diameter for the full depth of the course to be tested shall be taken at the locations section num asphalt pavements num directed by the engineer .
furnishing of suitable approved cutting equipment the cutting of the samples and the immediate repair of the sample holes with similar type of material shall be performed by the contractor without extra compensation .
a laboratory shall be furnished for the control of each hot and warm mix asphalt plant in accordance with the provisions of section num .
num construction requirements .
a equipment .
in general the choice of equipment will be left to the contractor .
it is the contractors responsibility to provide proper sized and amounts of equipment that will produce deliver to the roadbed spread and compact the plant mixed material in sufficient quantities for the continuous movement of the spreaders under normal operating conditions .
the mixing plant hauling spreading and compaction equipment shall meet the requirements listed below however other equipment that will produce equally satisfactory results such as electronically or automatically controlled devices of proven performance will be considered for use in lieu thereof .
the contractor shall secure the engineers approval of all equipment prior to beginning work and any equipment determined by the engineer to be unsatisfactory shall be promptly replaced or supplemented .
num .
requirements for all plants .
mixing plants shall comply with the requirements of aashto m num as modified by aldotnum mixing plant requirements for hotmixed hotlaid asphalt paving mixtures .
in addition to the above if a recycledreclaimed mix is used the mixing plant shall be modified as necessary to accommodate the use of the reclaimed material and necessary additives .
mixing plants shall be inspected at least annually to insure compliance with the requirements of aashto m num and aldotnum .
the contractorvendor will be charged a fee as specified by aldotnum general information concerning materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
if the plant is relocated or substantially modified in any way within a year of the last inspection an additional inspection and related fee will be required .
the plant shall be equipped with a dust collector constructed to waste or store and later return uniformly to the aggregate mixture all or any part of the material collected .
num .
scales .
a digital recorder shall be installed as part of the platform truck scales .
the recorder shall produce a printed digital record on a ticket of the gross and tare weights masses of the delivery trucks along with a time and date print for each ticket .
provisions shall be made so that scales may not be manually manipulated during the printing process and so interlocked as to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest .
the scales and recorder shall be of sufficient capacity and size to accurately determine the weight mass of the heaviest loaded truck or tractor trailers that are used for the delivery of the hot and warm mix asphalt from that plant .
in lieu of plant and truck scales the contractor may provide either num an approved automatic printer system which will print the weights masses of the material delivered evidenced by a weight mass ticket for each load provided the system is used in conjunction with an approved automatic batching and control system or num an electronic load cell weight mass determination system with associated computer hardware and automated printing system .
the contractor may provide a weigh mass batcher system utilizing a weigh mass hopper equipped with load cells that determine the net amount of mix delivered from the weight mass hopper .
an automated weigh mass printing system shall be provided to accurately print the weight mass of material delivered the time and the date for each ticket .
all scales which determine the weight mass of the mix for pay purposes shall meet the requirements of subarticle numh .
num .
hauling and remixing equipment .
a .
load limitations .
reference is made to article num concerning load limitations on hauling equipment .
section num asphalt pavements num wherever a material remixing device is used the following restrictions shall apply the device shall be empty while on a bridge .
the device shall be moved across a bridge without any other vehicles or equipment being on the bridge .
the device shall be moved on a bridge only within the limits of a lane and shall not be moved on the shoulder of a bridge .
the device shall move at a speed no greater than num miles num km per hour without acceleration or deceleration .
b .
trucks .
each truck shall have a hole approximately num of an inch num mm in diameter suitably placed in the side of the body to allow for temperature measurement of the asphalt mix .
trucks used for hauling hot and warm mix asphalt mixtures shall have tight clean smooth metal beds that have been thinly coated with a minimum amount ofapproved asphalt release agent list iinum hot mix asphalt release coating for truck beds in the msdsar manual to prevent the mixture from adhering to the beds .
the use of gasoline kerosene diesel or other volatile material is prohibited .
each truck shall be equipped with a tarpaulin that shall be used as needed to protect the mixture from adverse conditions .
the tarpaulin shall be made of water repellent material be of sufficient weight and strength to resist tearing and be in good condition with no holes or tears .
the tarpaulin shall be large enough to cover the load .
mixture shall not leave the plant unless the load is covered when the following conditions exist when the air temperature is below num f num c when hauling time exceeds num minutes or when threatening weather is present .
c. material remixing device .
when pay item numh is included in the contract a material remixing device shall be used for the placement of all asphalt layers except the following nume permeable asphalt treated base patb a layer placed directly on top of patb if the placement must be accomplished by operating the remixing device on the patb .
if a pay item is not shown on the plans the contractor may use a material remixing device without compensation .
a material remixing device shall not be placed on a permeable asphalt treated base .
the material remixing device shall be capable of remixing plant mix between the trucks and the finished mat .
plant mix shall be remixed in the device prior to being laid by the paver or spreader .
the plant mix delivered by the material remixing device shall be a homogeneous nonsegregated mixture .
equipment known to accomplish this remixing operation and currently approved by aldot are listed below manufacturer model blawknox mcnumtwin pug tub roadtec shuttlebuggy sbnum sbnum mtvnumd mtvnume terexcedarapids cr num rm weiler enum enum a material remixing device will not be required for temporary work of short duration bridge replacements having less than num feet num m of pavement at each end of a bridge acceleration and deceleration lanes less than num feet num m in length tapered sections widening patching spot leveling shoulders crossovers side street returns and other areas designated by the engineer .
a material remixing device will also not be required when placing a continuous leveling layer where the thickness of section num asphalt pavements num the layer is required to be transversely tapered i.e .
to correct cross slope to a thickness less than twice the maximum aggregate size of the layer being placed .
the contractor shall use a hopper insert with a material remixing device if pay item numh is included in the contract .
on projects where pay item numh is not included in the contract use of a hopper insert is preferred but not required .
num .
asphalt pavers or spreaders .
asphalt pavers or spreaders shall be selfcontained and of sufficient size power and stability to receive distribute and strike off the asphalt material at rates and widths consistent with the specified typical section requirements and details shown on the plans and noted in item numfnum .
all asphalt pavers or spreaders used for mainline paving including shoulders and interchange ramps shall be equipped with a full width vibratory or other compactive type screed .
the augers used to move the material across the width of the screed shall extend within num feet num mm of the edge of the screed .
it will be permissible to use a hydraulically extendable strikeoff for paving turnouts and short sections of pavement including variable width sections and crossovers .
when laying mixtures the paver shall be capable of being operated at forward speeds consistent with satisfactory laying of the mixture providing a finished surface of the required evenness and texture without tearing gouging or shoving of the mixture .
all asphalt paving machines shall be operated with automatic grade and slope controls unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the automatic grade controls shall be a contact ski a mobile stringline or noncontact sonic averaging sensors .
the effective length of these controls shall be a minimum of num feet num m. in the event of a malfunction of the automatic control system the spreading operation shall be discontinued after one hour until the equipment is repaired .
if shown to be required on the plans special attachments to the pavers and spreaders will be required to shape and finish the pavement .
num .
compaction equipment .
compaction equipment shall be capable of compacting the mixture to the required density throughout the depth of the layer while it is still in a workable condition without damage to the material .
the contractor shall be responsible for the selection of the types and number of rollers to be used .
b daylight wet weather and temperature limitations .
num .
operations in daylight .
placement and compaction operations shall be performed during daylight hours unless noted otherwise on the plans or directed otherwise by the engineer .
the requirements for lighting for nighttime work are given in subarticle numa .
num .
wet weather .
the mixture shall be laid only upon an approved underlying course which is dry and only when weather conditions are suitable .
the engineer may however permit work of this character to continue when overtaken by sudden rains up to the amount which may be in transit from the plant at the time provided the surface just ahead of the placement is swept clear of water and the mixture is within the allowable temperature tolerances .
the layer placed under such conditions shall be at the contractors risk and shall be removed and replaced by the contractor without extra compensation should it prove unsatisfactory .
num .
cold weather restrictions .
hot mix asphalt hma layers of num pounds per square yard num kgmnum or less shall not be placed when the surface or air temperature is below num f num c air temperature shall be num f num c before the spreading operation is started .
spreading operations shall be stopped when the air temperature is below num f num c and falling.for hma layers over num pounds per square yard num kgmnum the above temperature may be lowered num f num c. unless otherwise stated in the plans and specifications polymer modified hma layers of num pounds per square yard num kgmnum or less shall not be placed when the surface or air temperature is below num of num oc for layers over num pounds per square yard num kgmnum the above temperature may be lowered num f num c. section num asphalt pavements num warm mix asphalt wma layers of num pounds per square yard num kgmnum or less shall not be placed when the surface or air temperature is below num f num c air temperature shall be num f num c before the spreading operation is started .
spreading operations shall be stopped when the air temperature is below num f num c and falling.for wma layers over num pounds per square yard num kgmnum the above temperature may be lowered num f num c. unless otherwise stated in the plans and specifications polymer modified wma layers of num pounds per square yard num kgmnum or less shall not be placed when the surface or air temperature is below num of num oc for layers over num pounds per square yard num kgmnum the above temperature may be lowered num f num c. with the exception of section num polymer modified open graded friction course layers and any asphalt mixes containing ras the contractor may place hma and wma layers at temperatures lower than the cold weather limits .
the contractor is warned that other factors such as wind speed and percent humidity may increase the heat loss from the hma and wma layers .
all other requirements for the installation and quality of the hma and wma layers shall be applicable to the work even when the restrictions against placement of the hma and wma during cold weather are not followed .
the layers placed under such conditions shall be at the contractors risk and shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation if they are unacceptable .
there will be no direct payment for additional costs associated with the placement of hma and wma during cold weather .
c preparation of underlying surface .
num .
general .
the underlying surface must be approved by the engineer before the placement of a plant mix application will be allowed .
the underlying surface whether an old surface or a new surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign or loose material and maintained in such condition in advance of the placement operations .
failures in existing pavement or base shall be corrected as noted in item numcnum in advance of the placement of an overlying layer .
a prime coat when required shall be placed in accordance with section num .
tack coat shall be placed in accordance with section num .
num .
patching .
when patching of an existing surface is provided by the plans the engineer will examine the pavement surface and designate the area to be patched .
the designated areas shall be trimmed to the depth of the unstable material as directed .
the loose faulty material shall be picked up and removed from the area .
the newly exposed patch area shall be cleaned and treated with prime or tack material as directed before placement of patching material .
the hot andor warm mix asphalt patching material shall be placed and compacted by methods approved by the engineer until the patch area is filled to the elevation of the surrounding surface .
compaction of the patching material shall be to the degree that further consolidation of the patching material is not anticipated and is acceptable to the engineer .
num .
leveling .
when leveling of an existing pavement or base is provided by the plans the surface shall be brought to required grade and cross section with plant mix material .
the surface to be treated shall be prepared as noted herein and approved before placing the new material .
the plant mix material shall be spread in accordance with the provisions of item numfnum .
leveling shall include superelevating when so directed .
num .
widening .
when widening is provided by the plans the widening shall be placed at the locations designated by the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the requirements for placing the widening shall be the same as far as practical as for the placing of the normal roadway .
compaction of the widening material shall be to the degree that further consolidation of the widening material is not anticipated and is acceptable to the engineer .
d preparation of mixtures .
num .
liquid asphalt binder .
the liquid asphalt binder material shall be heated in a manner that insures the even heating of the entire mass under efficient and positive control at all times .
any liquid asphalt binder material which in the opinion of the engineer has been damaged shall be rejected .
section num asphalt pavements num num .
aggregate .
a .
aggregate used for batch mixing and continuous mixing operations .
all aggregates shall be dried so that the moisture content of the hot and warm mix asphalt at the point of sampling is less than num by weight mass in accordance with aldotnum .
the temperature of the aggregate at the dryer shall not exceed num f num c .
when more than two ingredients enter into the composition of the mineral aggregate they shall be combined as directed .
the aggregate immediately after being heated shall be screened into three or more sizes and conveyed into separate bins ready for batching and mixing with liquid asphalt binder material .
however for mixes using aggregate of num inch num mm maximum size the number of bins may be reduced to two .
b .
aggregates for dryer drum mixing operations .
maintenance of a uniform aggregate gradation is essential for a dryer drum operation hence caution and care shall be exercised in stockpiling of materials to avoid segregation .
num .
mixing .
a. mixing temperature .
the mixing temperature of hma and wma shall be in accordance with the refineries recommendations based upon the temperatureviscosity curve and shall be adequate to produce a mixture in accordance with the specification requirements .
the mixing temperature shall not exceed num f num c. the mixing temperature for hma and wma shall be continuously recorded and delivered to the engineer on the next working day .
b. batch mixing .
the dried mineral aggregate and measured mineral filler when used prepared as prescribed above shall be combined in uniform batches by determining the weight mass of and conveying into the mixer the proportionate amounts of each aggregate required to meet the job mix formula .
the largest size aggregate shall be introduced first then smaller sizes progressively with mineral filler last or all mineral components may be added simultaneously .
the mineral components shall be thoroughly mixed .
the required quantity of liquid asphalt binder material for each batch shall be measured by weight mass using scales or a liquid asphalt binder material metering device attached to the liquid asphalt binder material bucket .
after the mineral components have been mixed the liquid asphalt binder material shall be added and the mixing continued for a period of at least num seconds or longer if necessary to produce a homogeneous mixture .
however if a check by astm d num ross method shows that num plus coating is obtained a shorter mixing time will suffice .
the engineer may then give written permission for a change .
each batch must be kept separate throughout the weight mass determining and mixing operations .
the mixture shall be uniform in composition free from lumps or balls of material containing an excess quantity of asphalt or from pockets deficient in asphalt .
c. continuous mixing .
components shall be introduced and proportioned volumetrically by continuous methods utilizing equipment specified herein for continuous plants .
amounts of aggregate and liquid asphalt binder material entering the mixer and the rate of travel through the mixer shall be so coordinated that a uniform mixture of specified gradation and liquid asphalt binder content will be produced .
d. dryerdrum mixing .
components shall be proportioned by weight mass as noted herein in item numanum for this method of mixing .
amounts of aggregate and liquid asphalt binder material entering the mixer and the rate of travel through the mixer shall be so coordinated that a uniform mixture of specified gradation and liquid asphalt binder content will be produced .
an antistripping agent may be required to insure adequate coating of the aggregates if so directed by the engineer .
section num asphalt pavements num num .
recycled mixtures .
a .
new aggregate temperature .
the new aggregate shall be superheated to a temperature such that when combined with the reclaimed material the specified discharge temperature is produced however in no case shall the temperature of the new aggregate exceed num f num c. b. mixing .
the plant shall be designed and operated so that heat transfer will take place in the mixing unit without damage to or vaporization of the liquid asphalt binder material .
for batch type plants a minimum dry mixing cycle of num seconds shall be required for the new aggregate and reclaimed material before introduction of the new liquid asphalt binder material .
all environmental regulations shall be met as required by article num. e transporting the mixture .
the mixture shall be transported in haul trucks meeting the requirements of item numanum .
the equipment shall be in sufficient numbers to deliver the material to the roadbed without delay in the quantity required .
loads shall not be delivered too late in the day to be spread compacted and finished during daylight hours unless nighttime work is allowed as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
loads shall not be delivered at a temperature greater than num f num c or less than num f num c without written permission of the state materials and tests engineer .
f placing the mixture .
num .
rate of placement .
the placement rate of plant mix will be specified by the plans however this rate may require correction to adjust for the compacted mix unit weight density as determined in the job mix formula design as outlined in subarticle numb .
the engineer may direct in writing that the designated weight mass be increased or decreased in certain areas .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to place and spread the material uniformly and compact it to such a thickness that will produce the specified rate separately for each layer of base binder and surface and to maintain a continuing check on tonnage mass and yardage area throughout the days operation to insure uniform specified rate .
the unit for checking the average rate shall be approximately num square yards num mnum to the nearest even truck load .
if the last check performed in any day or any section of roadway is between num and num square yards num and num mnum this section shall be classified as a unit if less than num square yards num mnum this section shall be added to the previous unit and the revised unit rechecked .
when the initial days operation is less than num square yards num mnum this initial section will be carried over to subsequent days operations to make a unit of approximately num square yards num mnum .
in any unit checked the average rate shall not vary from the specified rate by more than num pounds per square yard num kgmnum for layers of num pounds per square yard num kgmnum or less and num pounds per square yard num kgmnum for layers greater than num pounds per square yard num kgmnum .
on the first applied layer of resurfacing where there is no required milling or leveling this tolerance is increased to num pounds per square yard num kgmnum for layers of num pounds per square yard numkgmnum or less and num pounds per square yard num kgmnum for layers greater than num pounds per square yard num kgmnum .
this tolerance is for providing leeway in equipment adjustment only .
a consistent and uncorrected variation from the specified rate even within this tolerance will not be allowed without the engineers written approval .
this tolerance does not apply to patching leveling and widening .
if the average rate of any unit is found deficient by more than the above referenced tolerance the engineer will determine num whether the contractor shall remove and replace the deficient unit without payment for the removal or the material removed or num whether the contractor may leave the deficient unit in place and cover it with a layer of the same mix of adjusted maximum size aggregate of not less than num pounds per square yard num kgmnum average .
in case num the surface layer shall not be featheredged at the end of the overlay layer but a sufficient amount of the surface beyond the ends of the deficient unit shall be removed to a neat line across the pavement to allow placing the full num pounds per square yard num kgmnum and to make a joint that will meet the surface requirements .
there will be section num asphalt pavements num no payment for any portion of the overlay needed to bring the total up to the designated average rate for that unit .
if the average rate of any unit is found to exceed the above referenced tolerance the tonnage metric tonnage in the unit that is in excess of the specified rate will be paid for as specified in subarticle numa .
unless otherwise provided in the following sections of these specifications or shown on the plans the average rate placed and compacted in one layer shall not exceed num pounds per square yard num kgmnum for base or binder layers and num pounds per square yard num kgmnum for surface layers .
where the amount to be placed exceeds these limits it shall be placed and compacted in two or more approximately equal layers or as shown on the plans .
num .
spreading .
a .
general .
spreading of the hot and warm mix asphalt mixture shall be performed by equipment meeting the requirements of item numanum except as noted in this item .
approved specialized equipment may be employed to spread the hot and warm mix asphalt material where standard full scale equipment is impractical due to size and irregularity of the area to be paved .
spreading operations shall be correlated with plant operations and hauling equipment such that the spreading operation once begun shall proceed at a speed as uniform and continuous as practical .
the continual forward movement of the spreader requires the use of hauling vehicles capable of supplying the spreader with hot and warm mix asphalt material while the spreader is in motion .
repetitive interruptions or stopping of the spreader shall be cause for the engineer to suspend the work until the contractor evaluates the cause of the stoppage and has provided a definite action plan for correction of the interruptions .
any interruption will require the thorough check of the area immediately under the spreader and any variances shall be corrected immediately or the material removed and replaced as directed without additional compensation .
material placed in the spreader shall be immediately spread and screeded to a uniform depth so that the specified rate of the mixture required is achieved .
alignment of the outside edges of the pavement shall be controlled by preset control lines and shall be finished in conformity with these controls .
any spreading operation which can not produce acceptable joints within the surface tolerances and density requirements shall be cause for requiring the contractor to modify his operations to include additional spreading equipment .
b .
spreading by motor grader .
for areas of a hot and warm mix asphalt plant mix surface inaccessible to the mechanical spreader patching of pot holes and correcting failures in existing pavement the plant mix may be dumped in low areas in the amounts directed windrowed spread and compacted to bring the elevation and section to the desired level .
if shown on the plans the contractor shall use a motor grader or a motor grader equipped with a dragbox to perform the spreading for the leveling operation .
the motor grader shall be equipped with smooth faced tires .
the dragbox when required shall be of sufficient size and weight mass to effectively shape and level the plant mix and shall be approved by the engineer prior to use .
c. spreading by hand .
for areas inaccessible to mechanical spreading equipment and when patching potholes and minor pavement failures hand spreading of the hot and warm mix asphalt mixture may be permitted .
the mixture shall be distributed immediately into place by means of suitable tools and spread in a uniformly loose layer .
g compacting .
as soon as the mixture has been spread and has set sufficiently to prevent undue cracking or shoving rolling shall begin .
a delay in the initial rolling will not be tolerated and the initial or breakdown rolling should in general be performed by rolling longitudinally beginning at the sides and proceeding toward the center of the surface .
when initially constructing any leveling layers the contractor as part of his qc plan shall establish a rolling pattern using the nondestructive testing devices approved in section num of the specifications .
the device shall either be calibrated to roadway cores or gage counts and shall be section num asphalt pavements num used to determine the rolling pattern producing maximum density .
contractor qc personnel shall be on site throughout each day to perform periodic checks and verify that the rolling pattern continually produces the maximum density that is achievable .
when paving abuts a previously placed lane the longitudinal joint shall be rolled in the first pass .
on superelevated curves rolling shall begin at the low side and progress toward the high side .
if any displacement occurs during rolling it shall be corrected at once .
to prevent adhesion of surface mixture to the rollers the wheels shall be kept adequately moistened with water and a nonfoaming detergent but an excess of water will not be permitted .
adequate precaution shall be taken to prevent dropping of gasoline or oil on the pavement .
in places inaccessible to a roller compaction shall be obtained with hand or mechanical tampers that produce adequate pressure to obtain the required density .
when the roller is in contact with a bridge deck vibratory mode shall be turned off and the roller shall operate in static mode only .
throughout the process of compacting tests for surface smoothness as required by article num and density as required by section num shall be made continuously .
h joints .
num .
general .
placing of hot and warm mix asphalt paving layers shall be as continuous as possible .
all joints shall be constructed in such a way as to provide a smooth wellbonded and sealed joint meeting the density and surface requirements of articles num and num .
failure to meet requirements noted above shall be cause for ordering the removal and reconstruction of the joint without additional compensation .
the contact surface of concrete structures shall be treated with a thin coat of liquid asphalt binder material tack material or the liquid asphalt binder material used in the mix prior to construction of the joint .
when directed by the engineer the same treatment noted above shall be used on cold asphalt joints .
num .
longitudinal .
longitudinal joints in the wearing surface shall conform with the edges of proposed traffic lanes insofar as practical .
any necessary longitudinal joints in underlying layers shall be offset so as to be at least num inches num mm from the joint in the next overlying layer .
num .
transverse .
transverse joints shall be carefully constructed .
rollers shall not pass over the unprotected edge of the freshly laid mixture unless laying operations are to be discontinued .
to facilitate the expeditious removal of the plant mix joint when laying operations are resumed the contractor shall place a heavy wrapping paper on the underlying surface across the joint and place plant mix on top of the paper .
upon resumption of the work a neat vertical joint shall be formed into the previously laid material to expose the full depth of the layer .
the fresh mixture shall be raked and tamped to provide a wellbonded and sealed joint meeting surface and density requirements .
num density requirements .
density requirements shall be as specified in table iv subarticle nume .
num surface and edge requirements .
a surface smoothness requirements .
num .
general .
surface smoothness and roadway section will be checked by the use of string engineers level and straight edge .
the contractor shall furnish string straightedges and the necessary personnel to handle them under the supervision of the engineer .
surface smoothness tests shall be made continuously during and immediately after rolling so that irregularities may be eliminated to the extent possible by rolling while the material is still workable otherwise deficiencies shall be corrected as provided in article num .
section num asphalt pavements num num .
perpendicular to centerline of roadway .
the finished surface of all base binder and wearing surface layers shall not vary more than num of an inch num mm from a num foot num m straightedge placed perpendicular at a right angle to the centerline of the roadway anywhere on the surface .
unless shown otherwise on the plans the slope shall not vary by more than num from the required slope in any num foot num m distance over which the slope is measured without the engineers written approval .
if for example a num slope is required the measured slope shall not be greater than num or less than num .
num .
parallel to centerline of roadway .
the surface shall not vary more than num of an inch num mm from a num foot num m straightedge placed parallel to the centerline anywhere on the surface .
a num foot num m rolling straightedge equipped with marking capability may be used in lieu of the fixed straightedge if approved by the engineer .
the finished surface shall not vary more than num of an inch num mm in any num foot num m section from a taut string applied parallel to the surface at the following locations num foot num mm inside of the edges of pavement at the centerline and at other points designated by the engineer .
the variance from the designated grade shall not increase or decrease by more than num of an inch num mm in num feet num m. b edge requirements .
unless shown otherwise on the plans surface binder and leveling pavement edges not confined by curbing or other structures may be lightly tamped behind the placement operation as a preventative measure against cracking and bulging during the rolling process .
this procedure shall also be required on the initial edge of a longitudinal cold joint .
these edges shall be neatly shaped to line behind the breakdown roller and shall be trimmed as necessary after final rolling to an accurately lined string or wire providing a maximum tolerance of num inches num mm outside the theoretical edge of pavement with a maximum variation from a true line of num of an inch num mm in num feet num m and a slope not flatter than num .
edges that are distorted by rolling shall be corrected promptly .
c smoothness requirements .
the smoothness requirements and testing covered in this subarticle shall apply for pay factor adjustments as indicated in the table below only if item numi smoothness testing certified inertial profiler is included on the plans or in the proposal .
num .
testing device .
a .
description .
the testing device shall be an inertial profiler that satisfies the requirements of aldotnum evaluating pavement profiles including the portable storage devices referenced herein .
portable storage devices containing profile measurements shall become the property of the department at the time the measurements are taken .
b .
equipment requirements .
the inertial profiler shall be a certified noncontact laserbased device capable of simultaneously measuring both wheelpaths meeting all the requirements of aldotnum .
portable storage devices for the inertial profiler shall be furnished in sufficient quantities for all calibration test runs and actual tests deemed necessary by the engineer .
unless approved in advance by the engineer all portable storage devices provided by the contractor will take the form of commonly available numg usb flash drives .
num .
testing procedure .
a .
description .
the testing device shall be an inertial profiler that satisfies the requirements of aldotnum evaluating pavement profiles including the portable storage devices referenced herein .
portable storage devices containing profile measurements shall become the property of the department at the time the measurements are taken .
section num asphalt pavements num numi smoothness testing certified inertial profiler open graded friction course layer data collection required pay factors apply wearing surface layer data collection required pay factors apply smoothness testing shall be performed and reported daily until the contractor demonstrates the ability to achieve a mean roughness index mri value of less than num inmile .
if the contractor demonstrates the ability to achieve a mri value of less than num inmile then the contractor may elect to perform and report the smoothness testing at a frequency he determines but not to exceed num working days production .
b. smoothness requirements .
the results of the inertial profiler tests shall be evaluated by department personnel as outlined in aldotnum .
if a mean roughness index mri value of num inches per mile num mkm is exceeded in any test section of any daily paving operation the paving operation will be suspended as soon as possible after results of the unacceptable test section are obtained .
the paving will not be allowed to resume until corrective action is taken by the contractor .
when the mri is more than num inches per mile num mkm per section a unit price reduction will be assessed .
when the mri is less than num inches per mile num mkm per section a unit price increase will be added .
the price adjustments are given in table num .
table i mean roughness index inchesmilesection meterskilometersection contract price adjustment percent of pavement unit bid price under num under num num mrinum num mrinum num to less than num num to less than num num num thru num num thru num num mri num num mri num over num over num unacceptable for pay item numi any price adjustment for smoothness considerations will be applied to the theoretical tonnage metric tonnage calculated using the plan specified rate of placement placed in those sections testing under num inmile or more than num inchesmile num mkm or more than num mkm per section .
num correction of deficiencies and defects .
deficiencies in surface smoothness as determined in subarticle numa shall be remedied to the extent practicable by rolling while the material is still workable .
otherwise the layer shall be removed and replaced as necessary to obtain required smoothness .
skin patching of a surface layer to correct low areas or heating and scraping to correct high areas will not be permitted .
overlays of not less than num pounds per square yard num kgmnum may be authorized by the engineer for surface smoothness deficiencies provided all material in the overlay is without additional cost to the department .
deficiencies in thickness shall be remedied as specified in item numfnum .
all areas containing excessive or deficient amounts of liquid asphalt binder all areas showing unacceptable segregation of materials and all areas unbonded after rolling shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
unacceptable segregation of a hot and warm mix asphalt mat is defined as any area in which two six inch num mm cores are taken and the average percent liquid asphalt binder content of the cores have an absolute difference greater than num percentage points of the design liquid asphalt binder content or the combined gradation analysis of the two cores on section num asphalt pavements num selected sieves has anabsolute difference greater than num percentage points from the job mix formula .
all testing shall be in accordance with aldotnum evaluation of segregated areas in hot mix asphalt pavement .
the location of all cores taken for segregation evaluation will be determined by the department .
all coring and traffic control required by aldotnum shall be conductedsupplied by the contractor at no cost to the department however the contractor will be reimbursed num per core when core results are within tolerances and the coring operations require additional traffic control .
at any time that segregation is determined to be unacceptable work shall be automatically suspended if positive corrective action is not taken by the contractor to prevent further segregation in the mat .
upon suspension the contractor shall place a test section not to exceed num tons num metric tons of the affected mixture for evaluation by the engineer .
however if after a few loads it is apparent that the corrective actions were not adequate work shall again be suspended and the segregated areas evaluated in accordance with aldotnum .
likewise if after num tons num metric tons it is apparent that the problem has been solved work will be allowed to continue .
when correcting subsurface mixtures base and binder layers the removal and replacement may be limited to the actual defective areas or the full mat width within the limits of individual defective areas as directed by the engineer .
removal and replacement of hot and warm mix asphalt wearing surface layers shall be a minimum of the full mat width and num feet num m in length .
all surface tolerance requirements shall apply to the corrected areas for both subsurface and surface mixes .
areas found deficient in density shall be removed and replaced or immediately rerolled until density is acceptable .
all work specified in this article shall be performed without additional compensation .
num maintenance and protection .
sections of newly finished work shall be protected from all traffic until properly hardened .
maintenance shall include immediate repairs of any defects that may occur on the work such repairs shall be repeated as often as necessary to maintain the work in a continuously satisfactory condition .
the contractor shall be responsible for the protection of the work and protection of any traffic using the work .
no additional compensation will be paid for maintenance and protection .
num method of measurement .
a general .
the accepted quantity of hot and warm mix asphalt plant mix used as directed will be measured in tons of num pounds metric tons in accordance with the following when the laboratory compacted density as determined in the job mix formula design exceeds num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum the actual total tonnage metric tonnage of mix placed will be adjusted for pay purposes in accordance with the following formula this shall not apply to section num patb and section num ogfc y num c a y num c a where y total tonnage metric tonnage of plant mix for pay purposes c actual tonnage metric tonnage of plant mix measured and placed except items subject to pay factor adjustment under the qcqa provisions .
on items subject to pay factor adjustment the adjusted tonnage metric tonnage after pay factor adjustment will be used a laboratory compacted mix unit weight in pounds per cubic foot density in kilograms per cubic meter as shown in the job mix formula .
no adjustments to the actual total tonnage metric tonnage placed will be made where the laboratory compacted mix density is below num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum .
no adjustments to the actual tonnage metric tonnage placed will be made when the use of lightweight aggregate expanded clay or shale is designated .
for determining weight mass each load of hot and warm mix asphalt mixture shall have its weight mass determined on approved certified scales as specified in article num furnished by the contractor without direct compensation .
the weight mass measurement shall include all components of the mixture .
no deductions will be made for any of the components including the liquid asphalt binder material contained in the mixture .
the laboratory compacted density requirements for ogfc are given in section num .
section num patb does not have a laboratory compacted density requirement because a layer thickness typically num inches num mm is required instead of a rate of placement .
section num asphalt pavements num b acceptance of the mixture .
the hot and warm mix asphalt mixture will be evaluated at the planton a lot to lot basis .
the material will be tested for acceptance in accordance with the provisions of section num and the following requirements .
however any load or loads of mixture which in the opinion of the engineer are obviously unacceptable will be rejected for use in the work .
the contractor shall control all operations in the handling preparation and mixing of the hot and warm mix asphalt plant mix so that the percent liquid asphalt binder and voids in laboratory compacted samples or gradation will meet the approved job mix formula within the tolerances shown in tables ii iii and vi for the num pay factor .
in recognition of the fact that the drying and screening operations may generate additional dust over that shown in the approved mix design the contractors attention is directed to the fact that the dust must be controlled in order to control vma and voids in the total mix .
acceptance of the mixture will be in accordance with subarticle numc .
lot pay factors for asphalt content and air voids will be determined from table ii for section num mixes and from table iii for a section num mix after the requirements of item numcnum are satisfied .
lot pay factors for asphalt content will be determined from the top half of table ii for section num and num mixes after the requirements of item numcnum are satisfied .
air voids are not a pay factor for section num and num mixes .
gradation is shown as a pay factor for section num mixes in table vi .
the pay factor values determined for each sieve noted in table vi will be averaged .
this average will then be compared to the asphalt content pay factor .
the lowest of these two pay factors will be applied to the mix .
calculations for the acceptance test results for asphalt content and voids in total mix shall be carried to the thousandths num and rounded to the nearest hundredth num .
calculations for averages shall be carried to the thousandths num and rounded to the nearest hundredth num in accordance with astm e num rules of rounding .
lot pay factors will be calculated to the nearest hundredth num .
payment for section num andnum mixes will be on the basis of table ii acceptance schedule for payment .
payment for a section num mix will be on the basis of table iii acceptance schedule for payment .
payment for section num mixes will be on the basis of table ii and table vi .
c suspension and voluntary termination of lots .
the production process will be considered out of control when any individual test result asphalt content gradation or air voids from a lot has a pay factor equal to num computed from the num test row in table ii the num test row in table iii or the num test column in table vi whichever is appropriate .
when gradation is a pay factor a num result for an individual screen before averaging is considered out of control .
if any single gradation for the num mixes falls outside of the gradation band shown in section num the process is considered out of control .
when this happens production shall be suspended .
if mix from the suspended lot is contained in storagesurge bins that mix will be considered part of the suspended lot and shall not be placed on any state project .
when production is suspended as described above or when the contractor voluntarily terminates a lot production shall not be restarted until after all of the following has been accomplished num the contractor shall notify the project manager immediately that the process is out of control or that the lot has been terminated voluntarily and that production has been suspended num the contractor shall determine the appropriate adjustments to make in order to bring the process under control and inform the project manager in writing of these adjustments num after adjustments the contractor shall produce a trial batch of mix approximately num to num tons num to num metric tons and test for control characteristics asphalt content gradation and air voids num adjustments trial batches and tests shall be repeated as many times as necessary until pay factors forasphalt content gradation and air voids equal num minimum at which time production may be restarted .
mix utilized as a trial batch shall not be used on the project .
section num asphalt pavements num d acceptance schedule of payment for asphalt plant mix characteristics .
table ii section num mixes section num mixes open graded friction course section num mixes stone matrix asphalt acceptance schedule of payment for asphalt plant mix characteristics arithmetic average of the absolute values of deviations of the lot acceptance tests from job mix formula values asphalt content lot pay factor num num num num num num num test num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num num over num voids in total mix lab .
compacted samples lot pay factor num num num num num num num test num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num num over num if approved by the department the contractor may accept the indicated lot partial pay .
the department may require removal and replacement .
if the lot pay factor is greater than num the contractor has the option to remove at no cost to the department and to replace at contract unit bid price rather than accepting the reduced lot payment .
the acceptance schedule of payment for voids in total mix will not apply to the num and num mixes table iii section num mixes superpave acceptance schedule of payment for asphalt plant mix characteristics arithmetic average of the absolute values of deviations of the lot acceptance tests from job mix formula values asphalt content lot pay factor num num num num num num num test num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num num over num voids in total mix lab .
compacted samples lot pay factor num num num num num num num test num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num over num num tests num num num num num over num if approved by the department the contractor may accept the indicated lot partial pay .
the department may require removal and replacement .
if the lot pay factor is greater than num the contractor has the option to remove at no cost to the department and to replace at contract unit bid price rather than accepting the reduced lot payment .
section num asphalt pavements num table vi section num mixes open graded friction course acceptance schedule of payment for asphalt plant mix characteristics arithmetic average of the absolute values of deviations of the lot acceptance tests from job mix formula values gradation num num mm sieve lot pay factor num test num tests num tests num tests num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num over num over num over num gradation no .
num num mm sieve lot pay factor num test num tests num tests num tests num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num over num over num over num the comparison value for aldot and contractor testing for the num num mm and no .
num num mm sieves is num .
if approved by the department the contractor may accept the indicated lot partial pay .
the department may require removal and replacement .
if the lot pay factor is greater than num the contractor has the option to remove at no cost to the department and to replace at contract unit bid price rather than accepting the reduced lot payment .
e acceptance of the roadway density .
for paving that is not mainline paving paving for patching widening and crossovers and leveling inplace density pay factors will not be applied .
for mainline paving including shoulders ramps and accelerationdeceleration lanes inplace density pay factors will be applied as specified herein unless otherwise noted on the plans or in the specifications .
after the hot andor warm mix asphalt mixture has been placed and compacted it shall be evaluated for density .
a core for mat density determination shall be taken by the contractor on each num foot num m segment of roadway lane of asphalt mixture placed .
the location of each test will be designated by the department .
the core shall meet a minimum thickness for use in determining the roadway density .
if the cores average thickness in inches millimeters is not at least num times the rate in pounds per square yard num times the rate in kilograms per square meter another core shall be taken as close a practical to the original location where the engineer believes the pavement is thick enough for roadway density determination .
the cores average thickness shall be determined by measuring the cores thickness at six equidistant locations around the circumference of the core .
the department will take immediate possession of the core and will make a density determination of the core in accordance with aashto t num method a .
the density values of the cores will be used to compute the pay factor for that sublot .
testing locations will be selected with the random number method outlined in aldotnum .
contractors are allowed but not required to take cores anywhere anytime for quality control .
this includes taking cores from the wearing layer .
the contractor must have the permission of the engineer to take cores from a patb num or ogfc num mix .
all core holes shall be promptly repaired at the contractors expense .
for purposes of evaluation a lot will be as defined in item numcnum .
a sublot for evaluation of density will be equal to num feet num m num test results or fraction of a num foot num m length as applicable .
for instance a num foot num m lot would be divided into two num foot num m sublots and one num foot num m sublot .
the inplace density will be expressed as a percentage of the theoretical maximum density tmd of the mix with the following relationship section num asphalt pavements num tmd in place density x num maximum mix density maximum mix density is equated to maximum mix specific gravity as measured with aashto t num flask determination with dry back .
the maximum mix specific gravity used will be the average of the values from the four most recent determinations using contractor data .
the appropriate pay factor for each sublot will be determined from table iv for the appropriate number of test results .
the pay factor for the lot will be determined by computing the weighted average of the sublots lot pay factor pf pf sublot num length sublot num pf sublot num length sublot num length sublot num length sublot num calculations for the acceptance test results for inplace density will be carried to the hundredths num and rounded to the nearest tenth num .
lot and sublot pay factor calculations will be carried to the thousandths num and rounded to the nearest hundredth num in accordance with astm e num rules of rounding .
the low rates of placement at which minimum density does not apply are given in section num .
density pay factors will not be applied to pavement layers placed at these rates .
table iv acceptance schedule of payment for inplace density section num mixes stone matrix asphalt characteristic sublot pay factor arithmetic average of the absolute values of deviations of sublot acceptance tests from target num test num tests num tests num tests inplace density num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num over num over num over num section num mixes superpave characteristic sublot pay factor arithmetic average of the absolute values of deviations of sublot acceptance tests from target num test num tests num tests num tests inplace density num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num over num over num over num if approved by the department the contractor may accept the indicated partial sublot pay .
the department may require removal and replacement .
the contractor has the option to remove at no cost to the department and replace at contract unit bid price rather than accepting the reduced sublot payment .
target density shall be num of the theoretical maximum density for all mixes except for the range of placement rates given in item numgnum num pounds per square yard or greater num kg per square meter or greater and less than num pounds per square yard num kg per square meter over surface treatments the target density shall be num and esal range a and b mixes where the contractor demonstrates and explains in writing why num of the theoretical maximum density can not be achieved and the engineer informs the contractor by written notification that the target density can be reduced to num or num .
section num asphalt pavements num table v comparison of aldot and contractor testing test acceptable asphalt content num air voids num gradation see table vi gradations given in articles num and num. f tack coat .
tack coat liquid asphalt material will be measured and paid for as specified in section num. g wasted and excess materials applied .
deductions in measurement will be made for all material wasted or lost due to negligence of the contractor or applied beyond the limits of the work .
h material remixing device .
the number of material remixing devices measured for payment will be the number of units approved by the engineer for use .
these devices will be measured per each device .
i certified inertial profiler .
the number of certified inertial profilers measured for payment will be the actual number of units ordered and accepted .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
compensation for plant mix material measured as provided above will be made on a tonnage metric tonnage basis and the contract unit price per ton metric ton for each individual item shall be full compensation for construction of the hot and warm mix asphalt plant mix layer complete in place on the roadbed as specified or directed including all materials procurement handling hauling and processing cost and includes all equipment tools labor and incidentals required to complete the work .
unless otherwise covered by a separate pay item the cost of excavation for patching and widening compacting the subgrade backfilling spreading or disposing of excess excavated material removal and disposal of old pavement removal and resetting of roadway signs and mailboxes and removal and disposal of pavement markers shall be subsidiary obligations of the associated plant mix pay item and no additional payment will be made for performing the work .
no payment will be made for unacceptable material for material needed to overlay layers deficient in thickness for material used in replacing defective or condemned construction for material wasted in handling hauling or otherwise or for maintaining the work .
when the average rate of placement is found to exceed the tolerance given in item numfnum .
the tonnage metric tonnage placed above the specified rate in that unit will be paid for at num percent of the contract unit price .
this reduction will not be applied to patching leveling and widening .
smoothness testing measured with a certified inertial profiler as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit bid price which shall be full compensation for furnishing the inertial profiler and portable storage devices and includes all equipment tools labor calibration maintenance services supplies and incidentals necessary to complete these items of work .
the number of approved remixing devices measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit bid price .
this price shall be full compensation for furnishing the vehicles and shall include all equipment tools labor calibration maintenance services operator and all other items necessary to furnish and operate the vehicles .
b payment will be made under item no .
see appropriate section for type of plant mix involved .
numh material remixing device per each numi smoothness testing certified inertial profilerper each section num polymer modified open graded friction course num section num polymer modified open graded friction course num description .
the work covered by this section shall consist of constructing a hot mixed hot laid polymer modified open graded friction course wearing layer generally placed on an existing pavement .
the typical cross section and the average weight per square yard will be shown on the plans .
requirements for all hot mix asphalt pavements as specified in section num are applicable to this section subject to any exceptions contained herein .
quality controlquality assurance qcqa requirements as specified in section num are applicable to this section subject to any exceptions contained herein .
num materials .
the materials furnished for use shall comply with the requirements of section num and the following a aggregates .
the aggregate shall be limited to num crushed aggregates of the following granite quarried quartzite slag sandstone or manufactured lightweight aggregate all of which shall be from approved sources and meet the appropriate requirements of sections num and num .
however if additional dust num num m material is needed mineral filler meeting the requirements of section num or agricultural limestone may be used .
if agricultural limestone is used it shall meet the requirements of astm c num standard specification for agricultural liming materials for class e agricultural limestone so that a minimum of num of the material will pass the no .
num num mm sieve and num will pass the no .
num num mm sieve .
in addition a minimum of num will pass the no .
num num m sieve .
no more than num agricultural limestone shall be used .
the aggregate shall be combined into a total blend that will produce an acceptable job mix within the gradation limits shown in the following table .
the blend shall be made from at least two stockpiles of different gradations .
at least num of the blend shall be taken from each stockpile .
aggregate gradation for open graded friction course sieve square mesh type percent passing by weight mass num inch num mm num num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num m num num the requirements for allowing the use of rap and ras are given in article num. b liquid asphalt binder .
the liquid binder shall be a polymer modified pg num meeting the requirements of section num .
the proportion of liquid asphalt binder to total sample by weight mass shall be num to num .
the exact proportion shall be fixed by the job mix formula .
additives or modifiers shall be used to prevent stripping of liquid asphalt binder if stripping is observed during design production or laydown .
these additives or modifiers shall be furnished and used at no additional cost to the state .
c polymer .
the polymer additive shall meet the requirements of section num. d liquid asphalt binder draindown .
a fiber stabilizer meeting the requirements given in section num shall be incorporated into the mix to reduce draindown .
the fiber shall be blended into the mix in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
section num polymer modified open graded friction course num e tack coat materials tack coat materials shall either be a cqsnumhp asphalt emulsion used in conjunction with the spray paver equipment as required in subarticle num d or pg asphalt for trackless tack with conventional paving equipment .
all tack coat materials shall meet the requirements given in section num except as modified by the requirements given herein .
the cqsnumhp shall be smooth and homogeneous and shall meet the requirements shown in the following table cqsnumhp modified asphalt emulsion test of emulsion parameter test method value viscosity num f sf aashto t num num min .
num max .
sieve test aashto t num num max.num numhour storage stability aashto t num num max .
num residue by distillation aashto t num num min .
oil distillate by volume of emulsion aashto t num particle charge aashto t num positive num test of residue from emulsion solubility in tce aashto t num num num min .
elastic recovery num f aashto t num num min .
penetration num f aashto t num num min .
num max .
ductility num f aashto t num num min .
num .
sieve test may be waived based on successful application in the field .
num .
after standing undisturbed for num hours the surface shall show no white milkycolored substance but shall be a smooth homogeneous color throughout the sample .
num .
if the particle charge test is inconclusive a ph test aashto t num shall be used with a maximum of num allowable .
num .
astm d num may be used when polymers block the filter during the test .
the original pg asphalt for trackless tack no rtfo or pav testing shall conform to the physical requirements shown in the following table specifications for pg asphalt for trackless tack parameter specification test method rotational viscosity maximum num pas num c aashto t num penetration maximum num num f num c num g. nums aashto tnum softening point c minimum num aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa num c aashto t num num design the open graded friction course shall be designed with a minimum air void content of num according toaldotnum open graded asphalt concrete friction course design method .
the contractor shall have the responsibility for the design of section num mixes .
the laboratory compacted density as determined in the job mix formula design shall not exceed num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum this corresponds with a maximum specific gravity value of num or a bulk specific gravity of num .
the work will be accepted on a lot by lot basis in accordance with the applicable requirements .
pay factors for air voids and density shall not apply .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the requirements of articles num through num shall apply except as modified hereinafter in this article .
b rate of placement of tack coat .
the rate of application of the tack coat on the asphalt surface shall be num to num gallons per square yard within a tolerance of num and num gallons per square yard for the pg asphalt for trackless tack .
cqsnumhp asphalt emulsion shall be applied at a rate of num num gallons per section num polymer modified open graded friction course num square yard within a tolerance of num and num gallons per square yard .
a uniform distribution of tack coat across the mat shall be enforced and streaked tack shots shall not be accepted .
c conventional paving equipment with the use of pg asphalt for trackless tack the use of conventional paving equipment shall be allowed when the tack coat material used is pg asphalt for trackless tack meeting the requirements given in subarticle num .
pg asphalt for trackless tack shall be applied at a temperature of num f to num f on a clean dry surface .
d spray paver paving equipment with the use of cqsnumhp asphalt emulsion the requirements given in article num shall be applicable to the construction of the open graded friction course except for the following the paving machine shall incorporate a tack distribution system receiving hopper feed conveyor and a variable width heated ironing or vibratory type screed .
the tack distribution system shall include metered mechanical pressure sprayer to accurately apply and monitor the rate of application of the emulsion for the tack .
the rate shall be uniform across the entire paving width .
it shall be applied at a temperature of num num f. application shall be immediately in front of the screed unit .
no wheel or other part of the paving machine shall come in contact with the tack before the paving mix is applied .
extensions added to the screed shall be provided with the same heating capability as the main screed unit except for use on variable width tapered areas as approved by the engineer .
e compaction equipment .
item numanum is amended to require that steel wheel tandem num ton num metric ton minimum size rollers shall be furnished in sufficient numbers based on the quantity of material being placed to provide effective compaction coverage within the workable time period of the mix as designated by the engineer .
rubbertire rollers shall not be used .
f weather and temperature limitations .
the weather air and surface temperature limitations for polymerized hma mixes are found in subarticle numb .
g compacting .
subarticle numg is amended to require that rolling shall be as approved by the engineer no density tests will be required .
num method of measurement .
the accepted quantities of polymer modified open graded friction course will be measured as provided in article num .
the cqsnumhp emulsion or pg asphalt for trackless tack for the tack coat will be measured in gallons in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
polymer modified open graded friction course measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid in accordance with article num .
the unit price of the open graded friction course tack coat shall be full compensation for all materials equipment and labor required to furnish and place the tack .
b payment will be made under item no .
num a polymer modified open graded friction course per ton metric ton num b open graded friction course tack coat per gallon section num stone matrix asphalt sma fiber stabilized asphalt concrete num section num stone matrix asphalt sma fiber stabilized asphalt concrete num description .
the work covered by this section shall consist of constructing a hot mix asphalt layer of fiber stabilized stone matrix asphalt pavement on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades typical cross section and the placement rate shown on the plans or as directed .
the plant equipment and construction requirements for this pavement are specified in sections num and num subject to any exceptions herein .
all num mixes shall be designed and produced in accordance with the requirements given in this section and aldotnum sma mix design .
num materials .
a aggregates .
num .
procedure for acceptance of coarse and fine aggregates .
all fine and coarse aggregate furnished shall come from an approved producer who is participating in and meeting the requirements of aldotnum procedure for acceptance of coarse and fine aggregates .
the producers name shall be listed in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list inum .
the department has established a list of qualified producers of fine and coarse aggregates .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
num .
types of acceptable coarse aggregates for sma .
coarse aggregate shall be aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve .
the virgin coarse aggregate shall be num crushed granite quarried quartzite limestone sandstone slag or other num crushed manufactured stone meeting the requirements given in section num .
num .
flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregates for sma .
the maximum amount of flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate for sma is given in the following table .
percent of flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate for sma test method maximum flat elongated by count num max to min astm d num section num num flat elongated by count num max to min astm d num section num num num .
coarse aggregate soundness for sma .
the percent degradation of the source aggregate by the sodium sulfate soundness test aashto t num soundness of aggregate by use of sodium sulfate or magnesium sulfate after five cycles of testing shall not exceed num .
num .
deleterious materials and absorption in coarse aggregate for sma .
the amount of deleterious substances and absorption in the coarse aggregate shall not exceed the limits given in the following table .
deleterious materials and absorption in coarse aggregate for sma coal and lignite visual num clay lumps and friable particles aashto t num num other local deleterious substances shale mica marcasite etc .
visual num absorption absorption on the material passing the num inch num mm sieve and retained on the no .
num num mm sieve aashto t num .
applies to gravel aggregates only .
num section num of aashto t num modified to require a num minute vacuum saturation period as per section num of aashto t num prior to the required num hour soaking period .
section num stone matrix asphalt sma fiber stabilized asphalt concrete num num .
los angeles abrasion criteria for coarse aggregate for sma .
the percent loss of the coarse aggregate by the la abrasion test aashto t num resistance to abrasion of small size aggregate by use of the los angeles machine shall not exceed num except that for sandstone and blast furnace slag the la abrasion shall not exceed num .
num .
fine aggregate for sma .
fine aggregate shall be num crushed granite limestone sandstone slag or other num crushed manufactured stone meeting the requirements of section num and the following table .
the parent material shall meet the requirements given in section num .
fine aggregate quality requirements for sma test method minimum maximum uncompacted voids aashto t num num num sand equivalent aashto t num num num liquid limit aashto t num num num plasticity index aashto t num nonplastic the sand equivalent and uncompacted voids may be run on the blend of the aggregates .
the fine aggregate shall be nonplastic when tested in accordance with aashto t num as modified by aldotnum and aashto t num and shall have a maximum of num clay lumps and friable particles as determined by aashto t num .
it shall consist of hard tough grain free of injurious amounts of clay loam or other deleterious substances .
num .
mineral filler for sma .
the mineral filler shall meet the requirements of section num. b recycled asphalt pavement rap reclaimed asphalt shingles ras .
the requirements for allowing the use of rap and ras are given in article num. c blend of aggregates .
the combined aggregates shall conform to the percent passing by volume requirements given in the following table .
section num stone matrix asphalt sma fiber stabilized asphalt concrete num percent passing by volume of aggregate for sma sieve size num inch num mm maximum aggregate size num inch num mm maximum aggregate size num inch num mm maximum aggregate size num inch num mm maximum aggregate size num inch num mm maximum aggregate size lower limit upper limit lower limit upper limit lower limit upper limit lower limit upper limit lower limit upper limit num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num num num num inch num mm num num num num num num num inch num mm num num num num num num num num num inch num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num m num num num num num num num num num num num num m num num num num num num num num num num num num m num num num num num num num num num num an example of how to blend aggregate based upon volume can be found in aldotnum sma mix design .
the production tolerances for the above gradation bands are as specified in item numdnum except that the tolerance for the no .
num num mm sieve is num and for the num inch num mm sieve is num .
aggregates that tend to polish under traffic such as limestone dolomite or marble shall be permitted only in widening as defined by article num shoulder paving underlying layers and layers that are to be covered by polymer modified open graded friction course section num mix in this contract except as noted in the following table .
allowable carbonate stone criteria for sma bpn num value of aggregate source maximum allowable percentage of carbonate stone num num num through num num num through num num num through num num num num this value bpn num is made using the british pendulum tester on aggregate source specimen polished for num hours on an accelerated polishing machine known as the british wheel as per astm d num astm e num and bmtpnum .
in no case shall the total amount of virgin carbonate stone in the combined mixture used as actual wearing surface layers exceed the percentage shown in the table above .
when parts of the carbonate stone used in the mix are from differing strata of material or coming from multiple sources that are represented by different bpn num values the lowest bpn num value will be used .
section num stone matrix asphalt sma fiber stabilized asphalt concrete num d liquid asphalt binder .
num .
required type of liquid asphalt binder for sma .
unless otherwise shown on the plans for pavement layers in the top num inches the liquid asphalt binder shall meet the requirements of section num and shall be polymermodified to meet a pg num as given in section num .
for pavement layers below the top num inches the liquid asphalt binder shall be pg num and shall meet the requirements of section num .
if open graded friction course section num layers are required the top num inches shall be measured from the bottom of the open graded friction course layer .
num .
required minimum amount of liquid asphalt binder for sma .
the minimum liquid asphalt binder content shall be as given in the following table by weight mass of total mix .
minimum liquid asphalt binder content for sma maximum aggregate size inches mm nominal aggregate size inches mm minimum liquid asphalt binder content by weight by mass minimum liquid asphalt binder content for mixes containing ras by weight by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num .
liquid asphalt binder draindown .
a fiber stabilizer meeting the requirements given in section num shall be incorporated into the mix to reduce draindown .
the fiber shall be blended into the mix in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
ras may be allowed as a fiber stabilizer provided it meets the requirements in section num .
num design .
all sma mixes shall be designed according to aldotnum sma mix design .
sma mixes shall be designed using a num blow marshall design or a num gyration gyratory compactor design .
the sma shall have a minimum vma of num a vcamix less than the vcadrc calculating voids in the coarse aggregate is explained in aldotnum sma mix design and air voids of num for sma mixes containing ras or num for all other sma mixes .
the sma mix shall be designed with a minimum tensile strength ratio of num according to aldotnum .
the mix shall exhibit num mm or less rutting when tested in accordance with aldotnum rutting susceptibility determination of asphalt paving mixtures using the asphalt pavement analyzer .
num hot mix asphalt plant requirements .
a mineral filler .
to ensure accurate metering and proportioning the introduction of the mineral filler shall be in accordance with section num of aashto m num as specified in aldotnum .
adequate dry storage shall be provided for the mineral filler .
in a batch plant mineral filler shall be added directly into the weigh hopper .
in a drum plant mineral filler shall be added directly into the drum mixer near enough to the liquid asphalt binder line so that the mineral filler is captured by the liquid asphalt binder .
note for most sma projects the flow rate of the mineral filler governs the plant production rate .
b hotmixture storage .
sma shall be stored according to the requirements as given in aldot num plant requirements for plants producing hotmixed hotlaid asphalt mixtures .
sma shall not be heated above num f num c without the approval of the engineer .
num construction requirements .
a general .
construction requirements shall be the same as specified in articles num through num except as noted in this article .
section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num b weather and temperature limitations .
the weather air and surface temperature limitations for polymerized hma mixes are found in subarticle numb .
c surface preparation .
a thin tack coat meeting the requirements of section num shall be applied to ensure uniform and complete adherence of the overlay .
d compaction .
due to the nature of stone matrix asphalt mixture the surface shall be rolled immediately .
rollers shall move at a uniform speed not to exceed num miles per hour num kmhr with the drive roller nearest the paver .
rolling shall be continued until all roller marks are eliminated and the required density has been obtained .
the contractor shall monitor density during the compaction process using the nondestructive testing devices approved in section num of the specifications to ensure that the required density is being obtained .
the device shall either be calibrated to roadway cores or gage counts and shall be used to determine the rolling pattern producing maximum density .
if vibratory compaction causes aggregate breakdown or forces liquid asphalt binder to the surface the vibratory mode shall be turned off and the roller shall operate in static mode only .
to prevent adhesion of the mixture to the rollers it shall be necessary to keep the rollers properly moistened with water mixed with very small quantities of detergent or other approved material .
num method of measurement .
the accepted quantities of stone matrix asphalt binder layer and stone matrix asphalt wearing layer will be measured as provided in article num .
the sma mix shall be evaluated for liquid asphalt binder content laboratory compacted air voids and inplace density pay factors will be applied .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
stone matrix asphalt binder layer and stone matrix asphalt wearing layer measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid in accordance with article num. b payment will be made under item no .
numa stone matrix asphalt wearing layer maximum aggregate size per ton metric ton numb stone matrix asphalt binder layer maximum aggregate size per ton metric ton specify maximum aggregate size either num num num num or num inches num mm num mm num mm num mm or num mm section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num description the work covered by this section shall consist of a hot or warm bituminous plant mixed pavement layer placed on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades typical cross section and placement rate shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor may use either hot mix or warm mix for all superpave esal range mixes in section num .
general requirements for all bituminous concrete pavements as specified in section num are applicable to this section subject to any exceptions contained herein .
quality controlquality assurance qcqa requirements as specified in section num are applicable to this section subject to any exceptions contained herein .
the work will be accepted on a lot by lot basis in accordance with the applicable requirements .
section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num num materials .
the materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements of section num and the following a aggregates .
num .
procedure for acceptance of coarse and fine aggregates .
all fine and coarse aggregate furnished shall come from an approved producer who is participating in and meeting the requirements of aldotnum procedure for acceptance of coarse and fine aggregates .
the producers name shall be listed in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list inum .
the department has established a list of qualified producers of fine and coarse aggregates .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
num .
types of acceptable coarse aggregates for superpave .
coarse aggregate shall be aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve .
coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed or uncrushed gravel with a bulk specific gravity greater than num aashto t num crushed stone or crushed slag or a combination thereof having hard strong durable pieces free from adherent coatings and meeting all requirements of these specifications .
num .
flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregates for superpave .
the maximum amount of flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate for superpave is given in the following table .
percent of flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate for superpave test method maximum flat elongated by count num max to min astm d num section num num shall not apply to the num inch num mm mix or to esal range ab num .
coarse aggregate soundness for superpave .
the percent degradation of the source aggregate by the sodium sulfate soundness test aashto t num soundness of aggregate by use of sodium sulfate or magnesium sulfate after five cycles of testing shall not exceed num .
num .
deleterious materials and absorption in coarse aggregate for superpave .
the amount of deleterious substances and absorption in the coarse aggregate shall not exceed the following limits restriction of deleterious materials and absorption in coarse aggregate for superpave coal and lignite visual num clay lumps and friable particles aashto t num num other local deleterious substances shale mica marcasite etc .
visual num absorption absorption on the material passing the num inch num mm sieve and retained on the no .
num num mm sieve aashto t num .
applies to gravel aggregates only .
num section num of aashto t num modified to require a num minute vacuum saturation period as per section num of aashto t num prior to the required num hour soaking period .
num .
los angeles abrasion criteria for coarse aggregate for superpave .
the percent loss of the coarse aggregate by the la abrasion test aashto t num resistance to abrasion of small size aggregate by use of the los angeles machine shall not exceed num except that for sandstone and blast furnace slag the la abrasion shall not exceed num .
num .
fine aggregate for superpave .
fine aggregate shall be aggregate passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
gravel used to manufacture fine aggregate shall have a bulk specific gravity greater than num aashto t num .
the fine aggregate shall be nonplastic when tested in accordance with aashto t num as modified by aldotnum and aashto t num and shall have a maximum of num clay lumps and friable particles as determined by aashto t num .
it shall consist of hard tough grain free of injurious amounts of clay loam or other deleterious substances .
num .
clay content for superpave .
the amount of clay material as indicated by the sand equivalent measured on the aggregate passing the no .
num num mm sieve as determined by aashto t num plastic fines in section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num graded aggregates and soils by use of the sand equivalent test shall be no less than the values defined in the following table according to the total design traffic in equivalent single axle loads esals .
clay content criteria for superpave esal range traffic esals sand equivalent ab esals numxnum num cd numxnum esals numxnum num e numxnum esals numxnum num num .
mineral filler for superpave .
mineral filler shall consist of finely divided mineral matter such as rock dust slag dust hydrated lime hydraulic cement or fly ash meeting the requirements of section num .
the introduction of mineral filler shall be in accordance with aashto m num section num as specified in aldotnum with the additional requirement that accurate proportioning shall be accomplished by means of pneumatic or mechanical metering .
b recycled asphalt pavement rap reclaimed asphalt shingles ras .
the requirements for allowing the use of rap and ras are given in article num. c blend of aggregates .
num .
gradations for blend of aggregates .
the coarse and fine aggregates mineral filler and recycled material shall be combined in a total blend that will produce an acceptable job mix within the gradation limits determined by the maximum and minimum control points as shown in the following tables .
maximum particle size is defined as the sieve size that is two sizes larger than the first sieve to retain more than num of the material .
the sequence of sieve sizes to be used in determining maximum particle size is given in the following tables .
gradation charts illustrating gradation requirements are given in article num .
the required mix will be shown on the plans .
also all esal range e mixes shall exhibit num mm or less rutting when tested according to aldotnum rutting susceptibility determination of asphalt paving mixtures using the asphalt pavement analyzer .
aggregate gradation control points for superpave num num inch num mm maximum aggregate size mix control point percent passing sieve size minimum maximum no .
num num m num num no .
num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm nominal num num num num mm maximum num aggregate gradation control points for superpave num inch num mm maximum aggregate size mix control point percent passing sieve size minimum maximum no .
num num m num num no .
num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm nominal num num num num mm maximum num section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num aggregate gradation control points for superpave num inch num mm maximum aggregate size mix control point percent passing sieve size minimum maximum no .
num num m num num no .
num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm nominal num num num num mm maximum num aggregate gradation control points for superpave num inch num mm maximum aggregate size mix control point percent passing sieve size minimum maximum no .
num num m num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num num mm nominal num num num num mm maximum num aggregate gradation control points for superpave num inch num mm maximum aggregate size mix control point percent passing sieve size minimum maximum no .
num num m num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm nominal num num num num mm maximum num num note up to num may be retained on the maximum size sieve num inch num mm and up to num may be retained on the nominal size sieve num num mm .
num .
coarse aggregate angularity for blend of aggregates .
the coarse aggregate angularity shall be measured on the total blended aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve in accordance with astm d num .
a fractured face is defined as an angular rough or broken surface of an aggregate particle created by crushing by other artificial means or by nature .
a face is considered fractured only if it has a projected area at least as large as onequarter of the maximum projected area maximum crosssectional area of the particle and has sharp welldefined edges .
the percent by weight mass of the coarse particles of the blended aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve with one fractured face and with two or more fractured faces shall be no less than the values in the following table .
coarse aggregate angularity requirements for superpave esal range traffic esals wearing surface binder layers base layers ab esals numxnum num num cd numxnum esals numxnum num num num e numxnum esals numxnum num num num num note num num denotes that num of the coarse aggregate has at least one fractured face and num has two or more fractured faces .
num .
fine aggregate angularity for blend of aggregates .
the percent air voids in loosely compacted fine aggregate measured according to aashto t num method a or astm c num method a uncompacted void content of fine aggregate as influenced by particle shape surface texture and grading shall be no less than the values in the following table .
section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num fine aggregate angularity requirements for superpave esal range traffic esals minimum air void base binder surface ab esals numxnum num num cd numxnum esals numxnum num num e numxnum esals numxnum num num num .
restrictions in the use of carbonate stone for blend of aggregates .
the restrictions for the use of carbonate stone are given in the following table .
these restrictions do not apply to widening as defined in article num .
num shoulder paving underlying layers and layers that are to be covered by polymer modified open graded friction course section num mix in this contract .
criteria for the use of carbonate stone in superpave bpn num value of aggregate source maximum allowable percentage of carbonate stone num num num through num num num through num num num through num num num num this value bpn num is made using the british pendulum tester on aggregate source specimen polished for num hours on an accelerated polishing machine known as the british wheel as per astm d num astm e num and aldotnum .
in no case shall the total amount of virgin carbonate stone in the combined mixture used as actual wearing surface layers that are exposed to traffic exceed the percentage shown in the above table .
when parts of the carbonate stone used in the mix are from differing strata of material or coming from multiple sources that are represented by different bpn num values the lowest bpn num value will be used .
d liquid asphalt binder .
liquid asphalt binders shall come from an approved producer who is participating in and meeting the requirements of aldotnum acceptance program for asphalt materials .
the producers name shall be listed in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list inum .
the department has established a list of qualified producers of asphalt materials .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
unless shown otherwise on the plans or in the proposal liquid asphalt binder for use in all mixes shall meet the requirements of aashto m num standard specification for performance graded asphalt binder as modified by the requirements given in the following table and section num .
allowable asphalt binder grades for superpave esal range traffic esals base lower upper binder layers wearing surface layers ab esals numxnum pg num pg num cd numxnum esals numxnum pg num pg num e numxnum esals numxnum pg num pg num the asphalt binder shall be pg num for leveling when the top of the leveling is within num inches num mm of the final pavement surface .
the asphalt binder may be pg num for leveling that is not within num inches num mm of the final pavement surface and for all patching and widening .
if open graded friction course section num layers are required the final pavement surface shall be the surface of the layer below these layers .
asphalt binders shall meet the requirements of section num .
polymer modifiers shall be blended at an approved refinery and meet the requirements of section num .
approved warm mix additives or processes are given in list iinum warm mix asphalt products and processes of the materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num e mix properties .
num .
air voids va .
the design air voids for all levels of traffic is num for mixes containing ras and num for all other mixes .
num .
voids in mineral aggregate vma .
the job mix shall be designed at a minimum vma given in the following table .
voids in mineral aggregate design vma for superpave maximum aggregate size inches mm nominal aggregate size inches mm minimum vma num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num as defined in subarticle numc all num num mm mixes where the esal range is greater than ab shall have a maximum vma of num .
production vma may be num lower than the minimum vma given above .
num .
liquid asphalt binder content pb .
the job mix shall be designed at a minimum liquid asphalt binder content pb given in the following table .
production tolerances shall be governed by the pay factors in table iii section num .
liquid asphalt binder content pb criteria for superpave maximum aggregate size inches mm nominal aggregate size inches mm minimum liquid asphalt binder content pb by percent of total mix minimum liquid asphalt binder content pb for mixes containing ras by percent of total mix num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num as defined in subarticle numd nd num num .
dust proportion dpbe .
the ratio of the percent by weight mass of aggregate passing the no .
num num m sieve to the effective asphalt content expressed as percent by weight mass of the total mix shall be between num and num .
all num inch num mm mixes shall have a dust to effective asphalt ratio range of num to num .
these ratio limits apply to both the design and production phases .
effective asphalt content is that liquid asphalt binder not absorbed into the aggregate pore structure and is determined in accordance with section num of the asphalt institutes msnum mix design methods for asphalt concrete .
num .
liquid asphalt binder draindown .
a fiber stabilizer meeting the requirements given in section num may be incorporated into the mix to reduce draindown .
the fiber shall be blended into the mix in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num num .
resistance to moistureinduced damage .
all mixes shall be designed and produced to have a tensile strength ratio tsr of at least num when compacted according to aldotnum at num air voids and tested in accordance with aashto t num as modified by aldotnum except the specimen shall be num num mm in diameter and num num mm in height .
f design procedure .
all superpave mixes shall be designed in accordance with aldotnum superpave mix design procedure for asphalt mixtures .
all superpave gyratory compactors shall have their angle of gyration verified by the engineer following the procedure in aashto t num standard method of test for evaluation of superpave gyratory compactor sgc internal angle of gyration using simulated loading .
this includes all design quality control and quality assurance sgcs .
the compactors shall tilt the specimen molds at an average internal angle of num num mrad num num degrees .
num gradation requirements .
num num num num num num num num num num num percent passing gradation chart for num num inch num mm maximum size aggregate maximum density line num num num num num um num num num mm num num num num num num maximum control points minimum control points num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
in .
sieve size to the num power section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num num num num num num num num num num num num percent passing gradation chart for num inch num mm maximum size aggregate maximum density line num num num num num um num num num mm num num num num num num maximum control points minimum control points num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
in .
sieve size to the num power num num num num num num num num num num num percent passing gradation chart for num inch num mm maximum size aggregate maximum density line num num num num num um num num num mm num num num num num num maximum control points minimum control points num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
in .
sieve size to the num power section num superpave bituminous concrete base binder and wearing surface layers num num construction requirements .
a general .
the mixing temperature of the asphalt mixture shall not exceed num f num c. b binder layer and wearing surface layer .
construction requirements shall be as specified in articles num through num .
num num num num num num num num num num num percent passing gradation chart for num inch num mm maximum size aggregate maximum density line num num num num num um num num num mm num num num num num num maximum control points minimum control points num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
in .
sieve size to the num power num num num num num num num num num num num percent passing gradation chart for num inch num mm maximum size aggregate maximum density line num num num num num um num num num mm num num num num num num maximum control points minimum control points num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
in .
sieve size to the num power section num scoring bituminous pavement surface num c base layer .
the construction requirements for base layers shall be as specified in articles num through num except as follows the edges shall be trimmed immediately after final rolling using an accurately aligned string or wire to a tolerance of num inches num mm outside the theoretical edge of the layer and to a slope not flatter than num .
any edge distorted by rolling shall be promptly corrected .
d preparation of mixtures moisture content .
each time an asphalt content measurement is made aldotnum or aashto t num the amount of moisture in the mixture shall be determined regardless of aggregate type as specified in aldotnum and reported on form bmtnum .
the moisture determination shall be used in computing the corrected asphalt content .
moisture samples shall be taken with the asphalt content samples from the loaded truck .
moisture in the mixture shall not exceed num by weight mass .
e production tolerances .
all mixtures furnished for use shall conform to the approved job mix formula jmf within the tolerances set in article num .
mixture gradations may be produced provided the gradations are within the tolerances .
num method of measurement .
the accepted quantities of superpave bituminous concrete wearing surface layer superpave bituminous concrete binder layer and superpave bituminous concrete base layer will be measured as provided in article num subject to any exceptions contained herein .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
superpave bituminous concrete wearing surface layer superpave bituminous concrete binder layer and superpave bituminous concrete base layer will be paid for at the contract unit price bid in accordance with article num subject to any exceptions contained herein .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa superpave bituminous concrete wearing surface layer maximum aggregate size mix esal range per ton metric ton numb superpave bituminous concrete binder layer maximum aggregate size mix esal range per ton metric ton numc superpave bituminous concrete base layer maximum aggregate size mix esal range per ton metric ton specify either upper or lower .
specify patching leveling widening etc .
only when required .
specify maximum aggregate size num num num num or num num mm num mm num mm num mm or num mm .
specify ab cd or e. section num scoring bituminous pavement surface num description .
this section shall cover the work of scoring bituminous plant mix pavement surfaces at locations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the scoring shall consist of cutting grooves at regular intervals in the shoulder pavement surface .
num materials .
na section num soil or aggregate type surface num num construction requirements .
a general .
it is intended that areas of the pavement surface designated by the plans or by the engineer to be scored shall be so done as to produce a rumble strip effect to alert inattentive drivers .
the size shape and spacing of the grooves formed during the cutting procedure shall be as shown on the plans unless a different configuration is approved by the construction engineer .
unless ordered otherwise by the engineer all grooves shall be perpendicular to the pavement edge .
b equipment .
the scoring equipment shall consist of a rotary type cutting head with cutting tips arranged in a pattern that will provide a smooth cut .
the cutting head shall be on its own independent suspension from that of the power unit to allow the tool to align with the slope of the shoulder and any irregularities in the shoulder surface .
c operational requirements .
the equipment shall be operated in a workmanlike manner that will satisfactorily produce a pavement surface having uniform grooves of the dimensions and spacing as shown on the plans or specified in this article .
equipment used to construct scored shoulders shall be positioned by using methods which will avoid scoring at locations other than those designated on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the debris that results from cutting shall be removed on a daily basis by a sweepervacuum or other approved methods .
num method of measurement .
the scoring of bituminous pavement surface ordered and accepted will be measured per mile kilometer along the centerline of each row of grooves placed either by direct measurement and computation to the nearest num mile num kilometer or by odometer to the nearest num mile num kilometer .
when more than one row of grooves is required on a surface each row will be measured separately .
the length of scoring measured will include any gaps shown on the plans as part of the design of the scoring but will not include the length of any other gap or section omitted by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the scoring of bituminous pavement surface measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the scoring of the pavement and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa scoring bituminous pavement surface per mile kilometer section num soil or aggregate type surface num description .
the work under this section shall consist of constructing a temporary or permanent surface course of soil type material selected material granular soil or soil aggregate etc .
or graded aggregate type material .
the plans or proposal will designate the type of material to be used .
num material .
all material furnished for use shall meet the appropriate requirements of division num materials for the classification of material specified by the pay item .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num num construction requirements .
a equipment .
selection of the appropriate type of equipment to satisfactorily accomplish the work will in general be at the option of the contractor .
b preparation of underlying surface .
before placing the surface material the subgrade shall comply with the requirements of subarticle numa .
if the soil or aggregate surfacing is to be used in a temporary manner for handling traffic the requirements for underlying surface preparation may be modified as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer and control elevation stakes will not be necessary .
if the soil or aggregate surfacing is used for shoulder construction adjacent to the resurfacing of the roadway the requirements given in subarticle numa will not be applicable and the underlying surface shall be compacted as directed by the engineer .
c placing spreading and shaping .
local type materials selected material granular soil and soil aggregate shall be yard mixed as described in item numcnum before being hauled to the roadbed .
approved surfacing material may be dumped directly on the prepared subsurface and the material spread to the width and depth shown on the plans or directed .
water shall be added if so directed .
mixing will not be required unless so specified on the plans .
if mixing is specified it shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of item numcnum .
upon completion of the spreading the material shall be shaped to the cross section shown on the plans and rolled to a smooth riding surface free from high spots or depressions and satisfactory to the engineer .
specific density requirements are waived however it shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
after being placed and shaped to proper crown and grade the surface shall be shaped at frequent intervals as directed and shall be kept free of ruts and holes .
new material shall be added and bladed as needed and as directed .
the surface shall be maintained in satisfactory condition in the manner described above until the contract is accepted .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of surfacing material placed on the roadbed will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numi or per ton metric ton measured by weight mass in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numh .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
surfacing material ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the material complete in place on the roadbed and includes all costs incident to furnishing and producing the material all hauling spreading mixing watering compacting shaping and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
additional material used in the maintenance will be measured and paid for under this item .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa soil type surfacingkind material per cubic yard cubic meter numb aggregate surfacingaldot size of material per ton metric ton section num portland cement concrete pavement num description .
the work covered by this section consists of constructing a pavement of portland cement concrete .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num num materials .
a references for material requirements .
all materials shall conform to the requirements given in division num materials .
the requirements given in the following sections are directly applicable to the materials furnished for the concrete pavement section num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregates section num bituminous materials section num mineral admixtures section num water section num air entraining additives section num chemical admixtures for concrete section num cement section num concrete curing material section num concrete joint fillers sealers and waterstop material section num steel reinforcement b aggregates .
num .
fine aggregate .
fine aggregate shall be aldot size no .
num concrete sand meeting the requirements of section num .
sand shall be natural sand except that it may include num percent crushed quartzite particles .
a blend of two natural sands will be permitted if a written request is submitted to the materials and tests engineer for approval .
num .
coarse aggregate .
a. gradation .
each component size shall be stockpiled separately at the batching plant .
b .
type of coarse aggregate .
the types of allowable coarse aggregate are dependent upon where the concrete is placed mainline shoulder ramp .
the coarse aggregate for mainline and ramp pavement shall be granite sandstone quartzite or gravel with a specific gravity greater than num specific gravity requirement applies to gravel only .
gravel with a specific gravity less than or equal to num and limestone will not be allowed .
the coarse aggregate for shoulder pavement shall be limestone or the aggregates allowed for mainline and ramp pavement .
num .
combined aggregate gradation .
the contractor shall use combined grading analysis to produce a wellgraded aggregate in designing the concrete mixture .
the contractor shall submit the following data with any concrete mixture design gradations for all coarse and fine aggregates .
coarseness factor chart .
num power chart .
chart showing the percent of combined aggregate retained on each sieve .
num .
crushed concrete used as aggregate .
crushed concrete may be used as an aggregate if this is shown to be allowed on the plans .
the crushed concrete used as an aggregate shall meet the requirements given in this section and the requirements given in articles num num and num. c portland cement .
the concrete producer may use type i or type iiportland cement .
the concrete producer may substitute type iii portland cement provided prior approval is given by the materials and tests engineer and it is included in the proposed mix design .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num d admixtures .
num .
chemical admixture .
any chemical admixture used in the concrete mixture shall be included in the mixture design proposal .
only approved chemical admixtures listed in list iinum chemical admixtures for portland cement concrete of the msdsar manual shall be used in department concrete mixes .
the dosage of chemical admixtures may be adjusted in the field to obtain the desired results provided that the manufacturers recommended dosage is not exceeded .
if chemical admixtures are part of the proposed mix design they shall also be used during production .
num .
mineral admixture .
mineral admixtures may be used in any concrete pavement mixture design except where it is specified otherwise by the plans and proposal .
substitution percentages are calculated by weight .
the maximum substitution of portland cement with mineral admixtures shall not exceed num percent .
the following table shows the maximum substitution of portland cement with any one mineral admixture .
maximum percent mineral admixture substitution for portland cement substitution by weight mineral admixture percentage substitution class c or class f fly ash num ground granulated blast furnace slag num microsilica num e concrete mix design .
num .
submittal of mix design .
the contractors concrete producershall establish the proportion of materials following the guidelines described in aldotnum method of controlling concrete operations for structural portland cement concrete .
it shall be the responsibility of the concrete producer to request approval of concrete mixture designs for use in departments projects .
the contractor shall submit the proposed concrete mixture no later than num calendar days after the date of notice to proceed .
the department shall be allowed num calendar days to complete the review and approval of the concrete mixture .
num .
mix design criteria .
the concrete producer shall submit a mix design meeting the following parameters maximum water to cementitious material ratio of num .
maximum slump of num inches num millimeters .
total entrained air percentage by volume between num and num .
minimum flexural strength of num psi at num days .
minimum compressive strength determined by correlation with the minimum allowable flexural strength .
the compressive strength shall not be less than num psi at num days .
for concrete mixtures using portland cement only the concrete producer shall submit data showing that the total alkali contribution from the cement in the concrete does not exceed num lbydnum when calculated as follows     num     num num    num num .
correlation of compressive strength with flexural strength .
in addition to the requirements listed in item num of aldotnum the concrete producer shall submit a correlation of the flexural strength versus the compressive strength .
this submittal shall be made at the same time as the submittal of the proposed mix design .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num a correlation of the flexural strength versus the compressive strength for num and num day strengths shall be made and shall be based on at least num tests for each age from the proposed concrete mixture .
the minimum numday flexural strength shall be num psi .
the flexural strength shall be obtained from beam specimens made in accordance with astm c num making and curing concrete test specimens in the laboratory and tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num flexural strength of concrete using simple beam with thirdpoint loading .
the minimum allowable compressive strength fc at num days shall be the compressive strength determined from the correlation of compressive strength with the minimum required flexural strength but in no case shall the minimum numday compressive strength fc be less than num psi .
separate correlation mix design tests shall be performed for each combination of cementitious materials and each combination of chemical admixtures proposed for use .
separate correlation mix design tests shall be performed for the different types of aggregates used .
separate correlation mix design tests shall be made for concrete for any conveying or placing method proposed which requires special properties .
changes in a mix design other than those allowed by the department shall require a new mix design correlation .
f steel .
tie bars shall be deformed new billet steel other bars shall be new billet steel .
the grade of the tie bars shall meet the requirements given in article num .
the material requirements given in section num shall apply to the reinforcing steel for the concrete pavement .
dowel bars shall be type b meeting the requirements given in article num unless otherwise noted by plan detail .
g quality control plan and maturity meters .
num .
quality control plan .
the contractor shall submit a quality control qc plan to the materials and tests engineer for review .
construction shall not begin until the qc plan is accepted as being complete and has been distributed for inspection of the construction work .
the contractor shall include a description of the required concrete plant laboratory as part of the qc plan .
the concrete plant laboratory shall meet the requirements of section num .
no direct payment will be made for the laboratory .
num .
maturity meters .
maturity meters may be proposed only for use in estimating the compressive strength of the concrete for opening the pavement to traffic .
the use of the maturity meters shall conform to the requirements given in aldotnum maturity method to determine earlyage strengths of concrete .
the maturity meters used in establishing the strengthmaturity relationship shall be the same ones used in estimating the early age compressive strength of the concrete in the pavement .
the manufacturers serial number of the maturity meter shall be shown on each strengthmaturity relationship submitted to the engineer .
when verification tests indicate the strengthmaturity relationship is invalid maturity testing shall be discontinued until a new strengthmaturity relationship is developed .
compressive strength by testing cylinders shall be used for the determination of the early age compressive strength until the contractor completes testing to reestablish the correlation between the early age compressive strength and the maturity meter readings .
h sampling and inspection .
num .
availability of plant and other facilities for inspection .
preparation of the mix shall be subject to inspection at all times .
the engineer shall have access at any time to all parts of the plant and other facilities for inspecting and checking all equipment operations and materials involved in preparation of the concrete mix .
any unsatisfactory equipment or operation shall be changed and improved as required .
num .
mainline pavement testing unit .
a mainline pavement testing unit shall be defined as num feet or fraction thereof of mainline roadway lane length placed in one paving pass .
the paving width may be multiple roadway lanes placed in one paving pass .
a complete mainline pavement testing unit shall be section num portland cement concrete pavement num removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans if the quality of the pavement in any portion of the pavement testing unit is determined to be unacceptable .
concrete shoulder pavement placed integrally with mainline roadway may be accepted using the tests for the mainline roadway pavement .
the engineer may include transitional areas of pavement adjacent to mainline pavement testing units for acceptance using the tests for the mainline roadway pavement .
a paving pass is defined as the continuous paving operation in width and length done without interruptions of more than num minutes .
num .
nonmainline pavement testing unit .
ramps shoulders and transitional areas are classified as nonmainline pavement .
a nonmainline pavement testing unit shall be defined as a num cubic yards or fraction thereof of ramps shoulders and transitional areas placed in one paving pass .
a complete non mainline pavement testing unit shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans if the quality of the pavement in any portion of the nonmainline pavement testing unit is determined to be unacceptable .
the engineer may combine ramps shoulders andor transitional areas into one non mainline pavement testing unit if the combined elements are placed in the same paving pass .
a paving pass is defined as the continuous paving operation in width and length done without interruptions of more than num minutes .
num .
table of sampling and testing requirements .
sampling and testing requirements for acceptance of portland cement concrete pavementnum sample size sampling methods sampling location testing methods aldot testing frequency remarks num .
compressive strength minimum of one set of cylindersnum aashto t num aldotnum aashto t num aashto t num minimum of num set per pavement testing unit sampled and tested by the department num .
total air content minimum of one aashto t num same location and sample as num aashto t num minimum of num per pavement testing unit sampled and tested by the department num .
slump minimum of one aashto t num same location and sample as num aashto t num minimum of num per pavement testing unit sampled and tested by the department num .
temperature minimum of one aashto t num same location and sample as num aashto t num minimum of num per pavement testing unit sampled and tested by the department num .
thicknessnum probing method aldotnum minimum of num sets per pavement testing unit contractor shall perform measurements notes num .
sampling and testing frequency applies for both mainline and nonmainline portland cement concrete pavement .
num .
a set of cylinders consist of two num in x num in cylinders to be tested at num days .
num .
the department will verify the contractors measurements by an alternative method for measuring thickness as indicated in item numhnum .
a set consists of two individual measurements .
num .
samples for testing by the department .
the contractor shall furnish without extra compensation samples of materials for making test specimens and performing tests as required to comply with departmental material testing procedures .
additional materials and increases in the frequency of testing will be required if deemed necessary by the engineer .
the engineer will establish the location for sampling in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum selecting samples by the random numbers method .
num .
sampling and testing of aggregates and cementitious materials .
aggregates and cementitious materials shall be from approved sources accepted in accordance with the requirements given in the departments testing manual .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num num .
testing concrete during mixing and placement .
a department certified aldot concrete technician will sample and test the properties of the concrete as it is being mixed and placed .
sampling and testing for total air content slump and temperature will be performed at the same time and from the same sample that compressive strength samples are taken .
concretethat is not within the following limits during placement shall not be used slump slump will be determined in accordance with aashto t num slump of hydraulic cement concrete and shall not exceed the maximum slump of num inches .
total air content total air content will be determined in accordance with aashto t num air content of freshly mixed concrete by the pressure method type b .
total air content shall be between num and num by volume .
concrete temperature concrete temperature will be determined in accordance with aashto t num temperature of freshly mixed portland cement concrete .
the temperature of the concrete at the time of placement shall not be less than num f or more than num f .
num .
concrete cylinders for testing compressive strength for acceptance .
the departments certified aldot concrete technician will make a minimum of one set of two num days concrete cylinders that will represent the pavement testing unit .
concrete cylinders will be made in accordance with aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the field .
the compressive strength of concrete cylinders at num days will be determined in accordance with aashto t num compressive strength of cylindrical concrete specimens .
the concrete cylinders shall be initially cured in a protected environment in accordance with the requirements given aashto t num .
the protective environment shall be available at the time of the concrete placement and shall be maintained until all specimens have been transported to the testing laboratory .
the contractor shall furnish without extra compensation a protected environment for all concrete test specimens .
the protective environment shall consist of at least one curing box more may be required with a capacity to hold at least num test cylinders that are num inch x num inch in size .
each curing box shall be equipped with heatingcooling capabilities automatic temperature control and a maximumminimum highlow temperature readout .
the protective environment shall be approved by the area materials engineer prior to beginning any concrete placement .
num .
probing method for determining concrete pavement thickness .
the engineer will select using aldotnum a minimum of two longitudinal locations within the pavement testing unit to be measured .
the engineer will then select using aldotnum two transverse locations within the width of the pavement at each of the longitudinal locations selected .
the contractor shall use a probing device to determine the concrete thickness of the freshly placed concrete at each of the locations selected .
the thickness measurements shall be recorded to the nearest  of an inch .
the two measurements at each longitudinal location constitute one set .
the contractor shall submit the record of all reading as well as the exact location including the station number and offset of each reading to the engineer by the end of the day .
the average of all the measurements within a pavement testing unit will be used by the engineer to determine the thickness of the pavement testing unit .
num .
verification of contractors determination of concrete pavement thickness .
the department will use the magnetic imaging technology mit scantnum to verify the contractors measurements of the concrete pavement thickness .
the engineer will set targets within one foot from the location of the contractors measurements .
the engineer will take two readings at each target location .
the average of all the mit scantnum readings within a pavement testing unit will be used by the engineer to verify the thickness of the pavement testing unit .
the engineer will record the station number and offset of the location the thickness measurements are taken .
if the contractors average thickness of the pavement testing unit varies from the verification thickness done by the department by num inches a referee core sampled in accordance with aashto t num will be extracted at a location selected using aldotnum from all the measured points .
the core will be measured by the department for thickness in section num portland cement concrete pavement num accordance to aashto t num .
if the referee core thickness agrees with the departments verification result the contractor will bear the cost of coring and repairing of the core hole .
if the referee core thickness agrees with the contractors result the department will bear the cost of coring and repairing of the core hole .
all voids resulting from coring operations shall be filled and consolidated with the same concrete mixture used during paving .
voids shall be filled on the same day that the cores are extracted using the same concrete mixture used for paving .
num construction requirements .
a placement of concrete .
concrete shall be placed in one lift of concrete .
separate lifts of concrete will not be allowed .
b equipment .
num .
certification of concrete batch plants .
all concrete batching plants shall be certified by the national ready mix concrete association nrmca to be in conformance with the nrmca plant certification checklist .
the concrete producer shall submit proof of nrmca certification to the area materials engineer prior to any batching of concrete .
all concrete batching plants used in the production of concrete pavement for the department shall be on list inum portland cement concrete producers in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
concrete producers who request that their concrete batching plants be placed on list inum shall meet the requirements outlined in aldotnum general information concerning materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
num .
scales .
the scales for determining the weight mass of aggregates mineral admixtures and cement shall be an integral unit of the batching plant and meeting the requirements of subarticle numh .
num .
concrete mixers .
concrete may be mixed at the site of construction or at a central point .
each mixer shall have attached to it in a prominent place a manufacturers plate showing the capacity of the drum in terms of volume of mixed concrete and the speed of rotation of the mixing drum or blades for both mixing and agitation .
an automatic graduated measuring device accurate within three percentshall be provided at the mixer for measuring each amount of airentraining agent and other chemical admixtures to be added to each concrete batch requiring such admixture .
mixers shall be equipped with an approved device for accurately measuring water within num of the reading indicated .
the requirements given in subarticle numb apply for concrete transit mixers .
num .
spreading and finishing equipment .
minimum spreading and finishing equipment shall consist of a mechanical spreader andor strikeoff screed a finishing machine vibrators for full width vibration of the paving slab smoothing float num foot straightedge floats burlap drags and curing equipment .
num .
vibration equipment .
vibration equipment shall be used to vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the pavement without coming in contact with steel bars other internal materials and the underlying layer .
the vibration equipment shall be capable of being stopped when the vibration equipment is not moving along the pavement .
internal spud or tube and surface pan vibrators shall be used .
spud or tube vibrators shall operate at a frequency between num to num vibrations per minute .
pan vibrators shall operate at a frequency between num to num vibrations per minute .
num .
concrete saws .
equipment shall be provided for the sawing of joints .
an adequate number of saws shall be utilized to complete the sawing within time to prevent cracking of the concrete .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num num .
forms .
forms shall be substantial enough in size and strength to allow the proper placement and finishing of the concrete .
num .
lighting .
lighting shall be in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa .
c precipitation and temperature .
num .
precipitation .
pavement damaged by rain or hail shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans without additional compensation .
num .
temperature .
a .
range of acceptable concrete temperature for placement .
the temperature of the concrete at the time of placement and spreading shall not be less than num f or more than num f .
b .
cold weather operations .
concrete shall not be placed on an underlying surface that is colder than num f. when concrete is placed during seasons when there is a probability of ambient temperatures lower than num f heating equipment and materials shall be available to protect the concrete from the cold weather .
the heating equipment and materials shall be used to enclose the uncured concrete and keep the air temperature inside the enclosure within the allowable ranges of temperature for the minimum required amount of time .
if there is a possibility that ambient temperatures will be below num f during the first three days after placement of concrete the concrete shall be protected from cold temperatures by keeping the surface at a temperature above num f for the first num hours after placement and above num f for an additional num hours .
after these periods of time the protective covering shall remain in place until the temperature inside the protective covering reaches that of the surrounding atmosphere .
the contractor shall furnish two continuous temperature reading thermometers for the measurement of the concrete surface temperature .
the measurements shall me made as directed by the engineer .
the aggregates and mixing water shall not be heated to a temperature in excess of num f. aggregates from frozen stockpiles shall not be incorporated into the mix .
materials entering the mixer shall be free from ice snow and frozen lumps .
salts chemicals or other materials shall not be incorporated in the concrete to prevent freezing .
care shall be taken to heat all materials uniformly and avoid hot spots that will burn or overheat the materials .
c. hot weather operations .
if there is a possibility that ambient temperatures will be above num f during the placement of concrete an approved retarder admixture shall be used in the concrete mixture .
cooling of the mixing water andor aggregates or placing the concrete during the cooler part of the day may be allowed to keep the concrete below the maximum allowable temperature .
in no instance shall a concrete mixture be placed when the temperature of the concrete is above num f num c. concrete shall not be placed against any surface in particular steel surfaces when the temperature of that surface is greater than num f .
surface watering may be used to cool the surface that the concrete will be placed on if it is at or above num f but standing water will not be allowed at the time of concrete placement .
concrete placement will only be allowed at night if the temperature of the concrete is above num f and can not be lowered or if the temperature of the surface that the concrete will be placed on is above num f and can not be lowered .
d preconditioning of underlying layer prior to placement of concrete .
all high areas of the layer under the concrete shall be corrected before the concrete is placed .
low areas shall be filled with material integral with the underlying layer hma or concrete pavement .
the underlying layer shall be thoroughly wetted the previous night but not less than six hours prior to placing of the concrete .
the underlying layer shall be sprinkled just before the placement section num portland cement concrete pavement num of the concrete so as to be uniformly moist .
the method of sprinkling shall not result in mud or pools of water .
e fixed forms .
fixed forms shall not be used for mainline pavement including shoulders when the total amount of concrete pavement required to be placed is greater than num square yards .
fixed forms shall be used in areas where slip form pavers can not be used such as areas with a sharp radius and at the transition areas of ramps .
f slip form method .
num .
allowable and required use of slip form method .
the slip form method shall be used when the total amount of concrete pavement required to be placed is greater than num square yards .
the slip form method may be used instead of fixed forms when the total amount of concrete pavement required to be placed is less than num square yards .
num .
slip form paver .
the slip form paver shall be designed to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the paver .
concrete shall be placed so that only minor hand finishing will be necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous concrete pavement .
the paver shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
the vibration shall be accomplished with the required vibration equipment .
the sliding forms shall be rigidly held together laterally to prevent spreading of the forms and shall trail behind the paver for such a distance that no appreciable slumping of the concrete will occur .
the paver shall be operated with a continuous forward movement .
all operations of mixing delivery and spreading concrete shall be coordinated as to provide uniform progress with stopping and starting of the paver held to a minimum .
if for any reason it is necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver the vibratory and tamping elements shall also be stopped immediately .
all tractive force applied to move the paver shall be operated by controls on the paver .
num .
edge slump .
the edge slump shall be measured within an area that is num inches from the longitudinal edges of each pavement slab .
the edge of the finished surface shall not vary more than num of an inch from a num foot straightedge placed perpendicular at a right angle to the edge of the outside of the pavement slab or to the edge of a pavement slab that is adjacent to another pavement slab .
pavements slabs where the edge slump is excess of the allowable amount num inch shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans without additional compensation .
g placing concrete .
num .
water evaporation rate during placement .
prior to and during the placement of concrete the water evaporation rate shall be determined in accordance with the requirements given in section num for bridge deck slabs .
preventive action shall be taken to eliminate plastic shrinkage cracking in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num .
reduction of evaporation during the screeding operations .
if the evaporation rate measured in accordance with the requirements given in section num exceeds the maximum allowable rate continuous fogging or an evaporation barrier material monomolecular film shall be used to maintain moisture on the surface of the pavement .
continuous fogging or an evaporation barrier shall be applied to the pavement no further than five feet behind the screeding operations .
if fogging is used a continuous fog or mist spray shall be maintained until the curing procedures begin .
intermittent fogging is not acceptable if there is drying of the concrete surface .
if water begins to pond on the pavement the contractor shall adjust the rate of fogging to minimize the ponding of water .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num if an evaporation barrier material is used it shall be applied immediately behind the screeding operation .
the entire top portion of the concrete slab shall be covered with a uniform film of the barrier material .
the rate of application and the means of application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall submit the manufacturers recommended application procedures to the engineer at least num days prior to the placement .
acceptable evaporation barrier products will be listed on the plans .
num .
concrete in adjacent slabs .
where concrete is placed adjacent to a previously placed concrete pavement the previously placed pavement shall have attained a compressive strength of at least num psi as determined by tests of standard specimens cured under the same climatic and moisture conditions as the concrete pavement unless other means of determining the compressive strength are allowed by the engineer .
num .
vibrators .
vibrators shall not come in contact with a joint assembly the layer under the concrete or forms .
single unit vibrators shall be used along the side forms joints and at other locations not thoroughly vibrated by the vibrator assembly .
in no case shall the vibrator be operated longer than num seconds in any one location .
carriage mounted vibrators shall be equipped to cut off automatically when the vibrator carriage stops .
vibration shall be completed ahead of the finishing machine screed .
h expansion joints .
expansion joint assemblies shall be installed in proper sequence ahead of placement of concrete .
concrete shall be deposited as near to an expansion joint as possible without disturbing it .
i placement of steel .
care shall be taken before and during paving operations to insure that steel including reinforcing steel dowels and tie bars will stay within the plan tolerances after the finishing operations .
j joints .
num .
establishing location of joints .
the contractor shall be responsible for marking locations of joint steel in advance of placement of concrete so that sawed joints will be properly located over dowels and tie bars .
num .
sawing concrete for joint construction .
all joints except expansion joints shall be prepared by sawing .
sawing shall be done with a concrete saw equipped with a guide frame or other approved device that will assure cutting of the joint within num of an inch of the designated alignment and to the required joint size shown on the plans .
all vertical joints shall be constructed perpendicular to the pavement surface .
because of the importance of sawing the joints at the proper location and at the proper time early sawing is imperative .
all uncontrolled cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans without additional compensation from the department .
num .
types of required joints .
joints shall be constructed of the type dimensions lengths arrangement spacing and at the locations shown on the plan .
a joint shall be a designed separation formed by material extending full depth of the slab or a saw cut extending part way through the slab .
a contraction joint is a transverse joint located at regular intervals in a slab to control transverse cracking or at other designated sites to control longitudinal cracking .
an expansion joint is one providing space for expansion of the slab without damage .
for clarity all expansion joints including those in intersections at any angle are regarded as transverse joints .
a construction joint is one made necessary by interruption of more than num minutes in continuous placing of concrete including a transverse joint placed at the end of a days operation or at the point of a breakdown or a longitudinal joint where adjacent lanes are constructed at different times .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num longitudinal joints shall be constructed coincident with or parallel to the pavement centerline .
transverse joints shall be constructed as shown on the plans .
num .
tie bars for longitudinal joints .
a .
tie bar location and strength .
deformed steel tie bars shall be placed perpendicular across the longitudinal joints at the location and at the spacing shown on the plans .
the required strength of the tie bars will be shown on the plans .
b .
tie bars in fixed forms .
when using the fixed form method the use of a keyway with a sectional tie bar or a straight tie bar bent against the form of the first slab constructed is acceptable .
c. tie bars in slip form paving .
when using the slipform method the tie bars shall be inserted in the fresh concrete or anchored in appropriately sized holes drilled into the previously placed pavement .
drilled holes shall not be greater than num inch larger than the diameter of the tie bar .
drilling of holes will not be allowed until the concrete has obtained a compressive strength of num psi or is seven days old .
tie bars shall be anchored in the drilled holes with an approved adhesive material meeting the requirements given in article num .
tie bars shall meet a num pound minimum pullout requirement .
the department will perform the pullout tests in accordance with aldotnum test method for pull out on steel tie bars secured in concrete with epoxy .
the contractor shall supply the equipment necessary to perform the pullout test .
the equipment shall be suitable for the performance of the tests at the frequency specified in section num of the acceptance sampling and testing schedule of the testing manual .
there will be no direct payment for the pullout test equipment furnished by the contractor for use by the department .
num .
weakened plane joint for adjacent lanes constructed simultaneously .
a weakened plane joint shall be constructed by sawing the concrete when adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed at the same time by the simultaneous placement of concrete .
the requirements for the size and sealing of the weakened plane joint are shown on the plans .
the joint shall be sealed with an approved joint sealer .
num .
dowel bars for transverse joints .
dowel bars shall be installed as shown on the plans .
the dowel bars shall be installed with a supporting assembly capable of rigidly maintaining the dowel bars in the proper horizontal and vertical alignment during and after the concrete placing and finishing operations .
dowel bars shall have the ends ground or dressed to eliminate any projections due to cutting operations .
dowel bars at expansion joints shall have a cap or sleeve over the expansion length length embedded in one slab of each bar with one end of the sleeve fitting tightly around the bar and the other end closed and watertight .
the cap or sleeve shall be provided with an expansion space not less than the width of the joint being constructed .
num .
transverse expansion joints .
the transverse expansion joints shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
dowels and supports shall be assembled off the underlying layer and shall beplaced into position as a unit .
num .
transverse contraction joints .
transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by sawing grooves in the surface of the pavement in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
all contraction joints shall be sealed as shown on the plans .
num .
transverse construction joints .
transverse construction joints shall be constructed when there is an interruption of more than num minutes in the concreting operations .
a transverse construction joint shall not be constructed within num feet of an expansion or contraction joint .
if sufficient concrete has not been mixed at the time of interruption to form a slab at least num feet long the excess concrete shall be removed back to the last preceding joint .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num the construction joint shall be formed by placing the concrete against a header board set so as to form a joint at right angles to the pavement centerline vertically and horizontally .
the board shall be shaped to the cross slope of the pavement and shall be sufficiently rigid to prevent bending or movement during finishing operations .
k surface smoothness and cross slope .
num .
measurement of surface smoothness and cross slope surface smoothness shall be checked by the use of straightedges levels and strings .
the contractor shall furnish levels straightedges string and the personnel to make and record measurements as directed by the engineer .
num .
surface smoothness .
surface smoothness tests shall be made continuously during and after concrete placement so that irregularities may be reduced while the concrete is still workable .
the finished surface shall not vary more than num of an inch from a num foot straightedge placed perpendicular at a right angle to the centerline of the roadway anywhere on the surface .
the surface shall not vary more than num of an inch from a num foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline anywhere on the surface .
the finished surface shall not vary more than num of an inch in any num foot section from a taut string applied parallel to the surface .
the surface shall be checked num foot inside of the edges of pavement at the centerline and at other points designated by the engineer .
the tolerance from the designated grade shall not exceed plus or minus num of an inch in num feet .
num .
cross slope .
the required cross slope shall not vary by more than num from the required slope in any num foot distance over which the slope is measured .
if for example a num slope is required the measured cross slope shall not be greater than num or less than num .
pavement that is not within the required cross slope tolerance shall be replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans without extra compensation .
l finishing .
num .
sequence of finishing requirements .
after the concrete has been placed consolidated and struck off the finishing floating surface corrections texturing and edging shall be performed .
num .
transverse finishing .
a finishing machine shall be used to screed the surface of the concrete to a uniform texture and to the required grade and cross slope .
num .
float finish .
after transverse finishing further finishing shall be performed by the means of a float .
num .
preliminary straightedging and surface correction .
after the finishing has been completed and the excess water removed but while the concrete is still workable the surface of the concrete shall be tested by the contractor with an accurate num foot floating straightedge .
depressions in the surface shall be immediately filled with freshly mixed concrete struck off consolidated and refinished .
high areas shall be cut down and refinished .
the surface across joints shall meet the requirements for smoothness .
straightedge testing and surface correction shall continue until the entire surface is found to conform to the straightedge and the slab conforms to the required grade and cross slope .
num .
surface texture .
the pavement surface shall be finished with a burlap drag .
the burlap drag finish shall consist of dragging longitudinally along the full width of the pavement with a seamless strip of damp burlap or cotton fabric which will produce a gritty texture.the drag shall be maintained in such condition that the resultant surface is of uniform appearance .
drags shall be maintained clean and free from encrusted mortar .
drags which can not be cleaned shall be discarded .
immediately after the pavement has been finished by the burlap drag the surface shall be grooved .
grooving shall be produced by mechanical equipment designed for grooving section num portland cement concrete pavement num plastic concrete utilizing rectangular shaped spring steel tines of uniform length that will produce clean cut transverse grooves in the hardened surface .
the tines shall be spaced at intervals of at least num of an inch apart up to a maximum spacing of  of an inch .
the tines shall produce grooves in the hardened surface which are from num to num of an inch in width and from num to num of an inch in depth .
the completed grooved surface finish shall meet the groove depth requirements given in aldotnum method of test for measuring the depth of grooves in concrete pavements and bridge decks with a tire tread depth gauge and all straightedge requirements .
any grooved surface damaged or destroyed may be restored if the concrete is still plastic otherwise it shall be regrooved after the concrete has obtained its designed strength .
grooving after the concrete has hardened shall be done by equipment designed specifically for grooving pavements .
m curing .
num .
duration of curing .
immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and as soon as marring of concrete will not occur the entire pavement surface shall be cured for a minimum period of num hours .
num .
optional curing methods .
the contractor shall cure the concrete by either placing an impervious membrane or by moist curing .
the curing method chosen by the contractor shall be sufficient to prevent plastic shrinkage cracking .
a. curing by using an impervious membrane .
the impervious membrane shall meet the requirements given in section num .
the impervious membrane material shall be applied in accordance with the requirements given in section num except that the rate of application shall be a minimum of num gallon per num square feet of surface area or a greater rate if recommended by the manufacturer .
the impervious membrane material shall be applied under pressure by mechanical sprayers .
spraying equipment shall be of the fully atomizing type equipped with a tank agitator .
at the time of use the compound shall be thoroughly mixed .
during application the compound shall be stirred continuously by mechanical methods .
hand spraying of areas of irregular widths or shapes and on surfaces exposed by form removal will be permitted .
when hand spraying is used the membrane material shall be applied in two applications .
the impervious membrane shall not be applied to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
b. moist curing moist curing shall be either by fog spraying or by saturated burlap or burlap sheeting in accordance with the following .
num .
fog spraying fog sprayingshall be done with nozzles or sprinklers designed for this purpose .
when using this method the contractor shall maintain a complete and continuous moist condition of the concrete surface .
intermittent fog spraying is not acceptable .
care shall be taken that erosion of the surface does not occur .
num .
burlap or burlap sheeting saturated burlap or saturated whiteburlappolyethylene sheeting may be used for curing .
the burlap and whiteburlappolyethylene sheeting shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
these curing materials shall be clean and free from any injurious substances that can cause deleterious effects to the concrete or cause discoloration .
the burlap and burlap sheeting shall be completely saturated before being placed on the concrete and shall be maintained in that condition for the entire curing period .
all edges of burlap and burlap sheeting shall extend at least num inches beyond the concrete surface .
where two individual sheets join their edges shall overlap at least num inches .
all edges and overlaps shall be secured to ensure that the concrete surface is completely covered during the entire curing period .
the burlap material shall be kept in contact with section num portland cement concrete pavement num the concrete surface at all times .
alternate cycles of wetting and drying will not be allowed .
n sealing joints .
before the pavement is opened to traffic and as early as is feasible all joints both longitudinal and transverse shall be filled with joint sealing material of a type specified by the plans .
the joint faces shall be clean and surface dry when the seal is applied .
suitable tools for installing the seal to the proper depth and dimensions shall be used .
the joints to be sealed with hot poured sealants or cold poured sealants shall be sealed as outlined in section num .
preformed elastomeric joint seals shall be installed in accordance with the manufactured recommendations and the details shown on the plans .
o removal of forms .
forms shall not be removed from freshly placed concrete until it has set for at least num hours except auxiliary forms used temporarily in widened areas .
they shall be removed carefully so as to avoid damage to the pavement .
after the forms have been removed the ends of all joints shall be cleaned after which the sides of the slab shall be covered with earth or other approved curing agent .
as soon as the side forms have been removed any defective work shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
any area or section so removed shall be not less than num feet in length and not less than the full width of the lane involved .
if the area to be removed extends to a point less than num feet num m from a joint it shall be extended on to the joint .
p reinforced bridge end slabs .
special pavement slabs reinforced as shown on the plans shall be constructed adjacent to bridges using concrete of the same type and proportions that are in the adjoining concrete pavement .
no direct payment will be made for reinforcing steel used in the bridge end slabs .
the end slabs shall be constructed in the same manner required for the construction of concrete pavement .
where the bridge end slab will be covered with a bituminous overlay the final screeding of the surface of the concrete shall be done by any means that will leave a slightly roughened surface .
where the bridge end slab will not have a bituminous overlay the final screeding of the surface of the concrete shall be done with a mechanical longitudinal screed and the hardened surface of the concrete shall be machine grooved in accordance with the requirements given for grooving the surface of concrete bridge decks .
q protection of pavement .
the contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances against both public traffic and traffic caused by his own employees and agents .
any material deposited on the pavement considered detrimental to the surface shall be removed immediately .
this requirement shall include erection and maintenance of warning signs lights watchmen to direct traffic pavement bridges or crossovers etc .
as needed or directed by the engineer .
r opening pavement to traffic .
the contractor shall protect the concrete pavement from vehicular traffic during the curing period .
completed portions of the concrete pavement may be opened tolight construction traffic only small pickup trucks with four wheels and cars when the compressive strength of the concrete pavement reaches num psi but not earlier than num hours .
traffic shall not be parked on the pavement during the curing period and any curing compound andor moisture removed by the traffic tires shall be replaced immediately .
the contractor may utilize maturity meter measurements for the determination of the compressive strength of the concrete .
the compressive strength required for opening the pavement to traffic shall be determined by tests of standard concrete cylinders cured under the same climatic and moisture conditions as the slab unless maturity meters are used .
the pavement may be opened to unrestricted traffic after num days if the numday compressive strength has been achieved and the engineer has accepted the pavement without restriction .
if the ambient temperature drops below num f the period of time that the temperature is below num f will be added to the minimum time to opening .
any part of the pavement damaged by traffic or other causes prior to its final acceptance shall be repaired or replaced at no additional cost to the department in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num num smoothness requirements .
a testing device .
num .
description .
the testing device shall be an inertial profiler that satisfies the requirements of aldot num evaluating pavement profiles including the portable storage devices referenced herein .
portable storage devices containing profile measurements shall become the property of the department at the time the measurements are taken .
b .
equipment requirements .
the inertial profiler shall be a certified noncontact laserbased device capable of simultaneously measuring both wheelpaths meeting all the requirements of aldotnum .
portable storage devices for the inertial profiler shall be furnished in sufficient quantities for all calibration test runs and actual tests deemed necessary by the engineer .
unless approved in advance by the engineer all portable storage devices provided by the contractor will take the form of commonly available numg usb flash drives .
b testing procedure .
num .
description .
smoothness testing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements given in aldot num .
the contractor shall furnish the necessary certified personnel to operate the inertial profiler .
the smoothness test shall be performed as soon as practical after the pavement hardens sufficiently to prevent damage to the surface finish but no later than the next work day after placement of the concrete unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
the smoothness test is considered a part of the paving operation and will be performed immediately in the proper sequence in a satisfactory manner even to the exclusion of other work .
smoothness testing shall be performed and reported daily until the contractor demonstrates the ability to achieve a mean roughness index mri value of less than num inmile .
if the contractor demonstrates the ability to achieve a mri value of less than num inmile then the contractor may elect to perform and report the smoothness testing at a frequency he determines but not to exceed num working days production .
num .
smoothness requirements .
the results of the inertial profiler tests will be evaluated by department personnel as outlined in aldotnum .
if a mean roughness index mri value of num inches per mile num mkm is exceeded in any test section of any daily paving operation the paving operation will be suspended as soon as possible after results of the unacceptable test section are obtained .
the paving will not be allowed to resume until corrective action is taken by the contractor .
the contractor will be allowed to diamond grind any test section whose mean roughness index exceeds num inches per mile .
all diamond grinding shall be performed with no additional compensation from the department .
diamond grinding may be separate locations of grinding or continuous grinding within a test section .
diamond grinding at any location shall be for the full width of the pavement test section .
if diamond grinding is performed the measurement of pavement thickness for acceptance and payment will be made after diamond grinding is completed .
the determination of the pavement thickness will be by coring a location determined by the engineer using aldotnum .
the contractor will be responsible for cost of coring and repairing the core hole .
all voids resulting from coring operations shall be filled and consolidated with the same concrete mixture used during paving .
voids shall be filled on the same day that the cores are extracted using the same concrete mixture used for paving .
price adjustments will be made for smoothness after the diamond grinding is completed .
all test sections of pavement where the mean roughness index remains greater than num inches per mileshall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans by the contractor without additional compensation .
the price adjustments for smoothness are given in subarticle numb .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num num tolerance in pavement thickness .
pavement main roadway shoulders intersections entrances crossovers ramps etc .
thicknesses will be checked by the department for compliance with required thickness by measuringthe length of cores or by the use of mit scan tnum device .
pavement with deficient thickness will be paid for on an adjusted unit price as described in subarticle numb .
thickness measurements shall be made after all operations if applicable have been performed to improve smoothness .
pavement that is deficient from the required thickness by more than num inches shall be replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans at no cost to the department .
num acceptance of concrete based on compressive strength .
concrete cylinders num inches x num inches in size will be made by the department from randomly selected concrete batches in each pavement testing unit as designated by the engineer .
the compressive strength shall be the average of two cylinder test results .
if the average compressive strength of the cylinders is equal to or greater than num of the required numday compressive strength the concrete will be accepted with no price reduction .
if the average compressive strength of the cylinders is num or greater but less than num of the required numday compressive strength a price adjustment will be applied to the applicable pay item for the increment of pavement represented by the low break .
the formula for the determination of the price adjustment is given in subarticle numb .
if the average compressive strength of the cylinders is less than num of the required strength the concrete pavement shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the details shown on the plans without additional compensation .
num method of measurement .
the amount of concrete pavement to be paid for under this section shall be the number of square yards square meters of pavement completed and accepted measured in place and calculated to the nearest square yard square meter .
the width will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section of the plans plus additional widening where called for or directed by the engineer in writing .
the width will be the outside to outside measurement of the pavement including any area covered by integral curb or concrete median strip .
the length will be measured along the surface of the centerline .
reinforced concrete bridge end slabs will be measured in square yards square meters and will be paid for separately .
the number of profilographs measured for payment will be the actual number of units ordered and accepted .
num basis of payment price adjustments and pavement replacement .
a general .
the square yardage square meters of concrete pavement and bridge end slab measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including any reinforcing steel and supports anchor concrete sleeper slab concrete structural steel except bridge joint armor plates dowels and all other joint material any additives and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals required to complete the work including the finishing grooving or tining of the surface .
no additional payment over the contract unit bid price will be made for any pavement which has an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
integral curb measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter which shall be payment in full for all materials and work required in completing the item .
the ordered and accepted profilographs measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for furnishing the unit and includes all equipment tools labor calibration maintenance services supplies chart paper and incidentals necessary to complete these items of work .
b price adjustments and deficiencies requiring pavement replacement .
num .
general .
the descriptions of mainline pavement testing unit and nonmainline pavement testing unit are given in numhnum and numhnum respectively .
section num portland cement concrete pavement num mainline pavement testing unitswill be designated for acceptance and payment based on smoothness concrete strength and pavement thickness .
nonmainline pavement testing units will be designated for acceptance and payment based on concrete strength and pavement thickness .
num .
price adjustment based on smoothness .
the mean roughness index shall be measured as noted in subarticle numb .
when the mri is more than num inches per mile num mkm per section a unit price reduction will be assessed .
when the mri is less than num inches per mile num mkm per section a unit price increase will be added .
the price adjustments are given in table num .
table i mean roughness index inchesmilesection meterskilometersection contract price adjustment percent of pavement unit bid price under num under num num mri num num mri num num to less than num num to less than num num num thru num num thru num num mri num num mri num over num over num unacceptable where diamond grinding is performed to bring the mean roughness index to num inches per mile or less payment for the test section will be a maximum of num of the contract price .
num .
price adjustment based on pavement thickness .
where the thickness of pavement measured as described in article num is deficient from the required thickness payment will be made at an adjusted price as shown in the following table .
price adjustment for deficiency in pavement thickness deficiency in pavement thickness price adjustment greater than num to less than or equal to num num greater than num to less than or equal to num num greater than num to less than or equal to num num greater than num to less than or equal to num num greater than num to less than or equal to num num greater than num replace pavement testing unit num .
price adjustment based on compressive strength .
payment for concrete pavement will be adjusted based on compressive strength as described in article num .
the price adjustment shall be determined from the following formula price adjustment payment num x num fc fc avg num fc fc required numday compressive strength psi mpa as designated from the correlation of the compressive strength with the required flexural strength fc avg average compressive strength of test cylinders psi mpa the price reduction shall be rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent .
num .
range of price adjustments and assessment of combined price adjustments .
the range of price adjustment based on smoothness is num to num .
the range of price adjustment based on pavement thickness is num to num .
the range of price adjustment based on compressive strength shall be num to num .
if more than one price adjustment is required the product of the price adjustments percentage price adjustments multiplied together will be applied to the contract price for the pavement .
section num slabjacking of portland cement concrete pavement num num .
deficiencies requiring pavement replacement .
the pavement shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation if the following price adjustments occur the mean roughness index is greater than num inches per mile per section the deficiency in pavement thickness exceeds num inches the compressive strength is less than num of the required compressive strength the product of the price adjustments for pavement thickness and compressive strength in the pavement is less than num .
other conditions of deficiency may result in a requirement that the pavement must be removed and replaced without additional compensation .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa cement concrete pavement ___ inches mm thick per square yard square meter numb reinforced cement concrete bridge end slab per square yard square meter numc integral curb per linear foot meter nume profilograph per each numf state furnished profilograph per each numg contractor retained profilograph per each plain reinforced plain high early strength reinforced high early strength continuous reinforced section num slabjacking of portland cement concrete pavement num description .
the work covered by this section consists of the raising and leveling of concrete pavements that have settled by the injection of grout under the pavement using hydraulic pressure to raise the pavement to its designated grade .
due to the variations in quantities that can be experienced in this type work the quantities for the items in this section can not be accurately determined before the work is done therefore the items in this section shall be excluded from those items which may have their unit price adjusted as allowed by subarticle numa .
at any time during the life of the project should any process or work herein be deemed ineffective or unnecessary by the engineer the engineer may order any andor all work under this section stopped reduced andor eliminated .
in such case the contractor will be paid for all work ordered and performed .
no claim will be considered because of elimination or reduction of work under this section .
num materials .
a general .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the requirements noted in this article .
b grout .
the grout used in slabjacking shall consist of one of the mixtures shown in table i with the materials complying with the following type i or iii cement article num and num calcium chloride section num type i fly ash section num modified to waive the loss on ignition requirement water section num admixtures sections num and num limestone dust limestone dust shall be thoroughly dry free of lumps meeting the following gradation requirements section num slabjacking of portland cement concrete pavement num size passing by weight mass no .
num num m sieve num no .
num num m sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num fine sand fine sand shall comply with the appropriate requirements of section num allowing the use of manufactured sand from limestone sandstone or granite or natural silica fine sand meeting the following gradation requirements size passing by weight mass no .
num num mm sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num percent silt num num percent clay num num percent organic material num num sand shall be nonplastic as determined by aashto t num and t num .
num construction requirements .
a equipment .
the equipment for slabjacking of concrete pavement shall be that customarily used in the slabjacking of concrete pavement consisting of at least the following a .
air compressors of sufficient capacity for operating pneumatic hammers .
b .
a discharge pipe with an adequate securing device .
c. pneumatic hammers equipped with drills that will cut num inch num mm diameter or other approved diameter holes through the rigid pavement .
the equipment shall be operated in such a manner so as to prevent unnecessary damage to the slab .
d. a num foot num m min .
straightedge and such other equipment as may be necessary to insure that the jacked slabs meet the alignment and surface requirements .
e. blow pipe to enlarge void area .
f. equipment for accurately measuring and proportioning by volume or weight mass the various materials composing the grout .
when volume is used the weight per cubic foot mass per cubic meter of the materials will be determined and mix proportions adjusted accordingly .
g. a batch type mixer capable of thoroughly mixing the various components of the grout .
a high speed colloidal type mixer will be required for grout mixes containing only cement and fly ash .
h. a positive action pump capable of forcing grout through a drilled hole into voids and cavities beneath the pavement slab .
the pump shall be capable of supplying adequate pressure at the end of the discharge pipe to insure filling of all voids at the required hole spacing .
a gage shall be located on the discharge side of the pump to measure the pumping pressure .
i .
a flow cone with all necessary components so that the engineer may make an accurate field determination of the consistency of the grout .
the flow cone shall conform to the dimensions and other requirements of u.s. army corps of engineers test method no .
crdcnum .
b jacking of pavement slabs .
num .
weather limitations .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer in writing all slabjacking shall be performed between the dates of april num and november num .
slabjacking operations may not be started unless the air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat is at least num f num c and rising .
slabjacking shall stop if the temperature is num f num c and falling or when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture as evidenced by standing water on the pavement or in joints or cracks .
to accelerate setting and provide early strength to mixes utilizing type i cement calcium chloride shall be used in the proportions tabulated below for respective temperature ranges .
section num slabjacking of portland cement concrete pavement num atmospheric temperature calcium chloride by weight mass of type i cement num num f num num c num num num f num num c num num num f num num c num num num f num num c num num f num c and above num when type iii cement is used num calcium chloride may be required as needed to accelerate setting in cold weather .
num .
preparation of grout mixture .
the mixtures used in slabjacking shall consist of the proportions tabulated in table i .
the consistency may be varied by the addition of water andor other additives .
the quantity by weight mass of equivalent num pure calcium chloride to be included in the mixture shall be in accordance with item num above .
the calcium chloride when required shall be thoroughly premixed in the approximate quantity of mixing water required for a predetermined batch size before combining with the other ingredients .
the consistency of the grout shall be determined by the u.s. army corps of engineers test method no .
crdcnum .
the quantity of mixing water used shall be that which will produce a grout of such consistency that the time of efflux from the flow cone will be a minimum of eighteen seconds and a maximum of twentyfive seconds for slabjacking .
after the initial introduction of a sufficient amount of water into the mixture to obtain the necessary consistency no additional water shall be added .
the grout shall be used within one and onehalf hours after introduction of water into the mixture .
dry ingredients may be added to a mixed batch only in the amounts necessary to bring a too thin mixture to the required consistency .
in this case the added dry ingredients shall be in the specified ratio .
grout which fails to meet the flow requirements specified above shall not be used in jacking operations .
a grout mixture shall be selected by the contractor from the mixtures shown in table i below .
the engineer reserves the right to specify a different mixture if the one chosen by the contractor fails to produce the desired results .
table i grout mixtures mix proportions percent by volume of dry ingredients grout type num num num num num num fine sand num num num limestone dust num num num fly ash num num num num cement num num num num num num num .
construction .
a .
general .
except as specifically outlined in these specifications the techniques involved in the slabjacking operation shall be the option of the contractor as long as the desired results are achieved .
hole drilling patterns for pavement jacking shall be determined by the contractor in the field based on conditions such as the size or length of the pavement area to be raised the elevation difference subgrade and drainage conditions location of joints and cracks and similar local circumstances .
extra holes may be required during the jacking process to apply additional pressure in a local area .
holes may be washed with water or blown with air to create a small hole from which the grout slurry can then spread .
the injection holes shall be drilled through treated base so the base may be lifted with the pavement .
before slabjacking begins at a location the engineer will furnish the contractor with the profile grade to be attained along with a nearby referenced point of elevation .
section num slabjacking of portland cement concrete pavement num the contractor shall pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within num of an inch num mm of the designated grade .
b. jacking .
during the jacking operation the discharge end of the grouting apparatus shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
continuous pressures up to num psi num mpa will be permitted .
pressures to num psi num mpa will be allowed only for short periods .
if the pavement is bonded to the subgrade brief bursts of pressure to num psi num mpa will be allowed .
after slabjacking has been completed in a hole and the discharge pipe removed the hole shall be plugged immediately with wooden plugs tapered to fit in the hole to retain the pressure of the grout and stop any waste or return flow of the mixture .
when slabjacking to the desired elevation has been accomplished the temporary plugs shall be removed and the hole filled with an approved stiff cement grout or concrete mixture .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer slabjacking operations shall cease as early as necessary to permit the grout to harden at least three hours prior to allowing traffic back on the grouted slab before first darkness .
lifting shall be done using sufficiently sized increments and change in injection locations to keep slab stresses to a minimum and to avoid cracking .
slabs which in the opinion of the engineer have been damaged by the contractors operation or lack of control such that their repair or replacement is necessitated shall be repaired or removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
c. overjacking .
any part of the pavement raised above the tolerances listed in subitem numbnum.a .
above shall if so directed by the engineer be brought to grade by grinding .
should the overjacking be greater than num foot num mm the department at its option may require removal and replacement of the pavement without cost to the department and to its satisfaction with regard to area involved method and time of replacement and materials involved .
d. radial cracks .
cracks emanating radially from the grout injection holes will be presumed to have been caused by improper injection techniques by the contractor .
for each num feet num m of such crack measured the contractors pay quantity shall be reduced by num bag of cement .
e. unanticipated and changed conditions .
should the engineer deem that continued grout injection at any specific location is no longer economically feasible he may direct the contractor to cease grout injection at that location .
the contractor will be paid at the unit bid price for the material used up to that point .
the engineer at his discretion may delete any location or may add a new location to be raised .
due to unknown conditions and the experimental nature of this type work variations of any size in the plan quantity will not be considered cause for any increase or decrease in the unit contract bid price .
num surface requirements .
after the slabjacking has been completed at a location and before cleaning and sealing of cracks the pavement surface shall be tested with a num foot num m straightedge placed on the surface parallel to the centerline of the lane at points as directed across the width of the pavement and lapping num the length of the straightedge progressing longitudinally along the pavement or with an approved rolling straightedge .
the contractor shall furnish the straightedge and personnel to operate it under the direction of the engineer .
areas showing high spots of more than num of an inch num mm but less than num of an inch num mm under the num foot num m straightedge shall be ground down with approved grinding equipment until the high spot is less than num of an inch num mm high .
if the area is more than num of an inch num mm low or num of an inch num mm high under the num foot num m straightedge the pavement in the affected area shall be repaired to the engineers satisfaction without additional compensation such repair may require removal and replacement of the affected area .
any area so removed shall not be less than num feet num m in length nor less than the full width of the lane involved .
if the area to be removed extends to a point less than num feet num m from a joint it shall be extended to the joint .
section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num num opening to traffic .
unless specifically authorized otherwise no traffic including construction equipment will be permitted on the jacked slabs until at least three hours after the grouting has ceased .
when type iii cement is used traffic will be prohibited until initial set occurs .
initial set shall be defined as num psi num mpa when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
slabs that have been removed shall be replaced the same day they are removed .
no traffic including construction equipment will be permitted on the replaced slab until at least six hours after the slab has been poured .
traffic shall be placed on grouted slabs before first darkness of the same day that the slabs were grouted traffic shall be placed on replaced slabs no later than the morning following the day the slabs were replaced .
num method of measurement .
portland cement pressure grout for slabjacking will be measured for payment by the bag num pounds num kg of portland cement used in the grout all other ingredients required in the grout will not be measured for payment .
no other work under this section will be measured for payment this includes all hole drilling and any slab repair removal replacement or grinding which may become necessary due to the slabjacking operation .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
portland cement pressure grout for slabjacking measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per bag of cement used in the grout .
this price shall be full compensation for furnishing of the grout including all ingredients for the type mix designated for mixing for pumping of the grout for all holes drilled for any and all slab repair removal replacement or grinding and all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa portland cement pressure grout for slabjacking per bag section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num description .
the work covered by this section consists of the stabilization of existing unstable concrete pavement slabs by pressure pumping of a specified grout under the slabs along with the removal and replacement of designated shattered paving slabs or sections of slabs .
the word slab in this section shall mean not only a slab or a portion of a slab in a jointed concrete pavement system but also a portion of a continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
pressure pumping of grout or subsealing of the pavement slabs is intended to stabilize the slab by filling voids and cavities under the slabs with a grout mixture that will form a hard insoluble mass .
removal and replacement of concrete pavement shall be as directed by the engineer .
cracking in concrete pavement is defined as follows hairline cracks small tight cracks which in width resemble shrinkage cracks .
no corrective repair procedure is required .
low severity cracks wider than hairline cracks with the crack opening clearly visible .
the concrete on both sides of the crack is acting with interlock between the cracked pieces limiting movement of the individual pieces .
medium severity cracks the concrete on both sides of the crack is acting with partial interlock between the cracked pieces allowing potential or actual small movement of the individual pieces .
high severity cracks the concrete on both sides of the crack is acting independently allowing unrestricted movement of the individual pieces .
section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num if the crack does not have the same severity level along the entire length the crack will be rated as the highest severity level present .
appropriate repair procedures for the various types of cracked slabs in a jointed pavement are as follows low severity cracking will not require the removal of pavement .
these cracks will be routed and sealed under item numa .
medium severity cracking will require the removal and replacement of at least a portion of the concrete slab .
the entire slab is to be removed and replaced if broken into four or more pieces by at least medium severity cracks .
high severity cracking will require the removal and replacement of at least a portion of the concrete slab .
the entire slab is to be removed and replaced if it is broken into three or more pieces of high severity cracks .
due to the variations in quantities that can be experienced in this type work the quantities for the items in this section can not be accurately determined before the work is done therefore the items in this section shall be excluded from those items which may have their unit price adjusted as allowed by subarticle numa .
at any time during the life of the project should any process or work herein be deemed ineffective or unnecessary by the engineer the engineer may order any andor all work under this section stopped reduced andor eliminated .
in such case the contractor will be paid for all work ordered and performed .
no claim will be considered because of elimination or reduction of work under this section .
num materials .
a general .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the requirements noted in this article .
b grout .
the grout used in pressure grouting shall consist of one of the mixtures shown in table i with the materials complying with the following type i or iii cement articles num and num calcium chloride section num type i fly ash section num modified to waive the loss on ignition requirement water section num admixtures section num and num limestone dust limestone dust shall be thoroughly dry free of lumps meeting the following gradation requirements size passing by weight mass no .
num num m sieve num no .
num num m sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num fine sand fine sand shall comply with the appropriate requirements of section num allowing the use of manufactured sand from limestone sandstone or granite or natural silica fine sand meeting the following gradation requirements size passing by weight mass no .
num num mm sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num percent silt num num percent clay num num percent organic material num num sand shall be nonplastic as determined by aashto t num and t num. c concrete .
concrete for portland cement concrete pavement replacement shall meet the requirements of section num utilizing either type iii cement or type i cement containing a nonchloride section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num accelerator .
the use of an accelerator will not be required when the ambient air temperature is above num f num c. d adhesives .
adhesives furnished for anchoring tie bars and dowel bars shall meet the requirements of article num .
num construction requirements .
a equipment .
num .
equipment for pressure grouting .
the equipment for pressure grouting of concrete pavement shall be that customarily used in the pressure grouting of earthen embankments or in mudjacking of concrete pavement consisting of at least the following a .
air compressors of sufficient capacity for operating pneumatic hammers .
b .
a discharge pipe with an adequate securing device .
c. pneumatic hammers equipped with drills that will cut num inch num mm diameter or other approved diameter holes through the rigid pavement .
the equipment shall be operated in such a manner so as to prevent unnecessary damage to the slab .
d. a portable gage apparatus which operates from the shoulder and is capable of monitoring slab movement during grouting of holes near the pavement edge .
dial gages with at least num inch num mm of travel arm and capable of detecting num of an inch num m of movement shall be placed within num foot num mm of the hole being grouted and num foot num mm outside the edge of paving .
the dial gage measuring movement within num foot num mm of the hole being grouted shall have an arm length of at least num feet num m. the base of the support for the gage apparatus shall be a minimum of num feet num m outside the edge of paving during the monitoring of movement and shall be moved along the shoulder during the grouting of holes along the pavement edge .
an engineers level furnished and operated by the department will be used periodically throughout the day to supplement the gage apparatus to monitor slab movement .
alternate gage apparatus setups may be used if requested in writing by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
e. blow pipe to enlarge void area .
f. equipment for accurately measuring and proportioning by volume or weight mass the various materials composing the grout .
when volume is used the weight per cubic foot mass per cubic meter of the materials will be determined and mix proportions adjusted accordingly .
g. a batch type mixer capable of thoroughly mixing the various components of the grout .
a high speed colloidal type mixer will be required for grout mixes containing only cement and fly ash .
h. a positive action pump capable of forcing grout through a drilled hole into voids and cavities beneath the pavement slab .
the pump shall be capable of supplying adequate pressure at the end of the discharge pipe to insure filling of all voids at the required hole spacing .
a gage shall be located on the discharge side of the pump to measure the pumping pressure .
i .
a flow cone with all necessary components so that the engineer may make an accurate field determination of the consistency of the grout .
the flow cone shall conform to the dimensions and other requirements of aldotnum .
num .
equipment for removal and replacement .
the equipment for removal and replacement of the concrete pavement slabs shall be suitable for the purpose intended and approved by the engineer .
attention is directed to the operational requirements for removal and replacement in subarticle c below .
section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num b pressure grouting of pavement slabs .
num .
weather limitations .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer in writing all pressure grouting shall be performed between the dates of april num and november num .
pressure grouting operations may not be started unless the air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat is at least num f num c and rising .
pressure grouting shall stop if the temperature is num f num c and falling or when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture as evidenced by standing water on the pavement or in joints or cracks .
to accelerate setting and provide early strength to mixes utilizing type i cement calcium chloride shall be used in the proportions tabulated below for respective temperature ranges .
normal traffic flow may be resumed three hours after grouting .
atmospheric temperature calcium chloride by weight mass of type i cement num num f num num c num num num f num num c num num num f num num c num num num f num num c num num f num c and above num when type iii cement is used num calcium chloride may be required as needed to accelerate setting in cold weather .
grouted slabs may be opened to traffic in accordance with subarticle numd .
num .
preparation of grout mixture .
the mixtures used in pressure grouting shall consist of the proportions tabulated in table i .
the consistency may be varied by the addition of water andor other additives .
the quantity by weight mass of equivalent num pure calcium chloride to be included in the mixture shall be in accordance with item num above .
the calcium chloride when required shall be thoroughly premixed in the approximate quantity of mixing water required for a predetermined batch size before combining with the other ingredients .
the consistency of the grout shall be determined in accordance with aldotnum .
the quantity of mixing water used shall be that which will produce a grout of such consistency that the time of efflux from the flow cone will be a minimum of num seconds and a maximum of num seconds for undersealing .
after the initial introduction of a sufficient amount of water into the mixture to obtain the necessary consistency no additional water shall be added .
the grout shall be used within num minutes after introduction of water into the mixture .
dry ingredients may be added to a mixed batch only in the amounts necessary to bring a too thin mixture to the required consistency .
in this case the added dry ingredients shall be in the specified ratio .
grout which fails to meet the flow requirements specified above shall not be used in grouting operations .
a grout mixture shall be selected by the contractor from the mixtures shown in table i below .
the engineer reserves the right to specify a different mixture if the one chosen by the contractor fails to produce the desired results .
table i grout mixtures mix proportions percent by volume of dry ingredients grout type num num num num num num fine sand num num num limestone dust num num num fly ash num num num num cement num num num num num num num .
construction .
selected slabs designated by the department for pressure grouting shall be drilled as indicated on the plans or designated by the engineer .
for holes nearest the edges of the slab the joints or a major crack a maximum of num inches num mm from the precise marked location is considered to be reasonable .
for other holes a maximum num inch num mm section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num tolerance is considered to be reasonable .
should it become necessary or desirable to drill holes at locations other than those shown on the plans such holes shall be drilled only as approved by the engineer .
in no instance shall holes be drilled in the wheel paths of a lane .
the drills shall be rotated to avoid cracking the pavement and to provide satisfactory holes of the proper diameter for effective operations in pressure grouting .
when drilling holes the drills shall be held as nearly perpendicular to the pavement surface as possible .
holes which can not be satisfactorily used in pressure grouting shall be filled with grout and not measured for pay new holes shall be drilled .
after the holes are drilled and just prior to pressure grouting a high pressure air pipe may be required to clean the hole if deemed necessary by the engineer to facilitate introduction of the grout .
after the holes are cleaned the discharge hose on the pressure grout pump shall be connected to the hole in a manner that will provide adequate seal to maintain pressure past the connection .
the discharge end of the pipe shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
to fill all voids pumping of grout will be required in holes designated by the engineer .
the maximum pressure allowed during the grouting operation will be num psi num mpa .
a gage shall be located on the discharge side of the pump to measure the pumping pressure .
normally indication that grout is flowing out of an adjacent hole or joint or the edge of the slab is sufficient evidence that all cavities or voids are filled within the range of the hole being grouted and pumping in such hole shall cease .
additional evidence that grouting should cease is a rapid rise of the slab or indications of a rise of the adjacent shoulder .
a minimal lifting of the slab will be allowed but not to exceed num of an inch num mm per grouting pass .
care shall be taken not to crack slabs by differential lifting .
any slab or portion of slab or shoulder which is raised more than num of an inch num mm each grouting will require corrective action without payment by the contractor .
such corrective action shall consist of grinding or other methods approved by the engineer .
after grouting has been completed in a drill hole the discharge pipe shall be withdrawn and latent grout removed .
the hole shall not be plugged unless authorized otherwise by the construction engineer .
patching of the hole shall begin after the grout has taken an initial set .
the grout shall be removed to a minimum depth of num inches num mm below the pavement surface .
a low slump concrete mix consisting of numpart type i or type iii cement and numparts no .
num concrete sand by volume shall then be placed in the hole rodded and leveled with the pavement surface .
filled holes that later shrink below the finished surface ravel out or otherwise become damaged before project completion shall be repaired .
corrective measures shall be taken in case stooling occurs by making proper adjustment in the stiffness of the grout being used .
in case stooling does occur additional holes shall be provided as directed and a more fluid grout shall be pumped through these new holes to fill the voids between the stools .
at least num hours but no later than num days after a slab has been grouted it shall be tested for movement between the hours of num a.m. and num a.m. on cool cloudy days this time frame may be extended if approved by the engineer .
the test rolling equipment shall be rubbertired and of sufficient weight mass to give a num pounds num kn single axle load with a minimum of num pounds num kn per side a properly loaded dump truck may be used .
each slab shall be tested by making one or more passes over it with the test roller .
the rolling shall be slow enough to allow an observer to measure the movement and mark the slab if regrouting is needed .
if the slab moves num of an inch num mm or more during the test rolling new holes shall be drilled and the slab regrouted .
all slabs which have been regrouted shall be retested as outlined above for the initial testing .
after two returns for regrouting should the slab fail the test rolling the engineer will make the decision to leave the slab as is continue regrouting or remove and replace the slab .
payment will be made under the appropriate pay items for the additional drill holes and grout used in the regrouting operation .
the cost of test rolling shall be absorbed in other items of work .
the construction methods outlined above may be modified by the engineer as field conditions indicate .
section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num pressure grouting operations shall cease at least three hours before sundown except that on cloudy days pressure grouting operations shall cease earlier as necessary to permit grout to harden at least three hours prior to allowing traffic back on the grouted slab before first darkness .
first darkness shall be defined as that time of day the average traveling public vehicle would first begin to use its headlights .
c removal and replacement of pavement slabs .
num .
removal .
the extent of removal shall be as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the slab section designated for removal shall be sawed as shown on the plans .
the contractor shall not oversaw the slab within num feet num mm of another oversaw or within num feet num mm of any type of joint .
transverse cuts for removal and the placing of new steel tie bars shall be performed as shown by plan details .
the sections of pavement to be removed may be removed in any manner approved by the engineer which does not damage the underlying base layer adjacent concrete slabs or the joint steel .
any damage to the underlying base or adjacent slabs shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer .
joint steel shall be cleaned and reconditioned to provide the same load transfer andor tie as in the original pavement design .
any damaged or destroyed steel which in the opinion of the engineer would not function properly shall be replaced in kind and retied to the old pavement by drilling an appropriate size hole of the proper depth and anchoring the new bar with an approved adhesive material .
this replacement also includes steel damaged or destroyed previous to the removal operation .
all tie bars and dowel bars tied to the old pavement shall be anchored into place with an approved adhesive material in such a manner as to meet a num pound num kn minimum pullout requirement .
the department will perform the pullout tests in accordance with aldotnum .
the contractor shall supply the equipment necessary to perform the pullout test .
slabs shall be removed and replaced during the same day .
preparation for removal including sawing the slab into smaller pieces may be done the day prior to removal but traffic shall be maintained on the slab the night before removal .
num .
concrete pavement replacement .
after completion of removal operation the joint steel andor reinforcing steel shall be reconditioned or replaced reconditioned means the cleaning and straightening of the steel bars and the cleaning painting greasing replacement etc .
of the dowels new tie bars placed as detailed by the plans and the base cleaned and repaired as directed and then the slab shall be poured .
the contractor shall provide gang drills or templates that will provide the proper alignment for holes drilled for dowels or tie bars .
the size of the drilled hole shall be num of an inch num mm greater in diameter than the diameter of the dowel or tie bar being installed therein .
the drill used shall not cause any spalling of the existing concrete around the face of the drill hole .
the contractor shall provide a device that will place the adhesive in the back of the drilled hole first and then proceed toward the front .
after the dowels or tie bars are anchored in place the contractor shall allow time for the adhesive to set and then allow sufficient time for any required pullout tests to be performed prior to pouring the replacement slab .
the concrete paving slab shall be poured in accordance with the provisions of section num except that structural portland cement concrete meeting the requirements of section num for a class a concrete utilizing either type iii cement or type i cement with a nonchloride accelerator shall be used and a full paving train will not be required .
unless shown otherwise by the plans the surface finish and slope of the new pavement shall be the same as the adjoining pavement slabs .
if the pavement is to be covered by a bituminous overlay a wood float finish and straight slope will be acceptable .
all joints except expansion joints with adjacent pavement shall be butt type tied construction joints .
expansion joints shall be reconstructed so that the continuity of existing expansion joints are retained utilizing similar joint filler and sealed with the type sealer specified on the plans .
other reconstructed joints which require sealing shall be sealed with the specified type sealer .
when a joint is completely removed new materials shall be used throughout the section num pressure grouting and repair of portland cement concrete pavement num joint .
all materials necessary to repair or reconstruct the joints in or adjacent to the concrete pavement replacement is considered incidental to said replacement .
all joints shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numj except as noted herein .
due to the requirement for the use of either an accelerator or type iii cement in the concrete mix extreme care shall be taken to see that joints are saw cut before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking begins .
slabs that have been removed shall be replaced the same day they are removed .
the contractor shall use such approved methods as necessary to keep all pavement surfaces adjacent to this operation reasonably clean of excess grout or other materials at all times .
d opening to traffic .
no traffic including construction equipment will be permitted on the grouted slabs until at least three hours after the grouting has been completed .
no traffic including construction equipment will be permitted on the replaced slab until at least six hours after the slab has been poured .
traffic shall be placed on grouted slabs before first darkness of the same day that the slabs were grouted traffic shall be placed on replaced slabs no later than the morning following the day the slabs were replaced .
num method of measurement .
each drill hole through the concrete paving slab ordered by the engineer and placed in accordance with the requirements noted herein in this section and properly filled after satisfactory use will be measured for payment .
portland cement concrete grout will be measured for payment by the bag num pounds num kg of portland cement used in the grout all other ingredients required in the grout will not be measured for payment .
concrete pavement removed will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest num foot num meter .
concrete pavement replacement slabs will be measured by computing the theoretical cubic yards cubic meters of concrete necessary to replace the removed slab .
the thickness used in computing the theoretical cubic yards cubic meters will be the average thickness necessary to replace the slab and to fill any voids except those caused by the contractor underneath the slab .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
drill holes .
drill holes for stabilizing the concrete pavement measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per each which shall be full compensation for the drilling of the holes and the sealing of the holes after the satisfactory use thereof and includes the furnishing of equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
portland cement pressure grout .
portland cement pressure grout measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per bag of cement used in the grout which shall be full compensation for furnishing the grout including all ingredients for the type mix designated for the mixing for pumping of the grout and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
removal of concrete pavement slabs .
removal of concrete pavement slabs measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which shall be full compensation for the sawing and satisfactory removal and disposal of the old concrete for the reconditioning or replacement of all steel and the concrete joint including all equipment tools labor and other incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
concrete pavement replacement slabs .
concrete pavement replacement slabs measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per cubic yard cubic meter which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the concrete mix the hauling of the mix the forming placing including any section num cleaning and sealing joints and cracks in concrete pavement num new steel sawing and sealing of joints finishing and curing of the slab and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
smoothness acceptance .
after the grouting operation all surfaces shall receive grinding in accordance with section num and shall meet the smoothness requirements of subarticle nume .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa drill holes max .
bid limited to num per hole per each numb portland cement pressure grout per bag num pounds num kg numc removal of concrete pavement slab per square yard square meter numd concrete pavement replacement slab per cubic yard cubic meter section num cleaning and sealing joints and cracks in concrete pavement num description .
this section shall cover the work of cleaning and sealing joints and cracks in existing concrete pavement .
the shape of the joints shall be restored by sawing the concrete to allow the proper sealing of the joints .
cracks shall be sealed by the routing of a groove at the crack for the placement of sealant .
the cleaning and sealing of joints and cracks will be classified by type in accordance with the following type i cleaning and sealing of joints and cracks that will not be covered by a bituminous overlay .
type ii cleaning and sealing of joints and cracks that will be covered by a bituminous overlay .
num materials .
the sealant shall be either a hot applied joint sealant or a cold applied joint sealant as shown on the plans .
joint sealants shall meet the requirements given in section num for joint and crack sealants .
num construction requirements .
a submittal of equipment data .
the contractor shall submit descriptions of all equipment proposed for use in sawing the joints routing the cracks cleaning the joints and cracks and placing the sealant .
the submittal shall also consist of the operational guidelines from the equipment manufacturer .
the contractor shall deliver the submittal to the engineer for review .
the engineer will not approve the submittal but will review it for completeness .
the engineer will prohibit the use of equipment that may damage the pavement or result in a joint or crack that can not be sealed .
equipment shall not be brought to the worksite until the engineer informs the contractor that the submittal is complete .
b preparation of joints for sealant .
the old joint sealant material and other debris shall be removed from the joint .
material placed to form an expansion joint during the original construction of the pavement shall not be removed .
the joint shall then be cut with a concrete saw to provide the shape and size of joint shown on the plans .
the concrete saw shall be a saw that is designed for cutting concrete .
if water is used to facilitate cutting the resulting slurry shall be completely removed from the joint and the pavement surfaces before it dries .
removal of the slurry shall be by flushing the joint and pavement surface with a jet of water under pressure and by the use of other tools as required by the engineer .
after the sawing and flushing if necessary the joint shall then be cleaned of loose material by the use of compressed air .
if further cleaning is required prior to sealing one or more of the following cleaning methods shall be used section num cleaning and sealing joints and cracks in concrete pavement num wire brush and muriatic acid the joints shall be thoroughly cleaned with a mechanical wire brush and other tools as necessary .
all harmful materials such as oil asphalt curing compound paint rust and other debris shall be completely removed .
after brushing a solution of num commercial muriatic acid shall be applied to the surfaces of the joint .
after the foaming action of the acid has ceased the joint shall be thoroughly flushed with water and thoroughly brushed again .
after flushing and rebrushing the joint shall be blown out with compressed air .
sand blasting the joints shall be thoroughly cleaned with a sand blaster and other tools as necessary .
all material such as oil asphalt curing compound paint rust and other debris shall be completely removed .
after blasting the joint shall be blown out with compressed air .
high pressure water jet the joints shall be thoroughly cleaned of all debris including old sealant .
air compressors used for cleaning joints shall be equipped with traps and filters capable of removing water and oil in the compressed air .
this compressed air will be checked by the engineer for contamination .
the air compressor shall be replaced if the air contains water or oil .
c preparation of cracks for sealant .
cracks shall be prepared for sealant by the cutting of a groove in the concrete with a rotary router .
the groove shall be cut along the centerline of the crack to the shape and size shown on the plans .
after the crack has been routed it shall be cleaned and dried using the same procedures that are required for cleaning and drying joints .
d sealing of joints and cracks .
surfaces shall be clean and dry before the placement of the sealant .
immediately before the joint sealant is placed compressed air having a pressure of at least num psi num kpa shall be used to blow out the joint and remove all traces of dust .
if a primer is recommended by the manufacturer of the sealant it shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the sealant shall not be placed when the air temperature is less than num f num c or is num f num c and falling unless allowed by the engineer .
the sealant may be applied by a mechanical device or by manual pouring or trowelling unless recommended otherwise by the manufacturer .
when applied mechanically or by pouring a nozzle or pouring spout shall be shaped to fit inside the joint or crack to introduce the sealant from inside the joint or groove .
after a joint or crack has been sealed all surplus primer or sealant on the pavement surfaces shall be promptly removed .
traffic shall not be permitted over sealed joints or cracks until the sealant is tack free .
in addition the sealant shall be placed and worked to provide the shape of sealed joint or crack shown on the plans .
e spalls .
spalls adjacent to joints and cracks that are smaller than num square inches num mm measured across the surface of the pavement shall be cleaned with the cleaning of the joint or crack .
the spall shall then be filled with sealant when the sealant is placed in the joint or crack .
the full depth of the slab may be designated for replacement in accordance with the requirements given in section num where the spall is larger than num square inches num mm .
num method of measurement .
the cleaning and sealing of concrete pavement joints and cracks will be measured in linear feet meters of joint or crack length to the nearest num foot num m along the surface of the pavement .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract unit price for cleaning and sealing concrete pavement joints and cracks shall be full compensation for sawing the joints routing the cracks furnishing all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to clean and seal all designated concrete pavement joints and cracks .
section num grinding concrete pavement surfaces num b payment will be made under item no .
numa cleaning and sealing concrete pavement type per linear foot meter specify i or ii specify joints or cracks section num grinding concrete pavement surfaces num description .
this section shall cover the work of grinding portland cement concrete pavement at locations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the primary locations will be the righthand lane or truck lane of each roadway but may include other locations .
said grinding is intended to substantially correct joint faulting surface drainage skid resistance riding characteristics andor removal of excessive surface material .
num materials .
na num construction requirements .
a general .
it is intended that areas of the pavement surface designated by the plans or engineer to be processed shall be ground to eliminate joint or crack faults and to provide a constant pavement cross slope within the designated grinding limits in each lane .
adjacent sides of longitudinal joints or crack shall be in the same plane .
adjacent sides of transverse joints or cracks in excess of num of an inch num mm shall be reground until flush .
if a progress schedule for the grinding operation is not shown on the plans the contractor may select his own grinding operation schedule .
the grinding operation shall be expeditiously performed in a continuous operation on a traffic lane before grinding begins on a succeeding lane .
the residue created by the grinding operation shall be satisfactorily removed as the grinding operation proceeds .
b equipment .
grinding equipment shall be a selfpropelled unit specifically designed to grind portland cement concrete pavement using diamond grinding blades capable of grinding the designated surfaces without causing spalls at cracks or joints or at other locations .
the equipment shall be of a size shape and dimension capable of working within the designated work limits without restricting the movement of traffic outside of the work limits .
the contractor shall provide positive means for the removal of the grinding residue before such residue is blown by traffic action or wind .
residue shall not be permitted to flow across lanes designated for traffic use or into gutters or other drainage structures .
c operational requirements .
num .
general .
it is the intent that the work of grinding of the pavement surface be performed under traffic .
traffic may be shifted to one lane on a numlane facility but no consideration will be given to transferring traffic to one travelway during this operation .
the area of pavement surfaces to be ground will be designated on the plans unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
the construction operations shall be scheduled and prosecuted in such a manner that a uniform surface finish which eliminates the joint or crack faults while maintaining positive lateral drainage by maintaining a constant cross slope is obtained .
num .
main roadway .
all preliminary work of stabilizing and repair on the main roadway shall be completed prior to commencing grinding operations .
this preliminary work includes the stabilization of designated pavement slabs and removal and replacement of certain slab sections as noted by plan details or as directed by the engineer .
section num grinding concrete pavement surfaces num the entire area of the travelway designated to be ground shall be ground until the adjacent sides of joints and cracks are in the same plane the cross slope complies with typical section shown by plan details and the surface requirements of subarticle numd .
it is the intent of this specification that the faulting at joints and cracks be eliminated the overall roughness be within the specified limits and that the pavement surface of the lane designated for treatment be textured .
d final surface finish .
the grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
said line type texture shall consist of parallel longitudinal corrugations of approximately num evenly spaced grooves per foot num mm with the ridges approximately num of an inch num mm higher than the bottom of the grooves .
joints and cracks shall be visually inspected to insure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane .
misalignment of the surface planes of adjacent sides of joints or cracks which is in excess of num of an inch num mm shall be ground until the surfaces are flush .
the transverse slope of the ground pavement shall be uniform to a degree that no depressions or misalignment of slope greater than num of an inch num mm in num feet num m are present when tested with a num foot num m straightedge placed perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
straightedge requirements do not apply outside of the ground areas .
e smoothness requirements .
num .
application of smoothness requirements .
smoothness requirements shall be applicable to the grinding of the concrete pavement surfaces if pay item numc smoothness testing certified inertial profiler is included in the contract .
num .
smoothness testing procedure .
the smoothness testing procedure shall be aldotnum evaluating pavement profiles .
this procedure is posted on the aldot internet site in the pages of the materials and tests bureau .
the mean roughness index shall be measured after the grinding of the concrete pavement surface .
the results of the smoothness tests will be evaluated by the engineer .
num .
contract price adjustment based on mean roughness index .
payment for the grinding will be made in accordance with the contract price adjustments given in the following table .
mean roughness index inchesmilesection meterskilometersection contract price adjustment percent of grinding concrete pavement unit contract price under num under num num num to less than num num to less than num num mean roughness indexnum num mean roughness index num num to less than num num to less than num num num through num num through num num mean roughness index num num mean roughness index num over num over num unacceptable num method of measurement .
the grinding of pavement ordered and accepted will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest num of a foot num m on the processed pavement .
those areas of pavement requiring corrective action due to inappropriate or unacceptable work or negligence on the part of the contractor will be excluded from measurement for payment .
section num bridge deck thin polymer overlay num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the grinding of pavement ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the grinding of the pavement the removal of grinding residue and the satisfactory disposal thereof the cleaning of the pavement and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment for the grinding will be adjusted in accordance with the requirements for smoothness if pay item numc smoothness testing certified inertial profiler is included in the contract .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa grinding concrete pavement per square yard square meter numc smoothness testing certified inertial profiler per each section num bridge deck thin polymer overlay num description .
this section shall cover the work of applying thin polymer overlays tpo and crack sealing to waterproof and provide a skid resistant riding surface .
num materials .
a general .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the requirements noted in this section .
b crack sealer material .
the crack sealer material if needed shall be specified as shown in plans .
the crack sealing material shall be a solvent less type i grade num epoxy as specified in aashto m num .
the crack sealer material shall be used to repair bridge deck cracks by gravity feeding .
the crack sealer shall meet the properties in table num .
table num properties of crack sealer property requirement test method viscosity poises max .
num astm d num tensile strength min .
psi .
num aashto m num elongation min .
num aashto m num water absorption by wt .
max .
num aashto mnum based on samples cured and tested at numf c overlay material .
the overlay material shall be a completely nonporous polymer bridge deck overlay system designed for low temperature applications .
the overlay system shall consist of polymer epoxy binder and aggregate .
the overlay system shall not contain any fillers or volatile solvents .
the overlay system shall meet the properties in table num .
table num properties of overlay system property requirement test method viscosity poises num num astm d num tensile strength min .
psi .
num aashto m num elongation min .
num aashto m num adhesive strength min .
psi .
num hours num astm c num compressive strength min .
psi .
num hours num astm c num method b compressive strength min .
psi .
num days num astm c num method b water absorption by wt .
max .
num aashto m num chloride permeability max .
coulombs num days num aashto t num section num bridge deck thin polymer overlay num based on samples cured and tested at numf or the manufacturers minimum cure time or num substrate failure d aggregate .
all aggregates used shall be num percent fractured nonpolishing and nonfriable .
aggregates shall be calcined bauxite .
the physical and chemical properties of the aggregate shall meet the requirements in table num .
table num aggregate physical and chemical requirements property requirement test method polish stone value num min .
aashto t num resistance to degradation num max aashto t num moisture content num max aashto t num aluminum oxide num min .
astm c num aggregate gradation passing by weight aashto t num sieve size no .
num num mm num min .
no .
num num mm num min .
no .
num num mm num max e storage and handling .
the polymer overlay materials shall be transported and handled in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
polymer overlay materials shall be stored at the job site in their original containers protected from moisture and maintained at a temperature between num to numf for a minimum of num hours prior to use .
all aggregates shall be stored in a dry environment protected from rain moisture and contaminants .
f other requirements .
all requirements listed in this subarticle shall be submitted to aldot no less than num days prior to placement of the polymer overlay .
the contractor shall submit a copy of a certified test report with actual test results from an independent laboratory verifying that the materials meet all the requirements specified in article num including tables num num and num .
the contractor shall submit a verification test report for each material lot number to be used on aldot projects .
the contractor shall provide the materials and tests engineer with ten years of performance history data from a minimum of three projects where the proposed tpo has been used .
the performance history shall be from projects located in alabama .
if no ten year performance history data is available from alabama then data from any southeastern states with similar climate conditions such as temperature and humidity as alabama may be accepted .
num construction requirements .
a submittals .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer three sets of copies of product data that completely identifies the physical components and performance characteristics of the overlay system .
the submittal shall also include safety data sheets for all materials to be used .
the overlay materials shall not be ordered until the product data has been accepted by the engineer as providing an adequate description of the overlay system .
the following items shall be included as a part of the product data submittal material composition type of polymer curing agents coloring additives etc .
surface preparation special cleaning requirements required extent of cleaning etc .
curing requirements acceptable ambient temperature range acceptable level of humidity etc .
application requirements and application equipment requirements etc .
section num bridge deck thin polymer overlay num no less than num days prior to construction of the polymer overlay the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval a work plan for constructing the overlay .
the work plan shall include but not be limited to construction procedures anticipated schedule for traffic control patching and crack repair procedures overlay placement procedure and proposed shot blasting procedure .
the work plan shall also include all test reports and samples required as per subarticle num f. b equipment .
the equipment for cleaning the concrete bridge decks shall be recommended by the manufacturer of the overlay system .
the polymer overlay shall be placed using mechanical equipment capable of mixing metering and distributing all components of the overlay system in a continuous application as per the polymer overlay manufacturers specifications .
the equipment shall be capable of heating and maintaining the components of the epoxy binder at a constant temperature .
the equipment shall be capable of mixing the components of the epoxy binder at a constant ratio and shall be capable of consistent application rates of both the epoxy and the aggregate and have the capability to display and record the application rates of both materials .
the use of agricultural type spreaders for the distribution of the aggregates will not be allowed when mechanical continuous application is required .
c surface preparation .
the entire area of the deck surface shall be cleaned by shot blasting to provide a surface free from curing compound laitance dust dirt oil grease bituminous material paint and all foreign matter .
the contractor shall use the test method described in astm c num standard test method for tensile strength of concrete surfaces and the bond strength or tensile strength of concrete repair and overlay materials by direct tension pulloff method to determine the shot blasting procedure .
the shot blasting procedure shall consist of size of shot flow of shot forward speed and number of passes of the shot blasting machine necessary to expose the coarse aggregate and provide tensile adhesion strength equal to or greater than num psi or a failure area at a depth of num in .
or more into the concrete deck .
a test section of not less than num sq .
ft. of bridge deck will be used to establish the shot blasting procedure .
three random test sites will be selected within the test section by the engineer and tested according to astm c num .
the contractor shall provide all test equipment and perform the tests .
if the adhesion strength or failure depth criteria are not met the contractor shall adjust the shot blasting procedure and the test section will be reblasted and retested until satisfactory test results are attained .
once an acceptable shot blasting procedure is established it shall be continued for the remainder of the bridge .
the contractor may with the permission of the engineer change the shot blasting procedure or equipment in which case an additional test section and testing will be required .
shot blast cleaning shall include the preparation of all bridge deck spall repair areas .
the shot blast cleaning of an area of the deck shall be performed within a numhour period preceding placement of the overlay .
the shot blast cleaned areas shall be protected against contamination prior to placement of the overlay .
contaminated areas and areas exposed more than num hours shall be shot blast cleaned again as direct by the engineer at the contractors expense .
in areas that the shot blasting equipment can not reach i.e .
along curbs and median walls sandblasting will be permitted to an extent satisfactory to the engineer .
this shall be performed prior to the shot blasting whenever applicable and practical .
immediately before applying the overlay system all prepared surfaces shall be cleaned with compressed air or vacuumed to remove dust and debris .
all surfaces to be overlaid shall be dry .
d repair of spalls .
the contractor shall be responsible to repair any spalled areas prior to the placement of the overlay system .
the contractor shall submit a repair procedure to the engineer for acceptance prior to performing any repair .
e application of overlay .
overlay applications consisting of more than num square yards shall be placed using mechanical equipment capable of continuous application .
manual application will be allowed only when the overlay application consists of less than num square yards .
the polymer overlay shall be placed in two layers of epoxy and aggregate .
both layers shall consist of a layer of epoxy followed with a layer of aggregate .
the layer of aggregate shall completely cover the epoxy .
the section num bridge deck thin polymer overlay num total thickness of the polymer overlay both layers shall not be less than  inch nor greater than  inch .
the application rates of the polymer overlay shall comply with table num .
table num application rates layer polymer gallonsnum square feet aggregate poundssquare yard num not less than num not less than num num not less than num not less than num the contractor shall plan and execute the work in a manner to provide at least eight hours of curing or the minimum cure time recommended by the manufacturer prior to opening the section to traffic .
prior to opening the section to traffic the contractor shall perform at least one pull off test per every num linear feet of each lane of bridge deck .
the engineer will randomly select the test locations .
pull off tests shall be performed in accordance to the requirements of astm c num .
the contractor shall provide all testing equipment .
each individual test shall have a minimum adhesive strength of num psi when the bond failure is located at the interface of the concrete and the overlay as described in astm c num .
unacceptable test results will require removal and replacement of the overlay at the contractors expense .
the thickness of the overlay shall be verified by using the cores obtained from the pull off tests .
areas found to be less than  inch thick shall be recoated and retested at no cost to the department .
the overlay manufacturer shall have a representative present at the job site at all times during placement of the polymer overlay .
the manufacturers representative shall advice the engineer of any procedure andor material not meeting specifications .
the engineer will suspend placement of the overlay system based on the advice of the manufacturers representative or hisher own observations .
work shall not resume until the engineer is satisfied that appropriate remedial action has been taken by the contractor .
polymer overlays shall not be placed when the ambient temperature is below numf or above numf and when the surface temperature is below numf .
placement of overlays will not be permitted when rain is forecast within num hours of application .
f performance guarantee .
the polymer overlay manufacturer shall provide aldot with a ten year performance warranty after the application of the overlay is complete .
the warranty shall be submitted to the engineer for review .
the overlay will not be accepted and final payment made until the contractor is notified in writing by the engineer that the warranty is acceptable .
the warranty shall include the requirement that the manufacturer will be fully responsible for all corrective work required due to performance related issues and to restore the overlay to a serviceable condition .
the warranty shall state that the overlay shall be restored to a serviceable condition by the manufacturer within sixty days of notification by aldot that corrective work is required .
num method of measurement .
a shot blast cleaning .
the area of the deck acceptably shot blast cleaned prior to placing the overlay will be measured in square yards computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest num of a foot num m. the shot blast cleaning of any longitudinal and transverse construction joints and vertical surfaces and bridge deck spall repairs will not be measured for payment .
b bridge deck spall repair .
bridge deck spall repairs will be measured in square feet computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest num of a foot num m. c polymer overlay .
the area of the deck acceptably overlaid will be measured in square yards computed from surface measurements taken to the nearest num of a foot num m. num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
shot blast cleaning .
section num bridge deck thin polymer overlay num payment for the measured areas at the contract unit price per square yard of shot blast cleaning will be considered full payment for all expenses associated with the blast cleaning operation .
num .
bridge deck spall repair .
the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot of bridge deck spall repair .
this price shall include all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals required to complete the work .
num .
polymer overlay .
the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard of polymer overlay .
layers will not be paid for individually .
this price shall include all materials procurement handling hauling and processing coring for pull of testing guarantee and includes all equipment tools labor and incidentals required to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa blast cleaning per square yard numb bridge deck overlay per square yard numd bridge deck spall repair per square foot section num structural portland cement concrete num division num structures section num structural portland cement concrete num description .
the work under this section shall cover the furnishing of portland cement concrete to be used in constructing concrete structures .
structures shall include but are not limited to bridges of all types box culverts headwalls retaining walls and other miscellaneous structures .
num materials .
a general .
handling storage and control of materials shall comply with appropriate portions of section num .
all materials shall conform to the requirements set forth in division num materials .
specific reference is made to applicable portions of the following sections section num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregates section num mineral admixtures section num water section num air entraining admixtures for concrete section num chemical admixtures for concrete section num cement section num concrete curing material section num concrete joint fillers sealers and waterstop material section num steel reinforcement b special requirements .
aggregates from different sources which are to be used for concrete class a and class c as specified in item numcnum may be stockpiled together provided material from each source meets the requirements of section num and the specific gravity of the aggregates from each source does not vary more than plus or minus num .
in the event the coarse aggregate shows a tendency to segregate in the stockpile the engineer may order the coarse aggregate be furnished and batched in two fractions from two separate stockpiles .
the contractor may be required to adjust the size of coarse aggregate for the concrete used around steel reinforcement of heavily reinforced members .
c proportioning materials .
num .
mixture design .
the contractors concrete producer shall establish the proportion of materials for each class of concrete following the guidelines described in aldotnum method of controlling concrete operations for structural portland cement concrete .
it shall be the responsibility of the concrete producer to request approval of concrete mixture designs for use in departments projects .
the contractor shall submit the proposed concrete mixture no later than num calendar days after the date of notice to proceed .
the department shall be allowed num calendar days to complete the review and approval of the concrete mixture .
section num structural portland cement concrete num num .
prequalification requirements for concrete mixture design .
prequalification requirements for concrete mixture design concrete class class a class b class c class d minimum numday compressive strength psi mpa num num num num num num num num maximum watercementitious materials ratio num num num num range of total air content num num num num num num num num slump in mm num num num num num num num num maximum numday drying shrinkage num largest nominal maximum aggregate size in mm num num num num num num num num notes num num num num num num num num num num the following notes are applicable to the table of prequalification requirements for concrete mixture design note num .
concrete mixtures used in marine environment within num miles num kilometers from coastline completely or partially submerged in seawater located within the tidal and splash zones exposed to seawater spray exposed to brackish water or as shown on the plans shall have a maximum permeability of num coulombs and shall include mineral admixtures note num .
seal concrete placed as an integral part of a bridge support system shall have type ii cement .
class f fly ash andor ground granulated blast furnace slag shall be used as a substitute for a portion of the required type ii cement .
the minimum substitution rate shall be num for fly ash and num for ground granulated blast furnace slag .
note num .
antiwashout admixtures shall be used when placing these mixtures through water .
note num .
coarse and fine aggregate gradations used shall meet the gradation requirements given in section num and section num .
optimized gradations that do not meet the gradation requirements given in section num and section num shall be submitted to the materials and tests engineer for approval prior to use .
num .
class of concrete required for specific structures .
class a retaining walls concrete safety barriers headwalls and inlets .
class b box culverts bridge substructures poured in place and bridge superstructures .
class c machine laid curbs gutters combination curbs and gutters slope paving and miscellaneous concrete units .. class d underwater concrete .
num .
substitution of higher strength concrete and aggregate requirements .
substitution of a higher strength mixture for one of a lower strength may be permitted provided all the prequalification requirements of the higher strength mixture are met and the proposed substitution is requested and approved in writing .
section num structural portland cement concrete num if requested in writing and approved by the materials and tests engineer the use of no .
num or no .
num aggregates may be permitted in class d mixtures .
num .
mixture design prequalification tests .
for concrete mixtures using portland cement only the concrete producer shall submit data showing that the total alkali contribution from the cement in the concrete does not exceed num lbydnum when calculated as follows     num     num num    num permeability tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num electrical indication of concretes ability to resist chloride ion penetration using a moistcuring period of num days .
the numday shrinkage test shall be performed in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num length change of hardened hydraulic cement mortar and concrete using concrete prisms exposed to drying at a concrete age of num days .
three concrete prisms that are num x num x num inches num x num x num mm in size shall be used .
the initial reading for drying shrinkage calculations shall be the reading taken at the start of drying at a concrete age of num days num hours .
compressive strength testing shall be performed in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num compressive strength of cylindrical concrete specimens using num x num inch num x num mm cylinders .
total air content shall be performed in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num air content of freshly mixed concrete by the pressure method using a type b meter .
slump test shall be performed in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num slump of hydraulic cement concrete .
num .
chemical admixtures for concrete .
any chemical admixtures used in the concrete mixture shall be included in the mixture design proposal .
only approved chemical admixtures listed in list iinum chemical admixtures for portland cement concrete of the msdsar manual shall be used in department concrete mixtures .
the dosage of chemical admixtures may be adjusted in the field to obtain the desired results provided the manufacturers recommended dosage is not exceeded .
the use of calcium chloride will not be permitted .
num .
airentraining admixtures for concrete .
approved air entraining admixtures are listed in the msdsar manual list iinum chemical admixtures for portland cement concrete .
the total air content shall be within the range of num to num at the point of delivery .
air content less than num will be acceptable for structures that are completely embedded below the ground line or mud line .
the total air content of freshly mixed concrete shall be measured in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num using a type b pressure meter .
all pressure meters used for measuring the total air content shall be calibrated prior to the beginning of concrete placement .
the calibration of pressure meters shall be verified at least twice a week and anytime a questionable result is obtained .
num .
mineral admixtures for concrete .
mineral admixtures may be used in any mixture design except where noted to be prohibited elsewhere .
substitution percentages are calculated by weight .
the maximum substitution of portland cement with mineral admixtures shall not exceed num percent .
the following table shows the maximum substitution of portland cement with any one mineral admixture substitution .
section num structural portland cement concrete num maximum percent mineral admixture substitution for portland cement substitution by weight mineral admixture percentage substitution class c or class f fly ash see note num num ground granulated blast furnace slag see note num num microsilica num notes to the table of maximum percent mineral admixture substitution for portland cement note num .
class f fly ash shall be used when fly ash is required to reduce the heat of hydration .
note num .
the maximum substitution rate shall be twentyfive percent by weight mass when the ambient temperature is num f or below .
num .
slump .
the engineer may accept any concrete mixture delivered to the field with a slump less than the specified slump if the concrete mixture is workable .
a tolerance of plus num inches num mm will be acceptable for the mixture delivered at the work site .
approved type f chemical admixtures may be used to chemically increase the slump of the concrete mixture from the maximum slump specified to a maximum slump of num inches num mm for class a class b and class c concrete .
the plus num in num mm tolerance will not be allowed when type f chemical admixtures are used .
in no case shall the water to total cementitious material ratio specified be exceeded in order to increase the slump andor adjust the mixture .
slump shall be measured in accordance with the requirements given in aashtotnum .
num .
concrete production .
during the progress of the work the relative proportions between the fine and coarse aggregates and between aggregate and water may be varied as needed for best results but the water to total cementitious material ratio shall not be changed except as noted below if it is impossible to produce concrete having the desired consistency the total amount of cementitious material may be increased to achieve the desired consistency provided that the maximum water to total cementitious material ratio is not exceeded and there is no additional cost to the department .
if the engineer finds it advisable to increase the minimum design strength of the concrete and orders the cementitious factor increased the state will reimburse the contractor for the actual amount only of the additional cementitious material used based on actual f.o.b .
destination with the additional quantity calculated from the theoretical cementitious factor determined by the engineer and not from count of bags or weight mass used .
the concrete mixture designs shall use type i ii or type iii portland cement unless otherwise specified .
the contractor may for his own convenience and without additional compensation substitute type iii portland cement provided prior approval is given by the materials and tests engineer .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to carry out uniform construction practices which will produce concrete with the specified plastic concrete properties and of not less than the minimum specified compressive strength .
concrete with compressive strength below the minimum specified compressive strength will be investigated in accordance with aldotnum prior to repairing or removing the affected concrete .
should low compressive strength occur consistently the materials and tests engineer may order corrective action as deemed necessary without additional cost to the department .
where the conditions require the use of low tricalcium aluminate cement the plans or proposal will designate type ii portland cement .
in such case if requested and approved in writing type i or type iii portland cement containing a maximum of eight percent section num structural portland cement concrete num tricalcium aluminate may be used .
should type iii portland cement be permitted a maximum of eight percent tricalcium aluminate shall still apply .
d sampling and inspection .
production of required aggregate gradation in the concrete mixture shall be the contractors responsibility .
cement aggregates water and chemical and mineral admixtures shall be accepted on the basis of requirements currently listed in the departments testing manual .
the department reserves the right to take samples of aggregates from stockpiles cementitious materials from storage bins and chemical admixtures from storage tanks at the mixing or batching plant and to make further tests as needed as the basis for continued acceptance of the materials .
the contractor shall furnish without extra compensation samples of the materials and the concrete mixture for making tests and test specimens as required to comply with the departments testing manual .
additional testing may be required if deemed necessary by the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish without extra compensation a protected environment for all concrete test cylinders produced incidental to any placement of concrete .
this shall be accomplished by supplying a cylinder curing box with a minimum capacity of num test cylinders num x num num mm x num mm in size equipped with heatingcooling capabilities automatic temperature control and a maximumminimum highlow temperature readout .
the protective environment shall be capable of protecting all specimens within the following specification requirements and it shall be available at each site when concrete is placed and then maintained until such time that all specimens have been transported from the project to the testing facility .
the engineer prior to beginning any concrete placement shall approve each protective environment .
immediately after being struck off the concrete test specimens shall be moved to the protective environment where they shall remain for an initial curing period of not less than num hours or more than num hours .
during the initial curing period the specimens shall be stored in a moist environment at a temperature range between num f to num f num c to num c preventing any loss of moisture for up to num hours .
at all times the temperature in and between concrete specimens shall be controlled by shielding the specimens from coolingheating devices and direct rays of the sun .
a temperature record of the specimens shall be established by means of maximumminimum highlow thermometers supplied by the contractor .
only plastic molds shall be used for concrete specimens to be immersed in water .
concrete specimens that are to be transported to the laboratory for standard curing within num hours shall remain in the molds in a moist environment until they are received in the laboratory removed from molds and placed in standard curing .
concrete specimens that are not transported to the laboratory for standard curing within num hours shall be removed from the molds within num num hours and standard curing used until transported to the laboratory .
during the standard curing period the specimens shall be stored at a temperature of num num f num num c using the cylinder curing box defined above .
standard curing shall comply with aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the field standard curing section .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all materials labor equipment tools and machinery necessary for forming mixing placing finishing and curing shall be available as required and all necessary equipment for the proper construction and completion of any section of the work shall be in satisfactory working condition before the contractor will be permitted to start placing concrete .
all concrete batching plants supplying concrete shall be on list inum portland cement concrete producers of the msdsar manual .
the concrete producer shall submit a valid bmtnum and proof of nrmca certification to the area materials engineer prior to batching concrete .
all batching plants shall meet the requirements of thespecifications and aldotnum .
producers who request that their batching plants be placed on the list of evaluated readymix concrete plants will be charged afee as specified by aldotnum general information concerning materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
section num structural portland cement concrete num b equipment .
num .
general .
the contractor shall furnish equipment capable of producing concrete meeting the requirements noted in this section in sufficient quantities to provide for orderly construction of the project .
all equipment must be in good working order and so maintained throughout the requirement for its use .
specific requirements for certain types of equipment are designated in subsequent items of this subarticle .
num .
mixing and transporting equipment .
concrete for all major structure work bridges culverts retaining walls etc .
shall be readymixed concrete .
readymixed concrete is defined as portland cement concrete manufactured for delivery and delivered to the work site in accordance with aashto m num readymixed concrete modified and the requirements written herein in other parts of these specifications .
in case of discrepancy these specifications shall govern .
modification of aashto m num .
the requirements of paragraph num shall include the following should this method of measuring fly ash or other cementitious materials cumulatively with cement produce unsatisfactory results it shall be discontinued and separate scales and hoppers provided for these ingredients .
concrete for minor structure work headwalls inlets junction boxes and other miscellaneous individual concrete units requiring three cubic yards num cubic meters or less of concrete along with such items as slope paving sidewalks curbs gutters and combinations thereof may be mixed in mixers as noted above or an approved type of mobile mixing plant designed with separate bins for fine aggregate coarse aggregate cement water additives etc .
that will automatically proportion all concrete aggregates either by weight mass or volume and be capable of combining the ingredients into a uniform mass and discharging such without segregation .
it shall have approved equipment that will determine the volume of concrete dispatched .
said alternate type mobile mixing plant shall be capable of providing concrete complying with the mixture design requirements noted in article num .
prior written approval of such alternate equipment shall be obtained before it is allowed on the project .
basis for this approval will be upon the satisfactory performance of the equipment when checked in accordance with the provisions of aashto m num concrete made by volumetric batching and continuous mixing .
the costs of all materials and labor furnished to perform the above mentioned test shall be absorbed by the contractor if the contractor requests to use portable concrete mixers equal or less than num cubic feet num cubic meter the materials and tests engineer may approve their use and will furnish written requirements covering such mixers .
all mixing and transporting equipment shall be supplied in sufficient amounts to provide continuous delivery of the concrete as needed for an acceptable satisfactory operation .
the volume of concrete mixed or transported in a concrete truck mixer shall not be less than num of the gross volume of the drum .
concrete transit mixers shall be equipped with either an inline water meter or a sight gauge to accurately measure the amount of water discharged into the drum .
inline water meters shall be accurate to within num of the designated quantity sight gauges shall be accurate to within num gallon .
water measuring devices shall be considered acceptable if the truck has been certified by nrmca as part of their delivery fleet inspection .
the nrmca delivery fleet certification card shall be affixed in a prominent location on the truck such as the windshield or drivers side door .
trucks shall be recertified annually in accordance with nrmca policy .
the concrete producer shall maintain a record of their nrmca certified trucks available for review by the department at any time .
additionally the accuracy of water meters and sight gauges shall be verified in accordance with aldotnum verification of watermeasurement devices for concrete delivery vehicles .
each transit mixer shall be equipped with an approved automatic counter that will record the number of drum revolutionsregardless ofthe drum speed .
num .
vibrators .
vibrators shall be of an approved internal vibrating type and design unless the engineer gives special authorization for other types .
vibrators shall be capable of transmitting vibrations to the concrete at frequencies of not less than num impulses per minute .
the section num structural portland cement concrete num contractor shall provide a sufficient number of vibrators to properly compact each batch immediately after it is placed in the forms .
at least one standby vibrating unit in workable order shall be available before the start of any placement of concrete .
c addition of water at jobsite .
field addition of water to concrete shall be allowed only upon arrival of the truck at the jobsite if slump tests indicate the mix is too stiff .
if water is added the drum shall be turned an additional num revolutions prior to discharging any more concrete .
in no instance shall the maximum watercementitious ratio of the mixture design or the maximum slump be exceeded .
tests for slump total air content temperature compressive strength shall be run after the addition of water at the jobsite regardless of any previous testing .
d time light and weather limitations .
num .
time of hauling and placing concrete .
the delivery and placement of readymixed concrete shall be completed within the time frames listed in the following table .
these times are measured from the time at which water is added to the cement until the time at which placement of the load is completed .
time limitations for the delivery and placment of concrete temperature of the concrete mixtures without retarding admixtures mixtures with retarding admixtures less than num f num c num hour num hour and num minutes num f num c or more num minutes num hour and num minutes if type iii portland cement is used the time limits shall be reduced by num minutes .
if requested and approved in writing by the materials and tests engineer a hydration stabilizer can be used to extend the retardation of set time of concrete .
the materials and tests engineer may permit mixing and the adding of the cement and additives at the work site in truck mixers in order to meet the time limitation requirements .
when a readymixed truck is used for concrete delivery the concrete shall be completely discharged from the mixing drum before the truck mixer has completed num revolutions and or before the above time limitations for placement have been exceeded whichever happens first .
num .
light .
all concrete shall be placed and finished during daylight hours unless written permission to the contrary is given .
such permission will not be given unless an adequate approved lighting system is available for all operations after sundown .
num .
weather .
a .
general .
the temperature of the concrete at the time of placing in the forms shall not be less than num f num c nor more than num f num c except that for bridge deck slabs the temperature of the concrete at the time of placing shall not be more than num f num c unless otherwise provided or directed .
b .
cold weather operations .
no concrete shall be placed when the ambient air temperature is belownum f num cwithout written permission of the engineer .
if the contractor proposes to place concrete during seasons when there is a probability of temperatures lower than num f num c the contractor shall have available on the project such suitable approved equipment and materials as necessary to enclose the uncured concrete and keep the air temperature inside the enclosure within the following ranges and for the minimum times noted hereinafter .
if there are indications there will be temperatures below num f num c during the first three days after placement of concrete it shall be protected from cold temperatures by keeping the surface at a temperature above num f num c for the first num hours after placement and above num f num c an additional num hours .
however the section num structural portland cement concrete num protective covering shall be retained in place until the temperature inside the protective covering reaches that of the surrounding atmosphere .
when the contractor is permitted to place concrete at temperatures below num f num c the aggregates andor mixing water shall be heated as necessary to keep the temperature of the plastic concrete above num f num c from the time of placement to the time of initial set however in no case shall the materials be heated in excess of num f num c nor shall aggregates from frozen stockpiles be incorporated into the mixture .
materials entering the mixer shall be free from ice snow or frozen lumps .
salts chemicals or other materials shall not be incorporated in the concrete to prevent freezing .
care shall be taken to heat all materials uniformly and avoid hot spots that will burn or overheat the materials .
the contractor shall assume all risk and added cost connected with mixing placing and protecting of concrete during cold weather .
permission given by the engineer to place concrete during such time will in no way relieve the contractor of responsibility for satisfactory results .
should it be determined at any time that concrete placed under such conditions is found to be unsatisfactory it shall be removed and replaced with satisfactory concrete by the contractor without extra compensation .
c. hot weather operations .
the following hot weather operations practices shall be followed for all concreting done between june num and september num of each year and any other time when the temperature of the concrete may be above num f num c or num f num c for bridge deck slabs .
the contractor shall submit in writing aproposed plan for controlling the concrete mixture temperature during hot weather operations .
the hot weather concrete plan shall outline the contractors procedures to maintain the temperature of the concrete at or below the temperature requirements noted above and the contractors procedures for transporting handling placing finishing and curing concrete during hot weather .
the hot weather concrete plan shall be submitted at the preconstruction conference to the area materials engineer for approval before any concrete placement is allowed .
during hot weather operations an approved retarder admixture shall be used in the concrete mixture and the concrete shall be properly placed and finished with the procedures previously submitted by the contractor .
cooling of the mixing water andor aggregates or placement during the cooler part of the day may be required to meet the above maximum temperature requirements .
in no instance shall a concrete bridge deck slab mixture be placed when the temperature of the plastic concrete is above num f num c. when the temperature of the steel is greater than num f num c the steel forms and reinforcement steel shall be cooled prior to concrete placement .
conveying and placing equipment shall be cooled if necessary to maintain proper concrete placing temperature .
e handling and placing concrete .
num .
general .
in preparation for the placing of concrete all sawdust chips and other construction debris and extraneous matter shall be removed from the interior of forms .
temporary struts stays or braces serving to hold the forms in place until the concrete is placed shall be removed prior to being encased in the concrete .
all permanent struts stays or braces shall be precast concrete struts or at the contractors option approved steel struts no wooden struts shall be permitted .
during the placing of concrete the contractor shall continuously check the alignment of forms and immediately correct any yielding of the forms or falsework .
concrete shall be deposited continuously for each monolithic section of the work by placing the fresh concrete in horizontal layers of approximately num inches num mm in thickness .
each additional layer shall be placed and compacted before the preceding layer has taken its initial set num minutes for mixtures without retarder and num minutes for mixtures with retarder .
for vertical members the maximum height of concrete placement shall not exceed num feet num m except for underwater concrete or when steel forms are used .
when structurally sound steel forms are used concrete placement may be made up to num feet num m in height section num structural portland cement concrete num provided that an approved mortar tight downspout of sufficient length to reach within num feet num m of the bottom of the placed concrete and a vibrator of sufficient length to provide good consolidation throughout the concrete placement are used .
any vertical member exceeding num feet num m in height shall be broken into two or more approximately equal concrete placements unless the preceding requirements are met .
when succeeding concrete placements are necessary the next concrete placement will not be permitted until the concrete in the underlying placed concrete has aged at least num hours or attained a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa from cylinders prepared in conformity with aashto t num .
when a set retarding admixture is used in the preceding concrete placement the next concrete placement shall not be permitted until a num psi num mpa cylinder strength is attained .
the forms shall not be jarred nor shall any strain be placed on reinforcing bars partially encased in concrete that will cause damage to bond .
all accumulations of mortar splashed on the reinforcing steel and surfaces of forms shall be removed before the next concrete placement .
when it is necessary to pump water from the excavation during placing of concrete to deposit the concrete in the dry the sump for the intake hose shall be located outside the forms .
the use of aluminum pipes chutes or other devices made of aluminum that come into direct contact with the concrete shall not be utilized in the handling and placing operations .
a .
use of chutes pipes or belts .
concrete shall not be dropped a distance of more than num feet num m unless confined in an approved mortar tight downspout of not less than num inches num mm in diameter .
downspouts shall be equipped with suitable hoppers at their inlet end and shall be provided in sectional lengths that will permit adjustment of the level of the outlet during placement .
the number of downspouts furnished shall be sufficient to ensure the concrete placement in horizontal layers .
depositing large quantities of concrete at one point in the form and running flowing or working the concrete along the forms will not be permitted .
in wall sections where a num inch num mm downspout can not be utilized without displacing the reinforcing steel the concrete may be dropped in excess of the num feet num m previously noted provided such does not displace the reinforcing steel nor produce segregation of the concrete .
num chutes pipes or power belts may be used to convey concrete from the concrete mixer or transporting vehicle to the forms and they shall convey it to its final position without segregation and without displacing the reinforcing steel .
if the use of this equipment results in honeycombed or otherwise substandard concrete the engineer will require it to be changed or its use discontinued .
num chutes pipes and power belts shall be flushed with water after each run and this water shall be discharged free of the freshly placed concrete .
all hardened concrete shall be promptly removed .
b. pumping .
direct placement of concrete by an approved pumping device will be permitted .
the equipment shall be so arranged that no vibration result that might damage freshly placed concrete .
the operation of the pump shall be such that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
when pumping is completed the concrete remaining in the pipeline if it is to be used shall be ejected in such a manner that there will be no contamination of the concrete or separation of the ingredients .
after each placement the equipment shall be cleaned to prevent improper results on subsequent operations .
c. compacting and vibrating .
concrete except underwater concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by mechanical vibration applied internally during and immediately after depositing .
the application of a vibrator or vibrators shall be at points uniformly spaced and not farther apart than twice the radius over which the vibration is visibly effective .
vibrators section num structural portland cement concrete num shall be manipulated so as to thoroughly work the concrete around the reinforcement and embedded fixtures and into the corners and angles of the forms .
vibration shall be supplemented by as much spading as is necessary to ensure smooth surfaces and dense concrete .
the vibrators shall be methodically inserted and withdrawn from the concrete .
the vibration shall be of sufficient duration and intensity to thoroughly compact the concrete but vibrators shall be withdrawn before segregation and localized areas of grout result .
vibration shall not be applied directly or through reinforcement to sections or layers of concrete that have hardened to the degree that the concrete ceases to be plastic under vibration .
vibrators shall not be used to make concrete flow in the forms over distances so great as to cause segregation .
num .
culverts .
see section num for specific details not covered in this section .
num .
retaining walls .
see section num for specific details not covered in this section .
num .
bridges .
see section num for specific details not covered in this section .
num .
depositing concrete under water .
a .
general .
concrete shall not be deposited in water unless provided for on the plans or authorized as provided in subarticle numg .
concrete placed under water shall be placed as hereinafter provided .
b .
control .
seal concrete shall be placed continuously from start to finish ensuring the concrete placement being monolithic .
the surface of the concrete shall be kept as nearly horizontal as practicable at all times .
to ensure bonding each succeeding layer of seal or foundation concrete shall be placed before the preceding layer has initially hardened .
all laitance or other foreign matter shall be removed from the top surface of the concrete and bonding of construction joints performed in accordance with the requirements given elsewhere in this section .
c. placing methods .
concrete specified to be deposited in water shall be seal concrete as provided in article num .
to prevent segregation it shall be carefully placed in a compact mass in its final position by means of a tremie a bottom dump bucket pumping or other approved method .
concrete shall not be disturbed after being deposited .
still water shall be maintained at the point of deposit as nearly as practical .
num use of tremie .
a tremie shall consist of a rigid watertight tube of sufficient strength to withstand the stress to which it is subjected and be at least num inches num mm in diameter .
the tremie shall be supported so as to permit rapid lowering when necessary to retard or stop the flow of concrete .
the tremie shall be plugged at the start of work with an approved device capable of separating the concrete from the water until the tube is filled with concrete .
the tremie tube shall be kept partially filled with concrete at all times during the concrete placement .
when a batch is dumped into the hopper the flow of concrete shall be induced by slightly raising the tremie always keeping the discharge end in the deposited concrete .
the flow shall be as nearly continuous as possible and in no case shall it be intentionally interrupted until the entire seal concrete foundation work is completed .
num use of bottom dump bucket .
the bottom dump bucket shall have a capacity of not less than num cubic yards num m and be mechanically equipped to prevent dumping until it rests on the foundation or previously placed concrete .
the bucket shall be completely filled and lowered very carefully until it rests upon the foundation or concrete already placed so as not to get a wash over the bucket top .
it shall then be raised very slowly during the discharge travel the intent being to maintain as nearly as possible still section num structural portland cement concrete num water at the point of discharge and to avoid agitating the mixture also to allow the concrete to be deposited by the time the bucket emerges from the concrete already on the foundation .
num pumping .
in addition to the requirements given elsewhere in this section the following shall also apply for placing concrete under water by pumping .
concrete may be pumped into a tremie or directly to the point of placement .
if the concrete is pumped directly to the point of placement a rigid pipe shall be provided that must extend a minimum of num feet num m above the water level when resting on the bottom of the excavation .
a flexible hose suitable for pumping concrete may be used from the top of the rigid pipe to the concrete pump .
the method of placing and handling the concrete shall be as described elsewhere in this section .
f construction joints .
num .
general .
construction joints shall be placed only at the locations shown on the plans or as directed .
in case of an emergency if a construction joint is permitted it shall be placed as approved by the engineer .
num .
horizontal joints .
generally horizontal joints shall be made by placing the concrete slightly above the grade of the construction joint and after the surface has reached its final set the surface shall be prepared as outlined in item num below .
insert formwork shall be used to obtain neat horizontal lines .
num .
vertical joints .
vertical joints shall be formed with substantial bulkheads or headers as required .
featheredged joints will not be permitted .
num .
bonding .
before placing concrete against any construction joint the surface of the hardened concrete shall be scarified in such a manner that all foreign matter laitance and loose material is removed to expose sound concrete .
the prepared concrete at the construction joint shall be kept wet for a minimum of one hour prior to placing concrete against it .
an approved epoxy listed in the msdsar manual list iinum epoxy resin systems for use with portland cement concrete shall be placed for bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete .
keyways and dowels shall be placed as shown on the plans or directed .
num .
water stops .
water stops shall be furnished and placed as required by the plans .
they shall form continuous watertight joints .
g expansion joints .
all joints shall be constructed according to details shown on the plans providing the design width designated for the expansion joint .
the insertion and removal of joint forming material shall be accomplished without chipping or breaking the corners of the concrete .
expansion material when required shall be placed as shown on the plans .
h forms .
num .
general .
reference is made to article num concerning working drawings and other details that require submission .
forms shall be substantial and unyielding and so designed and constructed that the finished concrete will conform to the plan dimensions and contours within tolerances listed in other portions of these specifications .
basic bridge plan design is for removable forms and plan concrete quantities computed accordingly .
hence removable forms are to be used unless stayinplace forms are allowed by contract plan notes and details .
when shown by contract plan details the contractor will be allowed the option of using permanent steel forms under deck slabs between girders beams or stringers provided the cost of extra concrete and materials required by this type of form is at the contractors expense .
num .
design .
section num structural portland cement concrete num a. removable forms .
all removable forms shall be designed so that they may be removed without damage to the concrete .
forms shall be so constructed that portions where finishing is required can be removed for that purpose without loosening supports or disturbing portions of forms that must still remain in place .
b .
permanent steel bridge deck forms .
the forms and supports shall be zinc coated galvanized steel conforming to astm a num with coating class of gnum according to astm a num and shall otherwise meet all requirements relevant to permanent steel forms and the placing of concrete as specified herein and as noted on the plans .
miscellaneous fastener hardware bolts nuts metal screws and washers shall be common stock hardware items galvanized to provide a zinc coating equal to or better than that required by astm b num .
the following criteria shall govern the design of permanent steel bridge deck forms num the steel forms shall be designed on the basis of dead load of form reinforcement and plastic concrete plus num pounds per square foot num knm for construction loads .
the unit working stress in the steel shall not be more than num of the specified minimum yield strength of the material furnished but not to exceed num pounds per square inch num mpa .
the uncoated thickness of the forms shall not be thinner than num inch num mm .
num deflection under the weight mass of the forms the plastic concrete and reinforcement shall not exceed num of the form span or num inches num mm whichever is less but in no case shall this loading be less than num pounds per square foot num knm total .
the permissible form camber shall be based on the actual dead load condition .
camber shall not be used to compensate for deflection in excess of the foregoing limits .
num the design span of the form sheets shall be the clear span of the form plus num inches num mm measured parallel to the form flutes .
num physical design properties shall be computed in accordance with requirements of the american iron and steel institute specification for the design of cold formed steel structural members latest published edition .
num the plan dimensions of both layers of primary deck reinforcement from the top surface of the concrete deck shall be maintained .
a minimum concrete cover of num inch num mm shall be maintained for the bottom slab steel .
num forms shall not be welded to any part of the structural steel main members the definition of main members is given in section num .
the installation of forms may be done by welding attachment straps together if backing plates are installed under the straps .
the backing plates shall be thick enough to prevent burnthrough .
the width of the backing plates shall be at least one inch wider than the width of the welded attachment straps so that the backing plates extend out at least one half inch beyond each edge of the welded straps .
num .
construction .
a. removable forms .
num forms shall be mortar tight and placed and maintained true to designated lines and grades until the concrete has been placed and hardened .
forms found unsatisfactory in any respect shall not be used and if rejected shall be removed from the immediate work site .
num all moldings panel work and bevel strips shall be straight and true with neatly mitered joints and all corners in the finished work shall be true sharp and clean cut and of good workmanship .
forms shall be filleted and chamfered at all sharp corners except where angles exceed num such as at the face of bridge curbs and deck overhangs .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the equal sides on triangular molding or chamfer shall be num inches num mm except that for small members the width shall be num inches num mm .
num for narrow walls columns et cetera the engineer may require daylight and inspection holes at vertical intervals as directed .
section num structural portland cement concrete num num bolts or ties shall be used to prevent forms from spreading .
all such bolts or ties shall be arranged so that at least num inch num mm of that part adjacent to the concrete surface can be removed or broken off .
num anchor devices may be cast in the concrete for later use in supporting forms only if they are detailed on approved formwork or falsework plans .
num the inside of all forms shall be coated with a nonstaining oil or other approved material to prevent the concrete adhering to them .
extreme care shall be exercised to ensure that form oil does not come in contact with structural or reinforcing steel .
num the forms shall be inspected before placing the concrete and the interior dimensions carefully checked to ensure that the concrete will be of the form and dimensions shown on the plans .
the inside faces of the form shall be thoroughly examined and any projections ridges depressions offsets spaces or other unevenness corrected so that the surface of the concrete will be smooth even and true and mortar tight .
all forms shall be wetted immediately prior to placing the concrete but no excess water shall remain in the forms .
num to permit proper surface finishing forms shall be removed as soon after the concrete has set as is practicable and safe .
in the determination of the time for the removal of forms except those listed elsewhere in this section consideration shall be given to the location and character of the structure the weather and other conditions influencing the setting of the concrete and the material used in the mixture .
methods of form removal likely to cause overstressing of the concrete shall not be used .
forms shall not be removed without the approval of the engineer .
b .
permanent steel bridge deck forms .
num all forms shall be installed in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
num on steel members form sheets will not be permitted to rest directly on the top of the stringer or floor beam flanges .
sheets shall be securely fastened to form supports and shall have a minimum bearing length of num inch num mm at each end .
form supports shall be placed in direct contact with the flange of stringer or floor beam.the installation of attachment straps shelf angles and forms shall be carefully monitored to make sure that no welding weld arc strike etc .
is done to the structural steel .
on concrete girders form supports to be cast into the girders shall be shown on the shop drawings .
all attachments to form supports shall be made by permissible welds bolts clips or other approved means .
attachment by welding to form supports may be performed by nonaldot qualified welders with welding electrodes recommended by the form manufacturer .
all form welds shall be cleaned of slag and wire brushed just prior to placing of the deck concrete .
num any permanently exposed form metal where the galvanized coating has been damaged shall be thoroughly cleaned wire brushed and painted with two coats zinc oxidezinc dust primer federal specification ttpnum type ii no color added to the satisfaction of the engineer .
minor heat discoloration in areas of welds need not be touched up .
num transverse construction joints shall be located at the bottom of a flute and num inch num mm weep holes shall be field drilled at not more than num inches num mm apart along the line of the joint .
if a bridge is on a skew or in a curve a weep hole shall be drilled in the bottom of each flute the joint crosses .
i falsework .
num .
design and construction .
a .
general .
for the purpose of this specification falsework shall be divided into two classes as follows section num structural portland cement concrete num class num common or simple falsework such as temporary bracing to provide stability for bridge girders permanent steel bridge deck forms deck overhang supports screed rail support systems or substructure supports attached to permanent parts of the structure i.e .
drilled shafts columns caps etc .. class num unique or complex falsework such as that required for box girder construction rcdg construction structural cofferdams or any falsework used in connection with steel erection .
the contractor shall be responsible for designing and constructing safe and adequate falsework which provides the necessary strength and rigidity supports all loads imposed and produces a finished structure with lines and grades shown on the plans .
falsework shall be designed and constructed to withstand all imposed loads during erection construction usage and removal .
the contractor shall submit to the construction engineer working drawings and design calculations for falsework in accordance with article num .
for both classes of falsework drawings the construction engineer will verify that the licensed professional engineer signature and stamp requirements of subarticle numd are met .
class num drawings will be stamped for distribution and then distributed .
class num drawings will be forwarded to the bridge engineer for review to determine if the results of the licensed professional engineers calculations are in compliance with design criteria .
if the design criteria are met the submittal will be returned to the construction engineer to be stamped for distribution and then distributed .
all falsework will be inspected by the project manager using the distributed drawings .
for all class num falsework the licensed professional engineer who signed the falsework submittal shall verify that the falsework as constructed meets all design criteria prior to any load being placed thereon .
a signed statement from the licensed professional engineer covering the verification shall be furnished to the project manager by the contractor .
when falsework of either class is to be used over highway pedestrian or railroad traffic additional details will be required to provide for special protection to prevent debris from falling on the traffic below .
these additional details will be required for both removal and construction work .
all falsework drawings shall include a description and size of all members connections and miscellaneous hardware .
when premanufactured assemblies are used all parts shall be easily identified as those shown on the drawings .
all falsework shall be designed and constructed to provide the necessary rigidity and to support the loads without appreciable settlement or deformation .
screw jacks andor hardwood wedges shall be used to take up any settlement in the formwork either before or during the placing of concrete .
any part of the permanent structure to which falsework will be attached shall attain a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa from cylinders prepared in conformity with aashto t num prior to the attachment .
falsework that can not be founded on a satisfactory footing shall be supported on piling which shall be spaced driven and removed in an approved manner .
all spans shall be given a temporary camber to allow for deflection shrinkage and settlement .
bridges shall have a permanent camber only where so shown on the plans or directed .
b .
design criteria .
falsework shall be designed to withstand all imposed loads during erection construction usage and removal .
designs shall be based on minimum loads maximum stresses and deflections and conditions in the following paragraphs .
allowable stresses are based on use of undamaged high quality materials .
the contractor shall reduce stresses if lesser quality materials are used .
design loads for falsework shall consist of the sum of dead and live vertical loads and assumed horizontal loads .
minimum total design load for any falsework shall not be less than num pounds per square foot num knm for the combined live and dead load regardless of slab thickness .
section num structural portland cement concrete num dead loads shall include weight mass of concrete reinforcing steel forms and falsework .
weight mass of concrete reinforcing steel and forms shall not be assumed to be less than num pounds per cubic foot num knm .
live loads shall consist of the actual weight mass of any equipment to be supported by falsework applied as concentrated loads at the points of contact and a uniform load of not less than num pounds per square foot num knm applied over the area supported plus num pounds per linear foot num knm applied at the outside edge of deck overhangs .
horizontal loads applied shall be the sum of the actual horizontal loads due to equipment construction sequence or other causes and an allowance for wind but in no case shall the design horizontal load to be resisted in any direction be less than two percent of the total dead load .
falsework shall be designed of sufficient rigidity to resist the design horizontal load prior to placement of concrete .
falsework foundations shall be designed to carry the loads imposed on them without exceeding allowable soil bearing values and anticipated settlements .
maximum allowable stresses loadings and deflections used in design of falsework shall be as follows timber compression perpendicular to the grain dense select structural grade southern pine num psi num mpa compression parallel to the grain but not to exceed num psi num mpa numldnum psi numldnum mpa flexural stress reduced to num psi num mpa for members with a nominal depth of num inches num mm or less .
num psi num mpa horizontal shear dense select structural grade southern pine num psi num mpa deflection due to weight mass of concrete .
num of clear span irrespective of the fact that the deflection may be compensated for by camber strips .
timber piles maximum loading num inch num mm butt diameter num tons num kn steel deflection due to weight mass of concrete irrespective of the fact that the deflection may be compensated for by camber strips .
num of clear span stresses shall not exceed those specified in the manual of steel construction as published by the aisc .
when the grade of the steel can not be positively identified design stresses shall conform to either those specified in said aisc manual for astm a num steel or the following tension axial and flexural .
num psi num mpa compression flexural but not to exceed num psi num mpa num ldbt psi num num ldbt mpa compression axial.except lr shall not exceed num .
num numlrnum psi num numlrnum mpa shear on gross section of the web of rolled shapes .
num psi num mpa web crippling for rolled shapes num psi num mpa in the foregoing formulas l is the unsupported member length d is the least dimension of rectangular columns or the width of a square of equivalent cross sectional area for round columns or the depth of beam b is the width of member t is the thickness of the compression flange and r is the radius of gyration of the member .
e modulus of elasticity used for timber shall be num x num psi num gpa and for steel shall be num x num psi num gpa .
any additional design criteria which may be needed shall be developed by the contractors licensed professional engineer designer and included with the calculations of the falsework submittal .
section num structural portland cement concrete num falsework over or adjacent to roadways or railroads which are open to traffic during construction shall be designed and constructed such that it is stable if subjected to vehicular impact or features shall be provided to protect falsework supports from vehicular impact .
protection shall be designed such that it does not present a hazard to vehicular traffic .
design criteria for permanent steel bridge deck forms shall be as shown elsewhere in this section .
num .
removal of falsework .
no falsework supporting concrete shall be removed or wedges loosened without the consent of the engineer .
if adequate test cylinders have been made falsework may be removed when the cylinders indicate that the concrete has developed a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa otherwise falsework shall be removed according to the following time limitations .
falsework may be removed after expiration of num days exclusive of days when for four hours or more the temperature is below num f num c. falsework under slabs of less than num foot num m span may be removed after seven days with the same temperature limitations .
falsework shall be gradually and uniformly released in such a manner as to avoid injurious stresses in any part of the structure .
wedges shall be removed first under slabs and transverse beams starting at the center of the span and working both ways then wedges under longitudinal girders and beams shall be removed also starting at the center of the span and working both ways simultaneously .
all falsework piles at the time of removal or cleanup shall be pulled out or cut off at an elevation not more than num inches num mm above the bed of the stream .
piles not in water shall be removed or cut off flush with or below the ground surface of stream bed .
piles within roadbed limits shall be cut off at least num feet num m below subgrade elevation .
other piles within roadway limits shall be cut off at least num inches num mm below the finished surface of the front slope ditch or backslope .
j curing concrete .
num .
exposed surfaces .
whenever the engineer determines that weather conditions are such that evaporation from the surface may cause shrinkage cracking a fog or mist spray may be required at intervals as needed during and after finishing until curing material can be applied so that the surface will be at all times damp but not excessively wet .
the contractor shall give careful attention to the proper curing of the concrete .
all surfaces not covered by forms shall be protected with an approved membrane curing compound from list iinum of the msdsar manual dampened burlap polyethylene film white opaque white burlap polyethylene sheet cotton mats or wetted sand as soon after placing the concrete as possible without marring the surface except for bridge deck slabs which shall be treated as noted in item num below .
immediately upon removal of forms other surfaces shall be treated by one of the approved curing methods .
unless membrane curing compound is used all curing materials shall be kept wet and shall remain in place for seven days except that small portions may be temporarily removed during actual finishing operations .
note when polyethylene film or white burlappolyethylene sheeting is used it shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that a complete moisturetight enclosure over the surface to be cured will be provided .
these materials shall meet the requirements noted in section num .
num .
bridge deck slabs .
a .
general .
prior to placing a bridge deck slab the evaporation rate shall be determined by use of the graph in figure num evaporation rate of surface moisture and recorded on form bmtnum evaporation rate record .
the contractor shall furnish the equipment necessary to measure the air temperature ambient wind velocity and humidity .
the equipment or a manufacturers certificate of calibration showing the equipments model number and serial number shall be submitted to the area materials engineer no less than section num structural portland cement concrete num num days prior to their use .
the equipment shall consist of the following instruments with the following specifications .
num anemometer range nummph num kmhr .
accuracy plus or minus num .
units u.s .
customary and metric .
num hygrometer range num relative humidity .
accuracy plus or minus num .
units u.s .
customary and metric .
certified and traceable to n.i.s.t .
num thermometer range num f num c. accuracy plus or minus num f plus or minus num c units u.s .
customary and metric .
combination instruments such as anemometer and thermometer or hygrometer and thermometer will be accepted provided they meet the above requirements .
if the placement is expected to last more than two hours the evaporation rate shall be checked and recorded on form bmtnum at twohour intervals or less .
to prevent plastic shrinkage cracking the expected evaporation rate shall not exceed num pounds per square foot per hour num kgmnumhour .
when the evaporation rate exceeds this amount the contractor shall be required to effectively reduce the rate to within the allowable limits by taking one or more of the following actions num construct windbreaks or enclosures to effectively reduce the wind velocity throughout the area of placement .
num use fog sprayers or sprinklers upwind of the placement operation to effectively increase the relative humidity .
num reduce the temperature of the concrete .
the department will evaluate plastic shrinkage cracks that occur .
remedial measures shall be performed as directed by the engineer .
plastic shrinkage cracks shall never be troweled over or filled with slurry .
section num structural portland cement concrete num figure num .
evaporation rate of surface moisture b .
evaporation control after screeding .
continuous fogging or an evaporation barrier monomolecular material shall be used for all bridge deck curing beginning immediately after the screeding operations have been completed for sections of the deck not to exceed five feet from the starting location .
if fogging is to be used a continuous fog or mist spray shall be maintained until the moist curing procedures described elsewhere in this section begin .
intermittent fogging is not acceptable if there is drying of the concrete surface .
if water begins to pond on the deck the contractor shall adjust the rate of fogging to minimize the ponding of water .
section num structural portland cement concrete num if an evaporation barrier material is to be used it shall be applied immediately behind the screeding operation and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the entire top portion of the concrete slab shall be covered with the barrier material applied under pressure at a rate of one gallon liter to not more than num square feet num mnum of fresh concrete .
application shall be done with an industrial type sprayer in such a manner as to cover the surface being treated with a uniform film .
c. moist curing after finishing .
immediately after the finishing operation concrete bridge decks shall be moist cured for seven days by maintaining a moist condition for the entire curing period .
this may be accomplished by one of the following methods num fog spraying or sprinkling with nozzles or sprinklers .
when using this method the contractor shall maintain a complete and continuous moist condition of the concrete surface .
intermittent sprinkling is not acceptable .
care shall be taken that erosion of the surface does not occur .
num saturated burlap saturated plastic coated burlap or cotton mats .
these curing materials shall be clean and free from any injurious substances that can cause deleterious effects to the concrete or cause discoloration .
the burlap or cotton shall be completely saturated before being placed on the concrete and shall be maintained in that condition for the entire curing period .
should tears or holes appear in the mat sheets they shall be repaired immediately .
all edges of burlaps and mats shall extend at least num inches num mm beyond the concrete surface .
where two individual sheets join their edges shall overlap at least num inches num mm .
all edges and overlaps shall be secured to ensure that the concrete surface is completely covered during the entire curing period .
these curing materials shall be kept in contact with the concrete surface at all times .
alternate cycles of wetting and drying shall be avoided because this may result in pattern cracking .
prior to the start of the curing operation the contractor shall have an approved curing system that ensures continuous moist curing of the concrete for num hours per day .
if water or the chosen curing material stains or discolors concrete surfaces which are permanently exposed the contractor shall be responsible for cleaning the surfaces .
when wooden forms are left in place during curing they shall be kept wet at all times .
if steel forms are used in hot weather nonsupporting vertical forms shall be broken loose from the concrete and curing water continually applied in this void .
if the forms are removed before the end of the curing period curing shall be carried out as on unformed surfaces .
num .
protection of concrete during curing .
green concrete shall be protected against jarring or other movement that might cause damage .
no traffic or other superimposed load will be permitted over bridges or culverts until the following criteria have been met num bridges the concrete shall have reached a minimum num psi num mpa compressive strength as determined from test cylinders .
num culverts the culvert concrete shall have reached a minimum of num psi num mpa compressive strength as determined from test cylinders or num days have passed since the last concrete was placed exclusive of days when for num hours or more the temperature is below num f num c. k finishing concrete .
num .
general .
the details set forth hereinafter in this subarticle cover the requirements for the several classes of surface finishes which shall be applied to the various parts of concrete structures .
these various classes of surface finishing will be used in accordance with the following class num required on all concrete surfaces except wearing surfaces and surfaces placed in direct contact with natural ground or embankment .
class num required on all exposed concrete surfaces within the requirements noted elsewhere in this section unless another class is specified .
section num structural portland cement concrete num class num may be used on designated bridge structures when specified by plan details .
wearing surface finish for bridge deck travelway shall be as specified in subitem numcnum.c .
and for sidewalks as specified in item numcnum .
exposed surfaces or sidewalks driveways curbs and gutters shall have a textured finish obtained by the use of a burlap or cotton drag brush or broom so that a uniform gritty texture is obtained .
exposed surfaces of concrete flumes and slope paving shall have a float finish .
num .
class num finish ordinary surface finish .
this class finish will require the concrete surface to be free from objectionable projections swells fins ridges depressions waves holes and other defects .
this will require that immediately after the forms are removed metal ties shall be removed for a minimum depth of num inch num mm from the face of the concrete .
all cavities or depressions resulting from this removal or from other causes shall be carefully filled and pointed with a mortar of sand and cement and the surface left smooth and even .
the proportion of cement to sand measured by volume shall be one to two unless otherwise specified .
the surface film of all pointed areas shall be carefully removed before setting occurs .
any fins ridges or projections shall be struck off smooth with the surface of the concrete .
particular care shall be taken throughout the progress of this operation to use one of the curing methods covered elsewhere in this section .
if a coated surface finish is to be applied in a later finishing operation the coating material may be used in lieu of mortar to fill small air holes in the concrete surface however this must be given time to take a set prior to applying the coated surface finish .
num .
class num surface finish .
a .
general .
this class surface finish requires that in addition to a class num finish the exposed surfaces of bridges culverts headwalls inlets etc .
as defined in the subitem d. below receive an additional surface finish in accordance with the following if only one brand and type of cement from the same mill is used in a structure or unit substructure or superstructure the contractor may elect to either apply a rubbed surface finish or apply an approved coated surface finish .
if more than one brand of cement is used in a structure the contractor shall apply a coated surface finish .
the same type of surface finish shall be used throughout the entire structure unless otherwise authorized in writing by the engineer .
b .
rubbed surface finish .
as soon as the class num surface finish has been completed and the pointing has set sufficiently to permit it the entire surface except chamfers shall be wetted with a brush and rubbed with a no .
num carborundum stone or an abrasive of equal quality bringing the surface to a paste .
the rubbing shall be continued sufficiently to remove all form marks and projections producing a smooth dense surface without pits or irregularities .
the material which in the above process has been ground to a paste shall then be carefully spread or brushed uniformly over the entire surface and allowed to take a reset .
curing shall continue on this surface as noted to be required elsewhere in this section .
the final finish shall be obtained by a complete rubbing with a no .
num carborundum stone or an abrasive of equal quality .
this rubbing shall continue until the entire surface is of a smooth texture and uniform in color .
c. coated surface finish .
only departmental approved coated finishing materials may be used .
the coating material shall be one of the coating materials shown on list iiinum surface coatings for portland cement concrete .
this list is given in the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
the application of the coating shall be in an approved manner normally in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations by competent and experienced personnel .
the overall coated finish shall be uniform in coverage texture and color after the coating material has taken set and cured .
failure to obtain uniformity of section num structural portland cement concrete num coverage texture and color shall be cause for the engineer to require such remedial action as deemed necessary to obtain the desired results .
the following actions shall be taken before the application of any coated finish a class num surface finish shall be applied and all pointing completely set .
surface shall be cleaned and free from foreign matter .
if membrane curing compound was used to cure the concrete the curing compound shall have weathered for a minimum time period of six weeks .
special care shall be taken to ensure that areas not to be treated are protected to prevent treatment from overlapping onto these designated areas .
d. exposed surfaces .
exposed surfaces for this class finish is defined as all surfaces including bottom chamfers and fillets except num the wearing surface of roadway slabs and sidewalks num those surfaces having immediate contact with embankment or excavation num those surfaces below low water level andor below newly established ground line after backfilling excavation or excavated channels num underside and interior faces of girders beams and slabs and underside of sidewalks where the edge beam extends num inches num mm or more below the bottom of the sidewalks num top and bottom surfaces of all type caps and num those parts of minor structures box culverts and bridge culverts that are not readily visible from a travelway .
num .
class num surface finish .
this class surface finish requires that in addition to the class num surface finish only the designated exposed surfaces of a bridge structure noted below be given an additional finish of either a rubbed or coated finish in accordance with the requirements given elsewhere in this section .
exposed surfaces shall be defined as the inside top and outside surfaces of barrier rail to bottom of slab overhang and all portions of the bridge abutments outside the edge of the exterior girders that are not in immediate contact with embankment or excavation .
all other structure surfaces exposed and unexposed shall receive a class num finish immediately after the forms are removed .
l concrete for precast nonprestressed and prestressed members .
concrete for precasting shall meet the requirements given in this section unless amended by concrete requirements given in other sections .
additional requirements are given in section num and aldotnum for the concrete required for precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members .
additional requirements are given in section num and aldotnum for the concrete required for precast prestressed concrete bridge members .
num inspection .
a general .
the contractor shall give the engineer sufficient advance notice before starting to place concrete in any section of a structure to permit the inspection of forms placing of steel reinforcements and of preparation for placing .
any defective falsework or forming shall be corrected or removed and replaced as necessary to the satisfaction of the engineer all at the expense of the contractor .
authorization of the engineer shall be secured before concrete is placed in any portion of a structure .
any concrete placed in violation of this provision or in the absence of the inspector shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the state .
b removable forms .
after the forms have been removed any defective work discovered shall be removed and replaced in a satisfactory manner .
if the surface of the concrete is bulged sagged uneven or honeycombed to such an extent that it can not be satisfactorily repaired the entire section shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the state .
c stay in place steel forms .
after the deck concrete has been in place for a minimum period of two days the concrete if deemed necessary by the engineer shall be tested for soundness and bonding of the forms by sounding with a hammer as directed by the engineer .
the number and locations of the forms to be section num structural portland cement concrete num tested shall be as selected by the engineer .
if areas of doubtful soundness are disclosed by this procedure the contractor will be required to remove the forms from such areas for visual inspection after the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
care shall be exercised to distinguish the sound of broken bond from the sound of defective concrete .
at locations where sections of the forms are removed the contractor will not be required to replace the forms but the adjacent metal forms and supports shall be repaired to present a neat appearance and assure their satisfactory retention .
as soon as the forms are removed the concrete surfaces will be examined for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
if irregularities are found and in the opinion of the engineer these irregularities do not justify rejection of the work the concrete shall be repaired as the engineer may direct .
if the concrete where the forms are removed is unsatisfactory additional forms as necessary shall be removed to inspect and repair the slab and the contractors methods of construction shall be modified as required to obtain satisfactory concrete in the slabs .
all unsatisfactory concrete shall be removed or repaired as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide all facilities as are reasonably required for the safe and convenient conduct of the engineers inspection procedures .
no additional compensation will be allowed the contractor for compliance with the above inspection procedures .
num acceptance of concrete .
a general .
certified concrete technicians as required by the department shall perform all concrete inspections and testing .
procedures for technician certifications and laboratory qualifications are described in aldotnum certification and qualification program for concrete technicians and concrete laboratories .
fresh concrete will be accepted on the basis of slump total air content and temperature meeting the requirements specified for the class of concrete .
hardened concrete shall be accepted on the basis of compressive strength meeting the requirements specified in item numcnum for that class of concrete .
compressive strength from concrete cylinders will be accepted when the average of two consecutive cylinder test results obtained at the same age equals or exceeds the specified num day compressive strength and neither cylinder test result is below num of the specified numday compressive strength .
b substandard concrete .
num .
general .
the department will investigate any concrete not meeting the acceptance requirements outlined in subarticle numa .
concrete investigations will be used to determine the suitability of potentially substandard concrete .
this investigation may include any or all of the procedures outlined in aldotnum .
the combined results of the departments investigations will be used to assess the acceptability or rejection of potentially substandard concrete .
if the investigation results show that the concrete fails to meet the contract requirements the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of the investigation to include but not limited to perdiem travel expenses and sampling and testing .
num .
inplace compressive strength .
if the department deems it necessary to evaluate only the inplace compressive strength of substandard concrete a core investigation as described in aldotnum will be performed .
price adjustments will be applied to the applicable pay item for the number of cubic yards represented by the low cylinder breaks and will be determined as follows .
if the average compressive strength of the cores is equal to or greater than num of the specified numday compressive strength the concrete will be accepted with no price adjustment .
if the average compressive strength of the cores is num or greater but less than num of the specified numday compressive strength and the bridge engineer deems the concrete to be structurally acceptable the concrete will be accepted with a price adjustment .
the price adjustment will be applied to the applicable pay item for the number of cubic yards section num steel reinforcement num represented by the low breaks .
the price adjustment shall be determined from the following formula price adjustment in percent num x num fc fc avg num fc fc required numday compressive strength psi mpa fc avg average compressive strength of test cores psi mpa the price adjustment shall be rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent the price adjustment is valid where num price adjustment num .
section num steel reinforcement num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing reinforcement steel for concrete structures in accordance with detailed plans and these specifications .
num materials .
a general requirements .
all materials shall conform to applicable portions of division num materials .
specific reference is made to section num steel reinforcement .
steel mesh shall be used only when and as shown on the plans .
special attention is directed to article num for the use of rail steel reinforcing bars in structures .
all reinforcing bars when shipped from the fabricator or supplier to the project site shall conform to the following bundling and tagging practice num .
bundling all bundles shall consist of the same size bars and the same heat number .
num .
tags tags shall be made of durable material and marked in a legible manner with waterproof markings not less than one tag per bundle .
the tags shall show the grade number of pieces size marks or length of bar and heat number of steel .
the supplier of the reinforcing steel shall furnish to the engineer three copies of an itemized list of all steel included in each shipment .
such list shall show the mark of the bar bar number heat number grade length and weight mass of all steel for each structure requiring reinforcing steel .
b bar bending diagrams .
when bar lists and bending diagrams are shown on the plans the contractor shall verify their accuracy from the drawings .
errors in the bar bending schedules and bar list shall not be cause for adjustment of contract unit prices .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all reinforcement received on the project shall be placed in approved storage and shall be maintained clean intact and free from distortion .
reinforcement shall be free from loose or thick rust which would impair bond of the steel with the concrete .
rust that produces only discoloration without reducing the cross section of the steel will not be considered objectionable .
only such reinforcement shall be distributed along the construction as is needed for immediate use .
b equipment .
all equipment necessary for the proper fabrication bending handling and installation of reinforcement must be available when required in first class working condition and shall be approved before fabrication and construction will be permitted to begin .
c handling and placing reinforcement .
num .
bending .
reinforcement shall be bent in accordance with crsi manual of standard practice mspnum accurately to the form and dimensions shown on the plans without heating .
in bending care shall be taken not to injure the steel and only proper appliances and section num steel reinforcement num competent workmen shall be employed on the work .
the radius of bends shall be three or more times the diameter of the bar unless shown otherwise on the plans .
abrupt bends shall be avoided .
any reinforcement bent during shipment or handling shall be properly reshaped without heating to a higher temperature than that producing a dark cherryred color before being placed in the work .
bars with kinks or bends and bars appreciably reduced in cross sectional areas shall be rejected .
num .
cleaning .
metal reinforcement before being placed shall be cleaned of loose mill scale and of coatings of dirt paint oil grease or any other foreign substance .
num .
placing .
all reinforcing steel shall be accurately placed and firmly held in the position shown on the plans during the placing and hardening of the concrete .
a num inch num mm vertical placement tolerance will be allowed on the top mat of reinforcing steel in the bridge decks .
num .
wiring and supporting .
a .
all reinforcement shall as elected by the contractor be num rigidly wired or num if approved by the engineer spot welded .
suitable provision shall be made for supporting reinforcement in position during the placing of concrete .
no construction operation shall be permitted which tends to bend or displace the reinforcement from its correct position .
all reinforcement shall be placed and securely wired spaced and blocked before placing concrete in any section .
railing post reinforcement shall be installed before placing the curb concrete .
in no case shall reinforcing steel be driven or forced into concrete after it has set .
b .
all reinforcing metal shall be maintained at the proper distance from the forms or in the case of layers from each layer by means of approved stays mortar blocks metal chairs ties hangers or other approved supports .
c. mortar blocks shall be precast from a mortar mix composed of one part portland cement and two parts concrete sand with wires cast into them for fastening to the steel .
blocks shall be moistcured other curing methods may be accepted for at least three days before use .
block basic shape shall be a square num inch num mm x num inch num mm min .
with appropriate height as required to hold the steel in its designated position num inch num inch num mm num mm .
the size and shape shall be approved before use .
tie wires shall be num inch num mm minimum diameter .
d. metal supports shall be in accordance with crsi manual of standard practice mspnum for class num bar supports except that supports which are to be in direct contact with removable forms shall be class num supports .
any premolded class num support tips that do not provide a tight snug fit shall be rejected and removed from the work .
e. the use of pebbles pieces of broken concrete stone or brick metal pipe and wooden blocks will not be permitted .
num .
inspection .
a. reinforcement in any member shall be placed and then inspected and approved before the placing of concrete begins .
concrete placed in violation of this provision shall be rejected and removed at no additional cost to the state .
b .
extreme care shall be taken to insure that the final location of bars in the top of floor slabs sidewalks curbs and beams are not lower than the clear distance from the top of the finished slab as shown on the plans .
d splicing and lapping steel reinforcement .
num .
splicing .
whenever it is necessary to splice reinforcement at points other than those shown on the plans drawings showing the locations and details of each splice shall be submitted by the contractor and approved before the reinforcing steel is ordered by the contractor .
splices shall be avoided at points of maximum stress they shall where possible be staggered and shall be designed to develop the strength of the steel without exceeding the allowable unit bond stress .
unless otherwise shown on the plans bars shall be lapped num diameters to make the splice in the slab and in the bottom of beams and girders and not less than num diameters in section num steel reinforcement num walls columns haunches and near the tops of beams and girders having more than num inches num mm of fluid concrete under the bars .
in lapped splices the bars shall be placed in contact and wired together in such a manner as to maintain a clearance of not less than the minimum clearance distance to the surface of the concrete .
welding of reinforcing steel shall be done only if detailed on the plans or if authorized in writing .
welding shall conform to the current specifications for welded highway and railway bridges of the american welding society .
num .
lapping .
sheets of mesh or bar mat reinforcement shall overlap each other sufficiently to maintain a uniform strength and shall be securely fastened at the ends and edges .
the edge lap shall not be less than one mesh in width .
num .
restrictive conditions for the welding of reinforcing bars .
reinforcing bars shall not be welded unless shown otherwise on the plans or approved by the bridge engineer .
num .
butt splicing .
reinforcing bars shall be butt spliced only when shown on the plans .
the butt splice shall be a mechanical coupling splice .
the mechanical coupling shall be made with a coupler that can develop in tension at least num percent of the specified yield strength fy of the bar .
the contractor shall prepare three test splices using the proposed method of splicing and reinforcing bars obtained from the supplier of the reinforcing steel .
these test splices and two unspliced bars will be tested by the alabama department of transportations bureau of materials and tests .
the tension tests will be performed on full cross section specimens in accordance with astm e num e numm using a gage length that spans the extremities of the connector .
complete details of the mechanical splice and the methods and equipment proposed for use in making the splice shall be submitted to the department for approval .
num method of measurement .
a lump sum unit measurement .
the steel reinforcement required for a bridge superstructure will be measured for payment as a lump sum unit .
b theoretical unit weight mass measurement .
the theoretical unit weight mass in pounds kilograms shall be used as the method of measurement for steel reinforcement where no other method of measurement is given for payment purposes .
the weight mass of steel paid for shall be the number of pounds kilograms of steel acceptably placed as shown to be required on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the unit weight mass used for deformed bars shall be the weight mass of plain square or round bars as the case may be of equal nominal size .
if steel mesh or expanded metal is required the weight per square foot mass per square meter will be shown on the plans .
the actual quantity measured for payment will be that shown on the itemized list specified in subarticle numa with deductions made for errors in number size or length of bars shipped steel reinforcement used in a structure where the cost of the steel is included in the cost of the structure steel reinforcement in bridge concrete superstructure units discrepancies or errors in the list itself .
section num steel reinforcement num c areas dimensions and weights masses .
area dimensions and weights masses to be used in calculations for the various size bars shall be as follows bar designation number weight mass pounds per foot kg m diameter inches mm crosssectional area square inches mmnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num d splicing .
weight mass allowance will be made for only those splices shown on the plans .
no weight mass allowance will be made for splices for the contractors convenience .
e miscellaneous metal parts .
num .
no allowance will be made for any device material or method which may be used for splicing clamping tying butt welding and keeping reinforcement in proper position .
num .
when the proposal form omits pay items for other metal parts indicated and required in connection with the construction of concrete structures and compensation for such parts is not elsewhere provided in these specifications or on the plans the weight mass of such other metal parts will be included in the weight mass computed for steel reinforcement .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
where the unit of measurement for steel reinforcement is pounds kilograms the weight mass of steel reinforcement determined as provided above shall be paid for at the contract unit price per pound kilogram which price and payment shall be full compensation for fabricating furnishing placing and butt welding all materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the item in accordance with plan details .
the reinforcement required for a bridge superstructure shall be paid for at the contract unit price bid per lump sum for steel reinforcement for bridge superstructure which shall be full compensation for fabricating furnishing and placing all materials in accordance with plan details .
the contract unit bid price shall also be full compensation for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
an increase or decrease in the quantity of steel reinforcement for a bridge superstructure from that shown on the plans which is caused by a change in the plans after the contract has been let will result in an increase or decrease in the compensation due the contractor .
changes to the compensation for the superstructure reinforcing steel will be made by applying the percentage of the increase or decrease to the contract lump sum price for pay item numb steel reinforcement for bridge superstructure .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa steel reinforcement per pound kilogram numb steel reinforcement for bridge superstructure per lump sum station number bridge number ramp number etc .
lane if applicable approximate quantity of reinforcing steel in pounds kilograms section num structure foundations num section num structure foundations num description .
the work under this section shall cover preparing foundations for bridges box culverts and other miscellaneous structures .
these foundations shall be built in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the provisions providedin this section .
num materials .
materials used in the work required under this section shall conform to the applicable requirements provided elsewhere in these specifications .
num construction requirements .
a general .
in the construction of foundations it is the intent that the foundations be constructed in the dry insofar as practical .
excavation shall be in accordance with section num or num whichever is applicable .
where excavation is near a railroad track the contractor shall install such shoring and sheeting as deemed necessary by the engineer and the chief engineer of the railroad company involved .
provisions of article num shall govern .
where the excavation is near a building utility or other property the contractor shall install shoring and sheeting and perform such other work as shown on the plans for proper protection of the property and in addition shall comply fully with the requirements of article num regarding protection of property .
b depth and size of footings .
the elevation of the bottoms of footings as shown on the plans shall be considered as approximate only and the engineer may order in writing such changes in dimensions or elevations of footings as may be necessary to secure a satisfactory foundation .
c preparation of foundations for footings .
num .
general .
all rock or other hard foundation material shall be freed from all loose material cleaned and cut to a firm surface either level stepped or roughened as may be directed by the engineer .
where seams voids cracks or crevices exist they shall be cleaned out and filled as directed by the engineer .
in rock the openings shall be filled with subfooting concrete class a concrete if the concrete can be placed in the dry .
refer to articles num and num concerning measurement and payment .
if the concrete can not be placed in the dry the contractor shall propose a method for filling the openings for review and approval by the engineer .
in hard dry material other than rock the engineer may allow the use of item numb foundation backfill or direct the use of subfooting concrete .
when the footing is to rest on an excavated surface other than rock special care shall be taken not to disturb the bottom of the excavation and the final removal of the foundation material to grade shall not be made until just before the footing is to be placed .
num .
stable material .
where rock or hard foundation material is available excavation for the footing shall be to neat lines and the concrete poured against the excavated walls without forms unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
concrete used to replace rock or hard foundation material excavated outside of the neat lines will not be measured for payment .
num .
unstable material .
if the material encountered at the elevation shown on the plans for the bottom of footing is of a soft and unstable nature lacking in the required bearing value and tests show the existence of satisfactory material of sufficient thickness and bearing value at a depth of less than num feet num m below the elevation shown on the plans for such footing the engineer section num structure foundations num may order that the footing be lowered into the satisfactory material andor that the dimensions of the footing be increased .
num .
pile footing .
the excavation of each pit shall be completed before the piles are driven .
after driving is completed all loose and displaced material shall be so removed as to leave a smooth solid bed to receive the footing .
num .
foundation backfill .
foundation backfill shall be used as directed by the engineer .
attention is directed to section num or num whichever is applicable .
num .
adjustment in footings .
the construction adjustments permitted above shall not be considered as materially altering the original plans and shall not be a waiver of any condition of the contract nor invalidate any of the provisions thereof .
d cofferdam and pumping .
num .
general .
in the construction of footings and substructures the item of cofferdam and pumping shall be used on all piers or bents where so designated on the plans .
working drawings and computations shall be submitted in accordance with article num .
attention is directed to section num for piers and bents not designated to receive the item of cofferdam and pumping .
num .
details .
interlocking steel sheet piling of num inch num mm minimum web thickness shall be used in all cofferdam work .
the tops of the cofferdams shall be well above the normal water stages and their bottoms shall be carried to a depth that will prevent flow of materials into the excavation .
they shall be constructed in a substantial manner capable of resisting earth water or concrete without appreciable displacement distortion or leakage .
interior clear dimensions of cofferdams shall be such as will provide sufficient clearance for construction and removal of forms and for a sump outside the footing where footings are to be poured in the dry .
no excess excavation and seal concrete will be paid for where the contractor elects to use an oversized cofferdam for his convenience .
e removal of cofferdams .
cofferdams shall not be removed until after the substructure has been constructed above normal water elevation or above the ground lines whichever is applicable and after the engineer has inspected the work .
care shall be taken in removing the temporary construction so as not to damage the footings and columns .
any damage as a result of the cofferdam removal shall be replaced or repaired without additional compensation from the department .
cofferdam sheet piling shall remain permanently inplace and undisturbed if this is shown to be required on the plans .
f pumping .
all substructure concrete shall be placed in the dry unless otherwise provided on the plans .
pumping during the placing of foundation concrete shall be done from a suitable sump separated from the concrete work and shall be so conducted that there will be no water currents inside the forms or inside the excavation if no forms are required .
pumping equipment shall in all cases be of ample capacity to keep the excavation practically free of water until all the concrete is in place .
water that originates in the footing area or that is necessary to come through or across the footing area shall be handled in approved pipes or conduits to the pump sump .
cofferdams shall be dewatered for inspection purposes without additional compensation when requested .
g seal concrete .
num .
general .
seal concrete shall be used by the contractor only when required by plan details as a structural footing or when directed by the engineer in accordance with the following conditions .
if the material encountered at the designed elevation of the bottom of the footing is so porous that water enters at such a rate that it is impractical to lower water level to this elevation by pumping or if the material is so plastic that it can not be prevented from flowing into the excavation by driving sheeting to reasonable depths the engineer may section num structure foundations num require the contractor to seal the cofferdam with concrete .
the seal concrete shall be placed in the manner prescribed in section num .
after placement of seal concrete the cofferdam shall not be dewatered for seven days or until concrete has by test indicated a compression strength of num psi num mpa .
immediately prior to placing seal concrete on a rock surface the footing floor shall be cleaned by airlift or other acceptable methods .
after cleaning any mud silt etc .
which is impossible to remove shall be agitated by means of compressed air jet so that this material will be suspended in the water during the placing of seal concrete .
all footings which are to receive seal concrete except pile footings will require an underwater inspection by the department prior to placing the seal unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
the contractor shall give at least a num hour notice prior to the need for an underwater inspection .
the contractor shall provide transportation to the cofferdam cell and a work station for the diver and his equipment .
if the footing floor is found to be unacceptable another underwater inspection will be required after corrections are made .
num .
core drilling of seal concrete footings .
pile footings will not be required to be cored unless noted otherwise on the plans or ordered by the engineer .
all other seal concrete footings shall be cored in accordance with the following procedure .
cores shall be taken by the contractor for use by the engineer in determining the quality of the seal concrete .
two cores shall be taken if only one tremie pipe is used for the placement of the seal concrete in the footing .
four cores shall be taken if more than one tremie pipe is used for the placement of the seal concrete in the footing .
after dewatering the cofferdam the engineer will inform the contractor of the location of holes to be cored in the seal concrete in each footing to determine its quality .
an accurate log of cores shall be kept and the cores shall be placed in a crate and properly marked showing the footing depth and elevation at each interval of core recovery .
the cores along with three copies of the coring logs shall be transported undisturbed to the materials tests bureau montgomery alabama for inspection .
no further concrete shall be poured inside the cofferdam until approval is received from the construction bureau .
because it is necessary to obtain a high percentage of core recovery for visual inspection and compressive strength testing the core bit used for core drilling shall be warranted by the manufacturer to be capable of coring the strength of concrete in the seal footing .
the engineer may require a new bit or replacement of the core barrel at any time inspection indicates that the equipment is incapable of coring as required .
the minimum core diameter shall be num inches num mm .
if the quality of the seal concrete footing is determined to be unacceptable the engineer may require the drilling of additional cores without compensation if the seal concrete is unacceptable the contractor shall construct another foundation or perform corrective work as required by the department .
this foundation or the corrective work shall be constructed without compensation from the department .
the details of the replacement foundation shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in article num for working drawings .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer all footings shall be cored to a point num inches num mm above the bottom of the seal concrete footing .
h class of concrete .
the class of concrete required for the specific type of work involved shall be in accordance with the provisions of section num. i construction joints .
in general each footing shall be constructed as a monolith .
if construction joints are required they shall be constructed as provided in section num. j finish .
concrete surfaces shall be finished in accordance with the provisions of section num for class num with exposed surfaces receiving a class num finish unless otherwise specified by the proposal or by plan requirements .
section num structure foundations num num method of measurement .
a seal concrete .
the measurement of the volume of seal concrete in a footing shall be calculated from the following l length of footing shown on contract plans feet meters w width of footing shown on contract plans feet meters t final approved elevation of the top of the seal footing feet meters d final approved elevation of the bottom of the seal footing feet meters vs volume of seal concrete for which payment will be made cubic yards cubic meters .
vs l x w x t d num vs l x w x t d seal concrete outside of these limits of measurement may be required for the construction of a seal concrete footing depending on the details of construction selected by the contractor .
no direct payment will be made for any seal concrete outside of the footing plan dimensions shown on the contract plans .
b cofferdam and pumping .
when items for cofferdam and pumping for individual piers or bents are provided by the plans andor proposal such will be measured in individual lump sum items for the pier or bent designated .
c excavation and backfill .
excavation and backfill when provided by the plans proposal or directed will be measured and paid for under the applicable provisions of sections num and num. d core drilling .
the actual depth of each core hole drilled at the location directed will be measured in feet meters to the nearest num of a foot meter .
e subfooting concrete .
concrete ordered and accepted for filling voids cracks and crevices as required in item numcnum will be measured by the cubic yard cubic meter delivered to the work site and acceptably placed minus any concrete wasted .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
seal concrete .
accepted seal concrete used as directed and measured as noted above will be paid at the contract price which shall be full compensation for the concrete complete in place exclusive of reinforcing steel .
num .
cofferdam and pumping .
when cofferdam and pumping has been provided for a designated pier or bent the lump sum item shall be full compensation for the furnishing and installation of all material dewatering maintenance removal satisfactory clean up of the area and for all tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
partial payment after installation of cofferdam will be made based on the following cofferdam complete in place num excavation performed and columns poured to elevation above normal water elevation num cofferdam work complete and sheet piling removed num num .
core drilling .
payment for the length of core drilling shall be full compensation for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
should the quality of the concrete be questionable based on the first cores taken from the footing the engineer may order additional cores to be taken from the footing .
all additional coring shall be at the contractors expense if the footing is determined to be unsatisfactory .
if the footing is determined to be satisfactory the cost of the additional coring will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot .
section num steel piling encasement num num .
concrete for rock subfootings .
the contractor will be paid the delivered invoice cost minus waste and including any applicable sales taxes to the project plus num percent .
this price includes the concrete gross receipt tax labor materials incidentals and the placing of the concrete in the designated locations .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa seal concrete per cubic yard cubic meter numb cofferdam and pumping pier no .
____ or bent no .
____ per lump sum numc core drilling seal concrete footings per linear foot meter section num steel piling encasement num description .
the work covered by this section consists of constructing reinforced concrete encasements on steel piling for existing bridges as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the work shall include the partial removal of existing piling encasement to the limits shown on the plans cleaning existing piling excavation construction of the encasements and any other incidental work or material necessary for the encasement of the piling as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num materials .
reinforcing steel material shall be furnished in accordance with the material requirements given in section num .
the contractors concrete producer shall establish the proportions for the concrete mix following the guidelines given in aldotnum method of controlling concrete operations for structural portland cement concrete and the design criteria given in this subarticle .
the concrete supplier shall submit the proposed concrete mix design to the materials and tests engineer for approval following the requirements given in aldotnum .
the distribution of approved concrete mix designs and the reapproval of concrete mix designs will be in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum .
any changes of the materials or proportions of a mix design shall be noted in a revised mix design that shall be submitted for approval .
the proposed concrete mix design shall meet the following requirements the minimum compressive strength at num days shall be num psi num mpa .
the minimum cementitious material content shall be num lbs .
per cubic yard num kg per cubic meter .
type ii cement shall be used .
the cementitious content may be composed of up to num by weight of either class c or class f fly ash .
the range of total air content shall be num to num by volume .
the mix design shall be based on a target total air content of num .
the maximum water to total cementitious material ratio shall be num .
the slump range shall be from num inches to num inches num mm to num mm during placement .
gradation of coarse aggregate used shall meet the requirements for either aldot size no .
num no .
num or no .
num .
form material shall be capable of withstanding the pressure of the placement of the concrete .
rigid forms shall be used for the construction of the encasements .
fabric forms will not be allowed .
the epoxy mortar used to seal the forms shall be made from an approved type i epoxy adhesive .
the mix proportions of the epoxy adhesive and aggregate shall be those recommended by the manufacturer of the epoxy adhesive .
section num steel piling encasement num num construction requirements .
a general .
the engineer will make the final determination of whether the construction of a piling encasement should be done in either a wet or dry condition .
an encasement must be constructed in the wet condition if the pile encasement site can not be dewatered by pumps .
the required lengths of encasement shown in the listing of quantities on the plans are approximate .
the actual required lengths of encasement may vary from the approximate lengths shown on the plans .
the contractor shall abide by the rules of navigation so as to permit the orderly passage of marine traffic at the site .
the contractor shall repair without compensation all damage done to the bridge due to performance of this work .
the contractor shall perform no work except the pumping of the concrete from the deck of the bridge .
forms shall not be removed until after the concrete has cured to a compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
all forms shall be completely removed to allow the inspection of the encasement .
an unacceptable encasement shall be removed and replaced with an acceptable encasement without additional compensation .
all materials at a work site forms old encasement materials swaybracing tools equipment etc .
that are not required as a permanent part of the bridge structure shall be removed .
b cleaning of piling .
all steel pile surfaces to be encased shall be thoroughly cleaned of all marine growth heavy rust foreign materials oil grease dirt etc .
cleaning may be done either by high pressure water jet num psi nummpa or more or by other mechanical methods approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall repaint all sections of piling where paint was removed during cleaning .
c placement of steel reinforcement .
all steel reinforcement shall be placed in accordance with plan details using nonmetallic spacers to provide the required concrete cover over the reinforcing steel and pilings .
all tie wiresshall be turned toward the pile .
d encasements constructed in wet conditions .
num .
underwater inspection .
the departments divers will inspect the encasement work .
the inspection shall be as follows the contractor shall complete all of the excavation cleaning and placement of reinforcing steel for all of the encasements required for at least one bent .
at the completion of all of the excavation cleaning and placement of reinforcing steel for all of the encasements required for at least one bent the contractor shall notify the engineer of the need for an inspection .
the contractor shall notify the engineer and the engineer will notify the aldot underwater inspection team supervisor at least num hours prior to the need for the inspection .
the departments divers will also perform other inspections as needed and a final inspection of the completed encasement work .
num .
placement of concrete .
the bottom of an encasement form shall be tightly sealed with epoxy mortar to prevent the concrete placed to fill a form from flowing out of the form .
care shall be taken to not block the bottom pumping port with the concrete or epoxy mortar seal at the bottom of a form .
the filling of an encasement form shall be done by pumping concrete through ports installed on the form .
lubricating agents placed in a pump hose shall not be pumped into an encasement form .
the concrete shall be pumped until undiluted concrete is present in all areas of the encasement .
section num piling num e encasements constructed in dry conditions .
the filling of an encasement form may be done by pumping concrete through ports installed on the form or by tremie .
lubricating agents placed in a pump hose shall not be pumped into an encasement form .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of steel piling encasement measured for payment will be the total linear feet meters of encasement measured to the nearest tenth of a foot meter from the top of the encasement to the bottom including any partial encasement where existing concrete is covered .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
accepted steel piling encasement measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter of encasement .
this bid price shall include the cost of the cleaning and scarifying or partial removal of steel piling encasements pile cleaning excavation concrete reinforcement steel forming labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numg steel piling encasement per linear foot meter show either wet condition or dry condition .
section num piling num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and driving foundation piles of the type and dimensions designated including cutting off or building up foundation piles when required .
piling shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the requirements given in these specifications at the location tip elevation penetration andor bearing shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num materials .
all materials shall meet the requirements specified in applicable portions of section num piling .
num construction requirements .
a hammers for driving piles .
num .
general .
piles shall be driven with air steam diesel and hydraulic hammers with the exception that prestressed concrete piles num inches num mm and larger shall not be driven with diesel hammers unless approved by the engineer .
all hammers shall be furnished with a means for adjusting the amount of energy that is delivered to the pile .
gravity hammers will be allowed if approved in writing by the engineer .
num .
gravity hammers .
when gravity hammers are permitted the ram shall weigh between num and num pounds have a mass between num kg and num kg and the height of drop shall not exceed num feet num m.all gravity hammers shall be equipped with hammer guides to insure concentric impact on the drive head .
num .
steam and air hammers .
the plant and equipment furnished for steam and air hammers shall have sufficient capacity to maintain under working conditions the volume and pressure specified by the manufacturer of the hammer .
the plant and equipment shall be equipped with accurate pressure gages which are easily accessible to the engineer .
the weight mass of the striking parts of air and steam hammers shall not be less than num the weight mass of the drive head and pile being driven and in no case shall the striking parts weigh have a mass less than num pounds num kg .
num .
diesel hammers .
section num piling num openend single acting diesel hammers shall be equipped with a device such as rings on the ram or a scale jump stick extending above the ram cylinder to permit the engineer to visually determine hammer stroke at all times during pile driving operations .
closedend double acting diesel hammers shall be equipped with a bounce chamber pressure gauge in proper working order mounted near ground level so as to be easily read by the engineer .
num .
hydraulic hammers .
hydraulic hammers shall have a builtin monitoring system which determines the ram velocity just before impact .
the contractor shall verify that the correct ram weight is entered in the monitoring system .
b driving appurtenancies .
num .
blow count monitoring equipment .
equipment shall be furnished by the contractor for displaying the blow count rate and stroke height during driving with all hammers except gravity and double acting hammers .
this equipment shall be operated at ground level to allow the engineer to monitor the blow count rate .
num .
hammer cushion .
where required by the hammer manufacturer impact pile driving equipment except gravity hammers shall be equipped with a suitable thickness of hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the hammer or pile and to insure uniform driving behavior .
hammer cushions shall be made of durable manufactured materials provided in accordance with the hammer manufacturers guidelines except that all wood wire rope and asbestos hammer cushions are specifically disallowed and shall not be used .
a striker plate as recommended by the hammer manufacturer shall be placed on the hammer cushion to insure uniform compression of the cushion material .
the hammer cushion shall be inspected in the presence of the engineer when beginning pile driving at each structure and after each num hours of pile driving .
a hammer cushion whose thickness has been reduced to less than num percent of the original thickness shall be replaced by the contractor before driving is permitted to continue .
num .
pile drive head .
piles driven with impact hammers require an adequate drivehead to distribute the hammer blow to the pile head .
the drive head shall be axially aligned with the hammer and the pile .
the drive head shall be guided by the leads and not be freeswinging .
the drive head shall fit around the pile head in such a manner as to prevent transfer of torsional forces during driving while maintaining proper alignment of hammer and pile .
for steel piling the pile heads shall be cut squarely and a drive head as recommended by the hammer manufacturer shall be provided to hold the axis of the pile in line with the axis of the hammer .
for prestressed concrete piles the pile head shall be plane and perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile to prevent eccentric impacts from the drive head .
for special types of piles appropriate driving heads mandrels or other devices shall be provided in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations so that the piles may be driven without damage .
num .
pile cushion .
a concrete piles head shall be protected by a wooden pile cushion .
the minimum thickness placed on the pile head prior to driving shall not be less than num inches num mm .
a new pile cushion shall be provided for each pile .
in addition the pile cushion shall be replaced if during the driving of any pile the cushion is either compressed more than onehalf the original thickness or begins to burn to the extent that flame is visible .
the pile cushion dimensions shall equal or exceed the cross sectional area of the pile top and shall be appropriately sized to fit the dimensions of the pile cap .
num .
leads .
piles shall be supported in line and position with leads while being driven .
pile driver leads shall be constructed in a manner that affords freedom of movement of the hammer while maintaining alignment of the hammer and the pile to insure concentric impact for each blow .
leads may be either fixed or swinging type .
swinging leads when used shall be fitted with a pile gate at the bottom of the leads .
the pile section being driven shall not extend above the leads .
the leads shall be adequately embedded in the ground or the pile section num piling num constrained in a structural frame such as a template to maintain alignment .
the leads shall be of sufficient length to make the use of a follower unnecessary and shall be so designed as to permit proper alignment of batter piles .
c driving aids .
num .
general .
driving aids such as jets pilot holes and followers shall not be used unless either specifically permitted in writing by the engineer or stated in the contract documents .
when permitted driving aids shall be used for installing production piles only after the pile tip elevation for safe support of the pile load is established by load testing andor test piles driven with the same aids and methods .
the contractor shall perform at his cost any extra load tests andor extra work required to drive test piles as determined by the engineer as a condition of approval of the driving aids .
num .
jetting .
jetting shall only be permitted if approved in writing by the engineer or when specifically stated in the contract documents .
the contractor shall determine the number of jets and the volume and pressure of water at the jet nozzles necessary to freely erode the material adjacent to the pile without affecting the lateral stability of the final inplace pile .
the jetting plant shall have sufficient capacity to permit installation to the required elevation location and alignment within specification tolerances .
the contractor shall decide when jetting should be discontinued above the prescribed tip elevation so that the pile will attain the required capacity at the required tip elevation established in the plans when driven with the approved hammer .
the contractor shall control treat if necessary and dispose of all jet water in a manner satisfactory to the engineer and in compliance with all regulatory guidelines .
upon completion of jetting a pile any voids around the pile shall be filled with clean sand and saturated with water unless driven under water .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage to the site caused by unapproved or improper jetting operations .
when driving concrete piles if num blows per foot num mm num blows per inch num mm is reached before the concrete pile reaches the required minimum tip elevation then jetting may be used when approved in writing by the engineer to facilitate the advancement of the concrete pile .
jetting shall be performed in a manner that allows the pile to continue on the previously established linear path of advancement by eroding the material adjacent to the concrete pile .
jetting a concrete pile may be done through internal pipes cast in the pile .
internal jet pipes shall be steel pipes for a pile that is solid concrete for the full length of the pile .
internal jet pipes shall be either steel or pvc for a pile that is cast with a void in the interior of the pile .
once driving of the concrete pile resumes the lowest stroke of the hammer shall be used until the contractor and engineer are satisfied that the original driving resistance has resumed .
under no circumstances shall driving and jetting concrete piling be allowed simultaneously .
num .
pilot holes .
augering wetrotary drilling or other methods of boring pilot holes shall be used only when approved by the engineer or shown on the plans .
when permitted such procedures shall be carried out in a manner which will not impair the load bearing capacity of the piles already in place or the safety of existing adjacent structures .
pilot holes shall be of a size smaller than the diameter or diagonal of the pile cross section that is sufficient to allow penetration of the pile to the specified depth .
if subsurface obstructions such as boulders or rock layers are encountered the hole diameter may be increased to the least dimension which is adequate for pile installation .
the use of spuds a short strong driven member which is removed to make a hole for inserting a pile shall not be permitted in lieu of pilot holes .
after a pile is placed in a pilot hole the voids around the pile shall be filled with clean sand before the pile is driven .
after driving additional sand shall be added to the hole to fill the voids left by the settlement of the sand during driving .
water shall then be added to the hole to saturate the final placement of sand .
pilot holes that terminate in rock shall be backfilled to the top of the rock with substructure concrete after seating the pile .
the remainder of the hole may be filled with either sand or concrete .
section num piling num the contractor shall decide when the pilot hole will be terminated above the prescribed tip elevation so that the pile will attain the required bearing capacity at the required tip elevation established in the plans when driven with the approved hammer .
where piles are to be endbearing on rock or hardpan pilot holes may be carried to the surface of the rock or hardpan unless otherwise noted on the plans .
the piles shall then be driven with an impact hammer to insure proper seating .
if the engineer determines that preexcavation has disturbed the load bearing capacities of previously installed piles those piles that have been disturbed shall be restored to conditions meeting the requirements of this specification by redriving or by other methods acceptable to the engineer .
redriving or other remedial measures shall be instituted after pilot hole excavation operations in the area have been completed .
the contractor shall be responsible for the costs of any necessary remedial measures unless the pilot hole excavation method was specifically included in the contract documents and properly executed by the contractor .
num .
followers .
followers shall only be used when approved in writing by the engineer or when specifically stated in the contract documents .
in cases where a follower is permitted the first pile in each bent and every tenth pile driven thereafter shall be driven full length without a follower to verify that adequate pile length is being attained to develop the desired pile capacity .
the follower and pile shall be held and maintained in equal and proper alignment during driving .
the follower shall be of such material and dimensions to permit the piles to be driven to the length determined necessary from the driving of the fulllength piles .
the final position and alignment of the first two piles installed with followers in each substructure unit shall be verified to be in accordance with the location tolerances given in this section before additional piles are installed .
d approval of pile driving hammer .
num .
general .
the contractor shall submit proposed pile driving equipment data for evaluation no less that num calendar days prior to the date that the equipment is proposed for use .
this data shall be submitted to allow the materials tests engineer to evaluate the proposed driving equipment .
the contractor shall send the submittal directly to the materials and tests engineer .
the contractor shall also send a copy of the submittal to the engineer project manager at the same time that the submittal is sent to the materials and tests engineer .
the proposed driving equipment submittal shall be pile hammer operators manuals from the hammer manufacturers .
completed pile and driving equipment data form form cnum for each proposed hammer .
charts from the hammer manufacturers shall be submitted with the data form for diesel hammers .
for single acting diesel hammers data equating stroke blows per minute and potential energy shall be shown on the charts .
for double acting diesel hammers data equating bounce chamber pressure to either equivalent energy or stroke of the hammer shall be shown on the charts .
the measurements required for the calibration data shown on the charts for double acting diesel hammers shall have been made no more than num calendar days prior to the beginning of the driving of the piles .
if more than one hammer is submitted to drive the same size piling the hammers shall be prioritized in the order of probable use .
initial approval of pile driving equipment will be given by the materials tests engineer after an evaluation usually a wave equation analysis of the pile driving equipment data .
final approval will be based on the satisfactory performance of the equipment and successful installation of representative test piles .
the representative test pile shall be the first production pile if payment for a test pile is not included in the contract .
the pile driving equipment shall not be used until approval of the engineer project manager has been given in writing .
pile driving equipment shall be maintained in proper working condition and shall be sized so that the piles are driven with reasonable effort to the required penetration without damage .
section num piling num any change in the driving system will only be considered after the contractor has submitted a revised pile and equipment data form for a revised wave equation analysis .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the acceptance or rejection of the revised driving system within num calendar days of receipt of a revised pile and driving equipment data form .
the time required for submission review and approval of a revised driving system shall not constitute the basis for a contract time extension to the contractor .
num .
wave equation analysis program weap .
the department or the consultant engineer provided by the department will perform all weap analyses for each pile driving hammer that the contractor may propose to use .
the department will use the information provided by the contractor on the pile and driving equipment data form to run a wave equation analysis .
a pile and driving equipment data form will be included in the contract documents or supplied by the engineer .
the hammer shall be capable of driving the pile to the required tip elevation with a blowcount of less than num bpf blows per num mm .
the tensile and compressive driving stresses shall be less than the following maximum values pile type maximum allowable compressive stress maximum allowable tensile stress steel num fy num fy prestressed concrete num fc effective prestress .
num times the square root of fc effective prestress the effective prestress may be obtained from the approved shop drawings .
if the hammer is approved a blow countbearing capacity graph with an acceptance criteria will be provided .
the blowcount and hammer stroke required to achieve the required minimum bearing capacity equal to twice the design load will be given with the blow countbearing capacity graph .
during pile driving operations the contractor shall use the system submitted and reviewed by the department .
the submitted hammer must successfully install test piles .
if the hammer does not successfully install the representative piles the engineer will require the contractor to repair that hammer or submit another pile driving hammer with the analyses as outlined above .
no variations in the driving system will be permitted without notifying the engineer in writing with the exception of increasing the pile cushion thickness and reducing the energy delivered to the pile to control driving stresses .
any changes in the driving system will only be considered after the contractor has submitted a revised pile and driving equipment data form .
if changes are made to the driving system the contractor shall perform a load test at no additional cost to the department unless this requirement is waived by the materials tests engineer .
in such cases where a weap analysis can not be performed a dynamic load test will be required to verify that the pile driving hammer is capable of successfully installing a representative test or production pile to the required depth without damage .
e pile driving preparation num .
location and alignment tolerance .
piles shall be driven as nearly as possible in the exact position designated however a maximum deviation of num inches num mm from exact position will be permissible in pile trestle bents and pile abutments and a maximum deviation of num inches num mm from exact position will be allowed for a foundation pile in footings of piers or abutments .
care shall be taken during driving to prevent and correct any tendency of concrete or steel piles to twist or rotate .
footings and encasements shall be formed around the piles to give at least the minimum concrete cover shown on the plans .
piles that are to be swaybraced shall be aligned as necessary so that swaybracing can be properly welded to the piles .
after all piling in a bent are aligned within the specified tolerances the bent cap shall be placed on the piles in exact position .
if the location or alignment tolerances are exceeded the error will be evaluated by the bridge engineer .
the engineer will require corrective work by either stipulating what will be required by the bridge engineer for the corrective work or requiring the submittal from the contractor of proposed details and design calculations for the corrective work .
the signature seal and date of signature shall be placed on all submittal details and design calculations by a professional engineer that is licensed in the state of alabama and not employed by the aldot .
section num piling num corrective work shall not be performed until allowed by the engineer after the bridge engineer has either stipulated what will be required or has approved the contractors proposed repair .
there will be no payment for the cost of corrective work including the costs of submittals and delay costs .
num .
installation sequence .
the order of placing individual piles in pile groups shall be starting from the center of the group and proceeding outwards in both directions unless an alternate installation sequence is approved by the engineer .
if starting the installation from the center and proceeding outwards can not be done because of battered piles the contractor shall submit a proposed sequence of installation to the engineer for approval .
num .
inspection .
the project manager shall be given num hour notice before the driving of any test pile or production pile .
no pile shall be driven except in the presence of a department inspector .
an accurate driving record will be kept by the engineer on form cnum .
each production pile driving record will be kept by the engineer and entered into the engineers daily log book .
the test pile driving record form cnum will be completed by the engineer each time a test pile is driven .
this form includes the number of hammer blows per foot num mm for the entire driven length the driven length cutoff elevation penetration in ground driving problems significant time delays whether or not the test pile was dynamically monitored and any other pertinent information obtained by the engineer .
if a redrive is necessary the engineer will record the number of hammer blows per inch num mm of pile movement .
f pile driving .
num .
general .
the contractor shall be responsible for driving piles with the approved equipment and in accordance with the procedures approved by the engineer .
num .
test and production piles .
a representative test pile shall be driven in the designated location and loaded to verify the minimum bearing capacity .
the minimum bearing capacity shall be verified by static testing methods .
correlation between static and dynamic test results will be required prior to using a dynamic test to verify minimum bearing capacity of other test and production piles .
the correlation shall also consist of applying a dynamic restrike to the test pile within num hours after completion of the static load test using the approved hammer system .
the capacity determined by either test method is assumed to represent the minimum bearing capacity for each of the production piles that the test pile represents .
a test pile represents a specific group of production piles that have the same size design loading and site soil conditions .
the test pile locations and the groups of production piles that each test pile represents will be shown on the plans .
test piles shall be driven at the locations shown on the plans unless the locations are changed in writing by the materials tests engineer .
unless otherwise directed test piles shall be driven at such locations as will permit their use in the finished structure .
in no case shall test piles driven out of permanent pile locations be pulled and redriven as production piles .
test piles specified to be used as permanent piles in a structure shall have sufficient length to be cut off at plan grade for top of pile .
in general the specified length of test piles will be greater than the estimated length of production piles in order to provide for variation in soil conditions .
precast concrete test piles shall be a minimum of num feet num m longer than the estimated length of piling shown on the plans .
steel piles shall be provided such that num additional feet num additional meters of driving would not require an additional splice .
upon completion of the load testing any test or anchor piling not a part of the finished structure shall be removed or cut off at least num foot num mm below either the bottom of footing or the finished ground elevation if not loaded within the footing area .
the driving equipment aids and methods used for driving test piles shall be identical to that which the contractor proposes to use on the production piling .
approval of driving equipment shall conform with the requirements of these specifications .
if piling are to be driven in a pile footing then the contractor shall excavate the ground at each test pile footing location to the elevation of the bottom of the footing before the pile is driven unless shown on the plans or directed otherwise by the engineer .
section num piling num num .
test pile with static load testing .
test piles shall be driven to the minimum tip elevation when provided .
test piles shall be driven to a hammer blow count given on the blow countbearing capacity graph .
this graph shall be used as an estimate of the test piles bearing capacity which uses the required minimum bearing capacity equal to twice the design load and stroke to obtain the required blow count for the test pile .
once the required blow count and minimum tip elevation when provided is reached the bearing capacity shall be proven after a num day wait for concrete piles and a num hour wait for steel piles with a static load test .
this blow count and stroke or the equivalent blow count and stroke recorded during the last foot num mm of driving of a passing static load test pile shall be used as the acceptance criteria for the production piling represented by this test pile .
a revised bearing graph will be provided by the materials tests engineer that reflects the actual capacity of the test pile which shall be used to determine the bearing capacity of all production piles represented by this test pile .
the static load test indicates a failure if the bearing capacity determined from the load test is not equal to or greater than the required minimum bearing capacity .
if the load test is a failure the test pile shall be redriven .
the blow count for the redrive shall be obtained by determining the blow count required for a theoretical increased bearing capacity .
the blow count for the redrive shall be taken from the blow countbearing capacity graph in accordance with the following formula load for obtaining redrive blow count num x a b a a minimum bearing capacity b load at failure the test pile shall then be reloaded .
this process shall be repeated as many times as necessary until the load test is determined to be a passing load test .
test piles driven to plan grade and not having the hammer blow count required may also be spliced and driven until the required bearing is obtained .
concrete splices must be approved by the engineer .
num .
test pile with dynamic load testing .
dynamic load testing may be used to supplement static load testing .
all dynamic load tests shall be correlated by a minimum of one representative static load test .
if shown on the plans or in the proposal or a change is requested by the contractor and approved by the materials and tests engineer dynamic measurements will be taken by the engineer during the driving of piles designated as dynamic load test piles .
the contractor shall notify the engineer when the contractor is ready to drive a dynamic test pile seven days in advance of driving the test pile .
if the contractor changes or delays the date of the dynamic testing then the contractor shall pay for all costs associated with the time delay to the dynamic testing engineer .
test piles shall be driven to the minimum tip elevation when provided .
test piles shall be driven to the depth at which the dynamic test equipment indicates the required minimum bearing capacity equal to twice the design load has been achieved unless directed otherwise by the materials and tests engineer .
the stress in the piles will be monitored during driving with the dynamic testing equipment to insure that the values determined do not exceed the values in item numdnum .
if deemed necessary by the engineer the contractor shall reduce the driving energy transmitted to the pile by using additional cushions reducing the energy output of the hammer or other appropriate methods in order to maintain stresses below the values in item numbnum .
if nonaxial driving is indicated by dynamic test equipment measurements the contractor shall immediately realign the hammer system .
the engineer will notify the contractor or their pile driving subcontractor if their pile driving procedures violated any of the referenced requirements during the installation of the dynamically tested pile .
the materials tests engineer may use dynamic measurements to adjust tip elevations after insuring that minimum tip requirements are satisfied .
the materials tests engineer will review the dynamic test data and provide the acceptance criteria for the production piling that are represented by the test pile .
a revised bearing graph will be provided by the materials tests engineer that reflects the actual capacity of the test pile which shall be used to determine the bearing capacity of all production piles represented by this test pile .
for correlation of a static load test with a dynamic load test the contractor shall within num hours of the static load test perform a restrike dynamic load test .
a cold hammer shall not be used for the restrike .
the hammer shall be warmed up before restrike begins by section num piling num applying at least num blows to another pile .
the sequence shall consist of striking the designated pile for num blows or until the pile penetrates an additional three inches num mm whichever occurs first .
in the event the pile movement is less than num inch num mm during the restrike the restrike may be terminated after num blows .
after restrike the materials and tests engineer will either accept the tip elevation or specify additional pile penetration and testing .
num .
restrike for production piles if dynamic load tests have been correlated to at least one static load test then dynamic load testing may be used to perform a restrike to verify minimum bearing capacity of production piles .
the materials tests engineer will direct the contractor after waiting seven days for a concrete pile and num hours for a steel pile to perform a restrike dynamic load test .
a cold hammer shall not be used for the restrike .
the hammer shall be warmed up before restrike begins by applying at least num blows to another pile .
the sequence shall consist of striking the designated pile for num blows or until the pile penetrates an additional three inches num mm whichever occurs first .
in the event the pile movement is less than num inch num mm during the restrike the restrike may be terminated after num blows .
dynamic load test restrike for production piles may be used to verify minimum bearing capacity of piles that fail to achieve the required blow counts determined by test pile installation and static load testing .
num .
driving to refusal .
no test pile is required for a pile to be driven to refusal unless shown on the plans .
the only exception is when a pile will be dynamically monitored because of an inability to perform a weap analysis .
refusal is defined as num blows per foot num mm num blows per inch num mm .
refusal shall only be used when rock is expected to be encountered .
a load test will be required for all other situations .
num .
heaved piles .
level readings to check on pile heave after driving shall be made at the start of pile driving operations and shall continue until the engineer determines that such checking is no longer required .
level readings shall be taken immediately after the pile has been driven and again after piles within a radius of num feet num m have been driven .
if pile heave is observed accurate level readings referenced to a fixed datum shall be taken on all piles immediately after installation and periodically thereafter as adjacent piles are driven to determine the pile heave range .
all piles that have been heaved more than num inches num mm shall be reseated by driving to original position prior to heave .
reseating shall be done without additional compensation .
reseated piles shall be driven to the required resistance or penetration .
concrete shall not be placed in pile casings until pile driving has progressed beyond a radius of num feet num m from the pile to be encased .
g loading methods num .
static load testing method a .
description .
static load testing shall be used to verify the axial load bearing capacity of pile groups or individual piles .
static load testing should be used after a test pile has been driven to the minimum tip elevation if shown on the plans and has met the bearing capacity estimate based on blow count and hammer stroke from the provided bearing curves .
a static load test may also be used in conjunction with a dynamic load test when verifying axial load bearing capacity of piling .
b .
general .
when required the length of piles to be driven shall be determined by the actual loading tests of any designated pile test or production in the structure .
the test shall be performed as defined by astm d num standard test method for piles under static axial compressive load using the quick load test method .
in general these tests shall consist of the incremental application and removal of static pressure exerted on the pile through approved rigging together with suitable apparatus for accurately determining the superimposed weight mass of pressure and pile settlement under each increment of load .
the safe allowable load shall be determined by the engineer from the settlement section num piling num versus load curve generated by the incremental loading based on davissons failure criterion explained in subitem numgnum.c .
a minimum num day waiting period shall be observed between the driving of a concrete load test pile and the commencement of the load testing unless otherwise specified in the contract or authorized by the materials and tests engineer .
for piles other than concrete this waiting period shall be num hours .
the contractor may extend the waiting period as deemed necessary before performing a static load test to allow for maximum soil set up time .
if the quick load test is performed using adjacent production piles as reaction piles for the test pile the involved production piles should be checked for any permanent upward displacement .
if any upward displacement is found then all production piles used as reaction piles for the quick load test shall be redriven as necessary to correct any possible axial load bearing capacity problem with the involved piles .
this redrive shall be performed at the contractors expense .
c. static load test procedure .
the apparatus for applying the load shall be subject to the approval of the engineer and have a capacity of num tons num kn or num percent of the design load whichever is less .
incremental loads of num of the design load shall be placed on the pile at num minute intervals until continuous jacking is required to maintain the incremental load or the capacity of the load frame is reached .
all loading tests will be continually inspected by the engineer .
time load and settlement data will be recorded on form cnumb immediately before and after the application of each load increment and at intermediate time intervals as specified .
when the maximum load has been applied readings will be taken and recorded when jacking has stopped .
additional readings will be taken after num minutes and again at num minutes .
if a longer holding period is specified additional readings will be taken as required .
the load shall be removed after the required holding period in num equal parts with time and rebound readings taken at each unloading increment .
readings will be taken immediately following each load removal allowing num minutes between increments .
upon removal of the entire load time and rebound readings will be taken and recorded .
additional time and rebound readings will be taken after num minutes and again at num minutes .
load test data will be plotted by the engineer in the form of settlement in inches millimeters ordinate positive down versus applied load in kips kn abscissa .
ultimate capacity predictions will be based upon davissons failure criterion as applied to the aforementioned settlement curve as per fhwas manual on design and construction of driven pile foundations .
in this method the elastic shortening of the pile qlae in inches millimeters is superimposed on the settlement curve .
in the elastic shortening equation q represents load in kips kn l represents length of pile from settlement instrumentation to tip elevation in inches meters a represents cross sectional area in square inches square meters at voided section if a void is present and e represents elastic modulus in ksi mpa elastic modulus for concrete piles is preferably obtained from dynamic load testing but may be calculated as num num times the square root of the design compressive strength in psi mpa when dynamic load testing is not performed .
the elastic modulus for steel piles may always be assumed as num ksi num mpa .
the aforementioned elastic shortening curve is then increased or offset by numdnum in inches numdnum in millimeters where d pile diameter or width in inches mm .
the point in which the offset elastic shortening curve intersects the settlement curve is considered the ultimate pile capacity .
d. hydraulic jacks and load gages .
when hydraulic jacks and gages are to be used for the superimposed load the jacks gages and hydraulic pumps shall have been calibrated with each other within the last num months by an independent laboratory that has been approved by the materials and tests engineer or by a department laboratory .
if multiple jacks are to be used with one gage the calibration shall be performed at an approved independent laboratory .
all jack calibrations shall be conducted in accordance with aldotnum and shall be valid for a period of num months from the date of calibration however should the engineer have any section num piling num doubt of their accuracy he may require a check of their calibration using aldot equipment .
all calibration checks shall be within num of the applied load .
when a jack gage and hydraulic pump are calibrated they shall be used as a unit and changing any one of the three components shall require a recalibration .
gages shall be of the size that will provide ease of reading approximately num inch num mm diameter with gradations for num tons num kn or less for loads under num tons num kn and gradations of num tons num kn or less for loads over num tons num kn .
calibrated jacks gages and pumps shall have identifiable serial numbers to insure traceability to calibration tests .
num .
dynamic load testing method .
a .
description .
dynamic load testing shall be used to verify that the pile test or production is not overstressed while being driven and to determine the axial load bearing capacity .
a dynamic load test may also be used in conjunction with a static load test when verifying the axial load bearing capacity of piling .
b .
general .
when required the length of piles to be driven shall be determined by the actual dynamic loading test of any pile test or production in the structure .
the test shall be performed as defined by aashto t num standard method of test for highstrain dynamic testing of piles .
dynamic measurements shall be taken by the engineer during the driving of piles designated as dynamic load test piles andor production piles .
in general dynamic load testing involves attaching two strain transducers and two accelerometers to the pile approximately num to num pile diameters below the pile head before initial driving or at a convenient location during restrike dynamic load testing .
the dynamic test is performed during actual pile driving .
dynamic load testing shall be performed when required on test or production piles only after a weap analysis has been performed .
when directed by the engineer the contractor shall after waiting seven days for a concrete pile and num hours for a steel pile perform a restrike dynamic load test .
a cold hammer shall not be used for the redrive .
the hammer shall be warmed up before redrive begins by applying at least num blows to another pile or other fixed object .
after redriving the engineer will either accept the tip elevation or specify additional pile penetration and testing .
c. process prior to placement in the leads the contractor shall make each designated concrete pile available for taking of wave speed measurements and for predrilling the required instrument attachment holes .
since there must be room on either side of the pile to drill instrumentation holes the contractor may be required to move piles to attain adequate clearance .
predriving wave speed measurements will not be required for steel piles however steel piles must be available for predrilling instrument attachment holes .
when wave speed measurements are made the piling shall be in a horizontal position and not in contact with other piling .
when required the contractor will furnish the equipment materials and labor necessary for drilling holes in the piles for mounting the instruments .
the instruments will be attached near the head of the pile with bolts placed in masonry anchors for concrete piles or through drilled holes on steel piles .
in no case shall the pile to be dynamically tested be picked up before the pile has been predrilled .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with a safe stable access to the top of the pile installed in the leads .
the access shall conform to osha requirements .
the access system shall be assembled andor operated by the contractor and shall provide a working area of not less than num square feet num square meters .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer details of the access system with the aforementioned pile and driving equipment data form submittal .
the contractor shall furnish electric power for the dynamic test equipment .
the power supply at the outlet shall be num amp num volt num cycle a.c. only .
field generators used as the power source shall be equipped with functioning meters for monitoring voltage and frequency levels .
section num piling num h piling length .
num .
estimated lengths of piles .
the estimated length of piles shown on the plans and in the proposal are for bid purposes only .
the contractor shall be responsible for providing the lengths of these piles necessary to obtain the bearing and penetration required as determined from results obtained in driving representative test piles or other pertinent data .
it is expected that there will be variations in final tip elevations due to differences in driving resistance because of differing soil conditions .
num .
pile tip elevation .
the final tip elevation of each pile will be determined by the engineer during the driving operation but in general the minimum penetration for any pile shall be not less than num feet num m into natural ground and not less than num the length of the pile .
when minimum tip elevations are specified by contract documents the contractor shall drive piles to a depth that satisfies this requirement in addition to required minimum bearing capacity .
num .
proposed pile lengths .
a .
steel piles .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer for review the proposed steel pile lengths for use in each bent of a structure before driving the piles .
b .
concrete piles .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer for review the proposed concrete pile lengths for use in each bent of a structure before casting the piles .
the lengths of concrete piles will be approved by the engineer before the casting of the piles .
i unsatisfactory piles .
approval of a pile hammer relative to driving stress damage shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the piles damaged because of misalignment of the leads failure of the cap block or cushion material failure of splices malfunctioning of the pile hammer pile manufacturers errors or other improper construction methods .
piles damaged for such reasons shall be rejected and replaced at the contractors expense when the engineer determines that the damage impairs the strength of the pile .
the method used in driving piles shall not subject the piles to excessive or undue abuse producing crushing cracking or spalling of concrete or deformation of the steel .
misaligned piles shall not be forced into proper position .
any pile damage during driving by reason of internal defects or by improper driving or driven out of its proper location or driven below the designated cutoff elevation shall be corrected at the contractors expense by a method approved by the engineer .
piles which have been bent during installation shall be considered unsatisfactory unless the bearing capacity is proven by load tests performed at the contractors expense .
if such tests indicate inadequate capacity corrective measures as proposed by the contractor and approved by the bridge engineer shall be taken such as installation of additional piles strengthening of bent piles or replacement of bent piles .
a concrete pile will be considered defective if a visible crack or any defect is observed which as determined by the engineer affects the strength or life of the pile .
j splicing piles .
num .
general .
full length piles shall be used wherever practical .
when splicing is necessary and can not be avoided the approved method shown on the plans shall be used .
if details are not shown on the plans the contractors proposed method of pile splicing shall be submitted to the bridge engineer for review and distribution .
num .
precast prestressed concrete piles .
when necessary the contractor shall submit proposed pile splicing details and design calculations to the bridge engineer for review and distribution .
the details shall be checked stamped approved and signed by a professional engineer licensed by the alabama board of licensure for professional engineers .
this professional engineer shall not be an employee of the aldot .
any driving splice for a concrete pile will require dynamic testing during the section num piling num driving to verify the performance of the splice .
payment for this requirement will be made under the item for dynamic loading tests .
num .
steel piles and steel shells for castinplace concrete piles .
splicing of these piles shall be made in accordance with details shown on the plans or furnished .
welded connections for splices shall be used .
all work shall be done with approved methods materials and experienced personnel who have been aldot certified numf qualification for fillet welding in a vertical position .
welding shall be in accordance with the departments current welding specification .
not more than three pieces two splices of steel pile will be permitted in making up one full length of proposed pile .
in no case shall there be more than two splices exposed to view in any length of piling after driving is completed .
in addition to meeting the requirements of the specifications the contractor shall submit documentation of the identification heat numbers for steel piles of all portions of a builtup pile .
k pile points .
pile points shall be furnished and installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the type of required pile points will be designated on the plans or by the engineer .
if pile points with cutting teeth are required it will be noted on the plans and the contractor shall furnish the required type of pile point with cutting teeth .
the types of pile points designated for use will be classified as follows type aheavy pile points .
type blight pile points .
type a pile points may be used as a direct substitution for the type b pile points .
the department has established an approved materials list for pile points .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and in materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements list iinum .
only pile points shown on this list shall be used .
the pile points shall be welded to the ends of the piles in accordance with the following requirements the welds for the attachment of a pile point shall be partial penetration single bevel groove welds placed full flange width along the outside of each pile flange .
either the pile point or the outside of each flange of the pile shall be beveled num degrees .
the depth of the bevel shall be num minimum for hpnum and hpnum piles and num minimum for hpnum and hpnum piles num mm minimum for hpnum and hpnum piles and num mm minimum for hpnum piles .
the width of weld at the outside face of the pile flange shall be the same as the beveled depth .
enumxx welding rods shall be used .
all welds shall be made in the flat position .
the welder shall be aldot certified numg qualification for groove welding in flat position .
welding shall be in accordance with the departments current welding specification .
l cutoff lengths .
the tops of all permanent piles and pile casings shall be cutoff at the elevation shown on the plans or as ordered by the engineer .
all cutoff lengths not used in the structure shall become the property of the contractor and shall be removed by the contractor from the site of the work .
m pile painting and protection .
all exposed surfaces of new steel piling and steel bracing members attached to the piling shall be coated after installation in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements given in section num .
the containment system and the submittal of a surface preparation plan described in section num will not be required .
storage and handling of piles shall be in accordance with article num. n permanent sheet piling .
num .
general .
permanent sheet piling shall be new piling and shall be furnished and driven by the contractor as provided on the plans or as designated by the engineer .
num .
construction details permanent steel sheet piling and concrete sheet piling .
all construction methods for steel sheet piling and precast concrete sheet piling shall conform to the respective requirements prescribed herein for steel and precast concrete bearing piling and as directed .
precast concrete sheet piling may require the use of some section num piling num tapered units in order to maintain vertical alignment of the sheet pile wall .
sheet piling shall be driven to the appropriate elevations .
where necessary cutting off driven sheet piling shall be done by approved methods and in a satisfactory manner .
o temporary steel sheet piling .
temporary steel sheet piling wall shall be designed furnished and driven at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer and removed when no longer needed .
working drawings and design calculations for the sheet pile walls shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in article num for the submittal of working drawings .
the design shall be in accordance with the current aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
the piling shall be driven to an adequate depth andor so braced or tied back as to protect the work from damage and workmen from danger of injury and to also protect the newly constructed work from failure .
p protection of existing structures and utilities .
the contractor shall control his operations to prevent damage to existing structures and utilities as outlined in article num .
preventive measures shall include but are not limited to selecting construction methods that will limit ground disturbance such as vibrations from pile driving operations and other construction related activities .
photographic video and other surveys of surrounding structures and utilities could be made prior to driving to serve as documentation of the conditions prior to driving .
num method of measurement .
a test piles .
the actual number of acceptable test piles driven as directed in conformity with these specifications will be measured complete in place .
piles paid for as test piles will not be included in the measurement of the linear feet meters of production piles .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for test pile cutoffs or splices necessary to lengthen test piles .
b static loading tests .
the number of static loading tests measured will be the actual number of accepted static loading tests ordered and completed in conformity with this specification .
if the pile does not carry the load satisfactorily after the load is placed according to the specifications and it becomes necessary to redrive the pile and place another load this will be deemed an additional stage of loading .
each time the pile is driven to additional penetration and load tested again each loading will be measured as an additional stage of loading not as an additional loading test .
c dynamic loading tests .
the number of dynamic loading tests measured will be the actual number of accepted dynamic loading tests ordered and completed in conformity with the specifications .
there will be no additional payment for a restrike dynamic loading test performed on a designated test pile .
restrike dynamic loading tests required on production piles will be included for measurement as dynamic loading tests .
d pile points .
pile points will be measured per each point installed on the end of an accepted pile .
e steel pile splices .
no measurement or payment will be made for steel pile splices .
f steel piling furnished and driven .
the accepted lengths of steel piling furnished and driven to remain in the finished structure will be measured in linear feet complete in place .
no measurement for payment will be made of steel pile cutoffs .
no measurement will be made for steel pile splices .
pile cap plates and cap channels will be measured and paid for as structural steel per pound kilogram .
piling damaged by the contractor in handling or driving will not be accepted .
g concrete piling furnished .
the approved lengths of concrete piling lengths approved by the engineer for casting will be measured in linear feet meters .
section num piling num h concrete piling driven .
the approved casting lengths of concrete piling remaining in the finished structure casting lengths minus any cutoffs will be measured in linear feet meters .
i concrete pile splice .
the buildup of a pile where the pile will not be driven with the buildup will be measured in linear feet meters from the joint at the bottom of the buildup to the top of the pile .
the linear feet length in meters of buildup will be included in the quantity of concrete piling furnished .
the splicing of this buildup will be measured as num additional linear feet num additional meters of concrete piling furnished .
the buildup and splicing of a pile where the pile will be driven with the buildup will not be measured for payment under a contract pay item but will be paid for as extra work .
j concrete pile cutoff .
each cutoff of a concrete pile will be measured as num additional linear feet num additional meters of concrete piling furnished .
k permanent sheet piling .
the quantity of permanent steel or concrete sheet piling to be measured for payment shall be the quantity in linear feet meters of such piling actually remaining in the completed structure and accepted .
in computing the linear feet meters the lengths shall be those lengths under cutoffs .
l pilot holes .
pilot holes will be measured for payment by the linear foot meter .
pilot holes will be measured from the top of the material where the auger or drill begins the excavation to the bottom of the hole .
m temporary steel sheet piling .
temporary steel sheet piling will be measured for payment in units of square feet square meters .
this square foot square meter quantity will be determined from the length and width of individual sheet piles .
the length of a sheet pile will be measured from the embedded tip to num foot num mm above the existing ground or placed fill whichever is appropriate .
the width of a sheet pile will be the distance from centerline of the interlock on one side to the centerline of the interlock on the other side .
the width of a sheet pile will be measured along the line of the sheets not adding for bends or corrugations .
the square foot square meter quantity for which payment will be made will be the sum of the square foot square meter areas of the individual sheet piles .
num basis of payment .
a general .
the contract unit price bid for the various type piling covered by this section shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing all materials required by each item of work and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
each pay item includes fabrication treatment transportation handling driving jetting spudding capping painting and finishing where necessary and as required by other portions of the specifications and the plans .
the pay item for steel piling includes the splicing and cutting off of the piles .
additional payment will be made for splicing and cutting off concrete piles .
all cutoffs shall become the property of the contractor .
no payment will be made for falsework piling and no additional payment will be made for driving piles on a batter .
b static loading tests .
accepted static loading tests will be paid for at the contract unit price for static loading tests per each complete in place which shall be payment in full for all materials equipment and labor incidental to constructing the loading platform instrument shelter procuring and placing the loading material andor equipment and removing and disposing of the platform and material andor equipment to the satisfaction of the engineer .
payment will be made for each additional stage of loading described in subarticle numb .
payment will be the percentage of the contract price for a loading test given in the following table .
section num piling num design load shown on plans tons metric tons percentage of contract price for a loading test up to num num num over num num to num num num over num num num c dynamic loading tests .
accepted dynamic loading tests will be paid for at the contract unit price for dynamic loading tests per each complete in place which shall be payment in full for all equipment and labor incidental to aiding the engineer in the performance of this test and for all costs associated with down time while setting up equipment making dynamic measurements down time while waiting to perform a restrike dynamic test and the restrike dynamic test .
d permanent sheet piling .
the quantity of acceptable sheet piling in place after all cutoffs have been made will be paid for at the respective contract price for the type of sheet piling listed .
the contract unit price bid for this item shall also include any necessary excavation unless an item of excavation is provided in the contract .
e pile points .
pile points will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
this payment shall be full compensation for furnishing the points and all materials labor and incidentals necessary to install the points .
f concrete pedestal foundations .
where hardmarl solid rock or other conditions are encountered that make it necessary or desirable to place piles in concrete pedestal foundations the net length of piling so placed in the structure will be paid for at the contract unit price for the respective kinds of piling .
the additional work required for construction of the pedestal foundations will be paid for as extra work as outlined in article num extra work .
g pilot holes .
the contract unit price per linear foot meter measured as noted above shall be payment in full for all materials equipment and labor required to excavate the pilot hole .
it shall also be payment in full for the disposal of excavated material and for filling the voids in pilot holes around the piles with sand or concrete .
h temporary steel sheet piling .
the quantity of temporary steel sheet piling acceptably placed measured as noted above will be paid for at the unit bid price which includes furnishing the design and piling driving bracing and removing the piling .
the piling after removal shall remain the property of the contractor .
i steel piling furnished and driven .
the accepted lengths of steel piling in the finished structure will be paid for at the respective contract price for steel piling furnished and driven .
the extra length beyond estimated length of steel pile that may be required to complete a structure will be paid for at the contract price for steel piling furnished and driven .
no payment will be made for cutoffs or splices of steel piling .
j concrete piling furnished .
the approved lengths of concrete piling lengths approved by the engineer for casting will be paid for at the respective contract price for concrete piling furnished .
nondriven pile buildups and cutoffs will be paid for at the designated rate for concrete piling furnished .
k concrete piling driven .
the approved casting lengths of concrete piling remaining in the finished structure casting lengths minus any cutoffs will be paid for at the respective contract price for concrete piling driven .
no payment for buildups either driven or nondriven will be made under this item .
l payment will be made under item no .
numa type test piles per each numb staticdynamic loading tests per each nume permanent steel sheet piling per linear foot meter section num drilled shaft construction num numf permanent concrete sheet piling width per linear foot meter numg pile points per each numh pilot holes per linear foot meter numi temporary steel sheet piling per square foot square meter numm steel piling furnished and driven per linear foot meter numn concrete piling furnished per linear foot meter numo concrete piling driven per linear foot meter pile designationsize typesize of pile point example numg pile points type a num section num drilled shaft construction num description .
this work shall consist of all labor materials equipment and services necessary to perform all operations to complete a drilled shaft installation in accordance with these specifications and the details and dimensions shown on the plans .
num materials .
a general .
all materials shall conform to requirements set forth in division num materials .
the requirements provided for structural portland cement concrete section num shall apply in all respects to drilled shafts except where otherwise indicated by specific requirements given hereinafter in this section or noted by plan details .
b concrete .
portland cement concrete used in construction of drilled shafts shall hereinafter be referred to as either class dsnum class dsnum or class dsnum concrete .
the specific class of concrete that is required will be shown in the pay item description for drilled shaft construction .
the concrete producer shall establish the proportion of materials for each class of drilled shaft concrete following the guidelines described in aldotnum method of controlling concrete operations for structural portland cement concrete and the criteria outlined hereinafter in this subarticle .
the concrete supplier shall submit for approval the proposed concrete mixture design to the state materials and test engineer following the requirements in aldotnum .
the distribution of the approved concrete mixture design and reapproval of concrete mixture designs will be as per aldotnum respectively .
any changes of the materials andor proportions of the mixture design will require a concrete mixture resubmittal .
num .
criteria applicable to class dsnum class dsnum and class dsnum concrete minimum compressive strength at num days shall be num psi num mpa .
the amount of cementitious material shall be a minimum of num pounds num kg and a maximum of num pounds per cubic yard num kg per cubic meter of concrete .
the range of total air content shall be num to num by volume except for concrete that is completely embedded below the ground line or mud line .
an air content less than num will be acceptable for shafts that are completely embedded below the ground line or mud line .
the maximum water to total cementitious material ratio shall be num .
slump requirements the allowable range of consistency slump during concrete placement shall be from num inches to num inches num mm to num mm .
the minimum consistency slump for all of the concrete placed in an individual shaft shall be no less than num inches num mm at the end of the concrete placement in that shaft .
the temperature of the concrete at the time of placement in the shaft shall not be less than num f num c nor more than num f num c. gradation of the coarse aggregate used shall meet the requirements for either aldot size no .
num no .
num or no .
num .
section num drilled shaft construction num all materials used in manufacturing the concrete shall conform to the requirements of thespecifications .
num .
additional criteria applicable to class dsnum concrete either type i or type ii cement shall be used .
the cementitious content may be composed of up to num by weight mass substitution of either class c or class f fly ash additive .
in lieu of fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag may be substituted for cement up to a minimum substitution rate of num and a maximum substitution rate of num by weight mass .
num .
additional criteria applicable to class dsnum concrete type ii cement shall be used .
the cementitious content shall be composed of no less than num nor more than num by weight mass of class f fly ash additive .
in lieu of fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag may be substituted for cement up to a minimum substitution rate of num and a maximum substitution rate of num by weight mass .
num .
additional criteria applicable to class dsnum concrete type ii cement shall be used .
the cementitious content shall be composed of num by weight mass of class f fly ash and num by weight mass of microsilica additives .
in lieu of the percentages of fly ash and microsilica the cementitious content may be composed of num by weight mass substitution of ground granulated blast furnace slag and num by weight mass addition of microsilica additives .
c slurry .
when use of slurry is either shown to be required in the contract documents or selected by the contractor mineral slurries shall be used unless another type of slurry is proposed for use by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
the following minimum requirements apply to material components used in slurries num .
approved minerals .
sodium bentonite or attapulgite shall be used as the principal mineral constituents of slurry .
the engineer may approve use of other minerals upon receipt of demonstrated proof that the requested alternate mineral insures shaft stability at the applicable shaft construction site .
num .
mixing water .
mixing water shall be capable of meeting drinking water standards as outlined in section num .
num .
sand .
clean locally available sand meeting the requirements of section num not to exceed four num percent by volume may be mixed in drilling slurries .
num .
additives .
at the contractors discretion additives may be used to control the consistency andor yield of slurries subject to the limitation that the type and amount of additives used shall not exceed the recommendations of the principal mineral manufacturer .
d casing .
when use of casing is either specified by the contract documents or selected by the contractor casings shall be smooth noncorrugated clean watertight steel of ample strength to withstand both handling and driving stresses and the pressures of concrete and the surrounding earth materials .
where permanent casing is required serviceable used casing may be installed with the approval of the engineer .
the contractor is responsible for insuring that all casing new or used is capable of withstanding the aforementioned stress and pressure requirements .
e steel reinforcement .
unless otherwise noted on the contract documents all steel reinforcement shall be grade num num billet steel meeting the requirements of section num sized and installed in accordance with the contract plans as applicable .
welding of the reinforcing steel will not be permitted without the written approval of the bridge engineer .
welding to the main vertical reinforcing steel will not be permitted .
section num drilled shaft construction num num construction methods and equipment .
the contractor shall perform excavations required for shafts through whatever materials are encountered to the dimensions and elevations shown in the plans or otherwise required by the specifications and special provisions .
the contractors methods and equipment shall be suitable for the site conditions and materials encountered .
the permanent casing method shall be used only at locations shown on the plans or authorized by the bridge engineer .
actual cores recovered from the test borings are available for inspection at the bureau of materials and tests .
a general requirements .
num .
contractor qualifications .
the contractor shall submit descriptions of the drilled shaft construction projects completed in the last three years to serve as evidence of the capability to construct drilled shafts .
the descriptions of the drilled shaft projects shall contain names and telephone numbers of owners representatives who can verify the contractors participation on those projects .
these descriptions shall be submitted with the installation plan and will be evaluated by the engineer .
the evaluation of the contractors capability for constructing drilled shafts will have a bearing on the decision by the engineer to require the construction of a trial drilled shaft .
num .
installation plan .
a .
installation plan requirements .
no later than num days after the date of the notice to proceed the contractor shall submit an installation plan for review by the engineer .
this plan shall provide information on the following items as applicable name and experience record of the drilled shaft superintendent in charge of drilled shaft operations for this project list of proposed equipment to be used including cranes drills augers bailing buckets final cleaning equipment desanding equipment slurry pumps core sampling equipment tremies concrete pumps casing etc .
details of the overall anticipated construction operation sequence and the proposed sequence of shaft construction details of planned shaft excavation methods details of the methods to be used to insure shaft stability i.e .
prevention of caving bottom heave etc .
using temporary casing slurry or other means during excavation and concrete placement .
this shall include a review of method suitability to the anticipated site and subsurface conditions .
if casings are proposed or required casing dimensions and detailed procedures for permanent casing installation and temporary casing installation and removal shall be provided .
when use of slurry is required or proposed details of the methods for mixing circulating and desanding slurry details of methods to clean the shaft excavation details of reinforcement placement including support and centralization methods details of concrete placement method required or proposed including operational procedures for free fall tremie or pumping as appropriate and the method used to fill or eliminate all voids between the plan shaft diameter and excavated shaft diameter or between the shaft casing and surrounding soil if permanent casing is specified .
details of the material equipment and procedures proposed to accomplish the required load testing .
b .
evaluation of installation plan .
the engineer will evaluate the drilled shaft installation plan for conformance with the plans and specifications .
within num days following receipt of the installation plan the construction engineer will return the plan for corrections distribute the plan for construction inspection or contact the contractor to establish a mutually agreeable date and time for a meeting to discuss the installation plan .
if a meeting is held to discuss the section num drilled shaft construction num installation plan the contractor and his drilled shaft project superintendent shall be in attendance .
the contractor will be notified of changes in the submitted installation plan deemed necessary by the construction engineer within seven days after the aforementioned meeting .
shaft construction shall not begin until the installation plan has been distributed by the construction engineer for construction inspection .
distribution of the installation plan for construction inspection shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to satisfactorily complete the work as detailed on the plans and in the specifications .
c. modification of installation plan .
any proposed modification of the installation plan during construction shall be submitted to the construction engineer for review and distribution .
num .
protection of existing structures and utilities .
the contractor shall control his operations to prevent damage to existing structures and utilities as outlined in article num .
preventive measures shall include but are not limited to selecting construction methods and procedures that will prevent caving of the shaft excavation monitoring and controlling the vibrations from construction activities such as the driving of casing or sheeting drilling of the shaft or from blasting if permitted .
num .
construction sequence .
a. excavation to the bottom of shaft elevation shall be completed before shaft construction begins unless otherwise noted in the contract documents or approved by the engineer .
any disturbance caused by shaft installation to a planned drilled shaft area shall be repaired by the contractor prior to the shaft construction .
b .
when drilled shafts are to be installed in conjunction with embankment placement the contractor shall construct drilled shafts after the placement of fills unless shown otherwise in the contract documents or approved by the engineer .
c. substructure concrete shall not be placed on a drilled shaft until the concrete in the shaft reaches a minimum of num of the required numday compressive strength and until all csl test results when required are accepted and the csl tubes have been dewatered and grouted .
b methods of construction .
num .
dry method .
the dry construction method shall be used only at sites where the groundwater level and soil conditions are suitable to permit construction of the shaft in a relatively dry excavation and where the sides and bottom of the shaft may be visually inspected by the engineer prior to placing reinforcement and concrete .
the dry method consists of drilling the shaft excavation removing accumulated water and loose material from the excavation placing the reinforcing cage and concreting the shaft in less than num inches of water .
num .
wet method .
the wet construction method may be used at sites where a dry excavation can not be maintained for placement of the shaft concrete .
this method consists of using water or mineral slurry to maintain stability of the hole perimeter while advancing the excavation to final depth placing the reinforcing cage and concreting the shaft .
where drilled shafts are located in open water areas exterior casings shall be extended from above the water elevation into the ground to protect the shaft concrete from water action during placement and curing of the concrete .
the casing shall be installed in a manner that will produce a positive seal at the bottom of the casing so that no seepage of water or other materials occurs into or from the shaft excavation .
num .
casing for dry or wet construction methods .
permanent or temporary casing may be used when shown on the plans or at sites where the dry or wet construction methods are inadequate to prevent caving or excessive deformation of the hole .
in this method the casing may be either placed in a predrilled hole or advanced through the ground by twisting driving or vibration before being cleaned out .
casing which is going to be installed by predrilling and permanently left in rock for the purpose of shielding voids shall be installed in not more than a num inch num mm oversized drill hole .
when downsizing of permanent casing is required no more than six feet of overlap of casing will be allowed .
section num drilled shaft construction num when the casing method is required but not shown on the plans the contractor shall submit details of the proposed casing method including casing lengths and diameters and the proposed procedures of casing installation to the bridge engineer for review in the installation plan .
if the need is determined after work on the shafts has begun a revised plan proposing this method must be submitted for review .
c excavation procedures .
num .
excavation location coordination and time constraints .
shaft excavations shall be made at locations and to the elevations geometry and dimensions shown in the contract documents or as directed by the engineer .
a shaft shall not be excavated as long as an adjacent shaft in the same substructure unit is open unless authorized in writing by the construction engineer .
blasting and vibrating casings in place will not be allowed until the concrete in adjacent shafts has reached num of the required numday compressive strength .
once the excavation of a shaft has been started the excavation shall be conducted in a continuous operation until the excavation is completed .
when an excavation is performed with any type of drilling fluid i.e .
slurry water etc .
used to stabilize the excavation the placement of concrete shall begin within num hours from the start of excavation and within num hours from the start of the excavation of the bottom num feet num m of the shaft .
if the contractor exceeds these time limits additional work may be required to insure that the condition of the excavation is adequate to result in an acceptable load carrying capacity in the completed drilled shaft .
the contractor may be required to over ream the entire depth of excavation or the bottom num feet num m if the num hour time limit is exceeded increase the depth of the excavation or perform other work that may be required by the engineer to provide an acceptable excavation .
there will be no compensation for this additional work .
the minimum width of over reaming shall be num inch num mm and the maximum width shall be num inches num mm .
num .
excavation log .
the contractor shall maintain an excavation log during shaft excavation .
the log shall contain information such as the description and approximate top and bottom elevation of each soil or rock material encountered during shaft excavation elevations at which seepage or groundwater flow are encountered and remarks .
the type of tools used for the excavation shall be shown on the log .
all changes in the type of tools used for excavation shall be shown on the log .
the engineer will monitor these operations and the logs will be used as a basis of measurement for payment .
the contractor shall resolve all discrepancies on the log noted by the engineer at the end of each work day .
two copies of the legible final log shall be furnished to the engineer within num hours after a shaft excavation is completed and accepted .
num .
handling excavated material .
excavated materials which are removed from shaft excavations shall be disposed of by the contractor in accordance with subarticle numg .
num .
excavation safety .
the contractor shall not permit workers to enter the shaft excavation for any reason unless suitable casing has been installed the water level has been lowered and stabilized below the level to be occupied and adequate safety equipment and procedures have been provided to protect workers entering the excavation .
the contractor is responsible for compliance with applicable state and federal safety regulations .
d types of drilled shaft excavation .
num .
drilled shaft excavation .
the excavation of the shaft using conventional earth drilled shaft excavation tools will be designated as drilled shaft excavation .
num .
special drilled shaft excavation .
the excavation of the shaft requiring rock tools andor procedures to accomplish hole advancement will be designated as special drilled shaft excavation .
this excavation will be for the removal of rock or other hard material within the planned shaft .
section num drilled shaft construction num e excavating and drilling equipment .
num .
general .
excavation and drilling equipment shall have adequate capacity including power torque and down thrust to excavate a hole of both the maximum specified diameter and to a depth of twenty num percent beyond the depths shown on the plans when operated at rated capacity .
num .
rock tools and equipment .
when the material encountered can not be drilled using conventional earth drilling tools and equipment the contractor shall provide rock drilling equipment including air tools approved blasting materials and other equipment as necessary to construct the shaft excavation to the size and depth required .
concurrence of the engineer shall be obtained prior to switching from earth to rock drilling tools and equipment .
approval of the engineer is required before excavation by blasting is permitted .
num .
overreaming .
a. sidewall overreaming shall be required when the sidewall of the hole is determined to have either softened due to excavation methods swollen due to delays in concreting or degraded because of slurry cake buildup .
overreaming thickness shall be a minimum of num inch num mm and a maximum of num inches num mm .
b. overreaming may be accomplished with a grooving tool overreaming bucket or other approved equipment .
the thickness and extent of sidewall overreaming shall be as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall bear all costs associated with both sidewall overreaming and additional shaft concrete placement .
num .
lost tools .
drilling tools which are lost in the excavation shall not be considered obstructions and shall be promptly removed by the contractor without compensation .
all costs due to lost tool removal shall be borne by the contractor including costs associated with correcting hole degradation due to removal operations and time delays .
f exploratory shaft excavation .
num .
general .
the contractor will be required to perform some type of exploratory shaft excavation soil samples rock cores or drilling or probing below the bottom elevations shown on the plans unless this requirement is noted on the plans as being deleted .
the contractor shall extend drilled shaft tip elevations when the engineer determines that the material encountered during this exploratory excavation is unsuitable andor differs from that anticipated in the design of the drilled shaft .
num .
rock cores and soil samples .
the contractor shall take num inch num mm minimum diameter rock cores andor soil samples at locations as designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer to determine the character of the material directly below the completed shaft excavation .
the soil samples shall be extracted with a split spoon sampler or undisturbed sample tube in accordance with aashto t num and t num .
the methods and equipment used for the rock coring shall be those given in subarticle numb for the core drilling of drilled shaft concrete .
the cores andor soil samples shall be taken to a minimum of num feet num m below the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation unless otherwise noted on the plans or directed by the geotechnical engineer .
the engineer may require this depth to be extended up to a total depth of num feet num m below the bottom of the shaft .
the contractor may choose to take these cores andor soil samples prior to excavating for the drilled shafts however payment will only be considered for that portion of the cores taken below the bottom elevation of the shafts shown on the plans .
rock core and soil test samples shall be measured visually identified and described on the contractors log .
the samples shall be placed in suitable containers identified by shaft location elevation and project number and delivered to the central laboratory in montgomery with the contractors field logwithin numhours after the exploration is completed .
the engineer will inspect the samplescores and determine the final depth of required excavation based on his evaluation of the sampled materials suitability .
num .
drilling or probing .
section num drilled shaft construction num at all drilled shaft locations where rock cores andor soil samples are not designated the contractor will be required to drill or probe an exploratory holebelow the bottom elevation of the shaft to determine if any voids or crevices are present .
the exploratory hole shall be taken to a depth of num feet num m unless noted otherwise on the plans .
exploratory drilling or probing will not be required if it is noted on the plans that this requirement is not necessary .
no direct payment will be made for this operation .
g obstruction removal .
surface and subsurface obstructions at drilled shaft locations shall be removed by the contractor .
such obstructions may include manmade materials such as old concrete foundations and natural materials such as boulders .
special procedures andor tools shall be employed by the contractor in the event the hole can not be advanced using conventional augers fitted with soil or rock teeth drilling buckets andor underreaming tools .
special procedurestools may include but are not limited to chisels boulder breakers core barrels air tools hand excavation temporary casing and increasing the hole diameter .
blasting shall not be permitted unless specifically approved in writing by the engineer .
removal of obstructions will be classified as special drilled shaft excavation .
h trial drilled shaft installation .
num .
general .
the engineer will require the construction of a trial shaft if the submittal of descriptions of previous drilled shaft construction projects does not in the opinion of the engineer substantiate the contractors capability for constructing the drilled shafts on this project .
the engineer may also require the construction of a trial shaft to verify the adequacy of unusual construction methods andor equipment proposed for use in the construction of the production shafts .
the trial drilled shaft shall be constructed if required by special note on the plans .
num .
location and depth .
the trial shafts shall be positioned as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
unless otherwise indicated shafts shall be drilled to the maximum depth of any production shaft shown on the plans .
num .
failure to demonstrate ability .
failure of the contractor to demonstrate the adequacy of his equipment methods andor expertise shall be reason for the engineer to require alterations necessary to eliminate unsatisfactory results .
additional trial shafts required to demonstrate correction of deficiencies shall be at the contractors expense .
num .
trial shaft approval .
once approval has been given to construct production shafts no changes will be permitted in the personnel methods or equipment that were used to construct the satisfactory trial shaft without written approval of the engineer .
num .
site restoration .
unless otherwise shown in the contract documents the trial shaft holes will be filled with nonreinforced concrete in the same manner that production shafts will be constructed .
the concreted trial shafts shall be cutoff num feet num mm below finished grade or at the mudline if in water .
the disturbed areas at trial shaft holes shall be restored as nearly as practical to their original condition .
no direct payment will be made for cutting off the top of the trial shaft or for the site restoration .
num encased excavations .
a general .
the outside diameter of casings shall not be less than the specified shaft size .
no extra compensation will be allowed for concrete required to fill an oversized casing or excavation .
all casings except permanent casing shall be removed from shaft excavations .
b temporary casing .
num .
general .
all casing shall be considered temporary unless specifically shown as permanent casing in the contract documents .
the contractor will be required to remove temporary casing before section num drilled shaft construction num completion of concreting the drilled shaft .
telescoping predrilling with slurry andor overreaming to beyond the outside diameter of the casing may be required to install casing .
num .
size substitution .
if the contractor elects to remove a specified diameter or length of casing and substitute a longer or larger diameter casing through caving soils the excavation shall be either stabilized with slurry or backfilled before the new casing is installed .
other methods as approved by the engineer may be used to control the stability of the excavation and protect the integrity of the foundation soils .
num .
bound or fouled casings .
temporary casings which become bound or fouled during shaft construction and can not be practically removed shall constitute a defect in the drilled shaft .
the contractor shall be responsible for correcting such defective shafts to the satisfaction of the engineer .
correction may consist of but is not limited to removing the shaft concrete and extending the shaft deeper to compensate for loss of frictional capacity in the cased zone providing straddle shafts to compensate for capacity loss or providing a replacement shaft .
all corrective measures including redesign of shafts caused by defective shafts shall be done to the satisfaction of the engineer without compensation or an extension of the completion date of the project .
in addition no compensation will be paid for casing remaining in place .
num .
removable casing .
when the shaft extends above ground or through a body of water the portion exposed above ground or through a body of water may be formed with suitable removable casing except when permanent casing is specified .
removable casing shall be stripped from the shaft in a manner that will not damage the concrete .
casings can be removed when the concrete has attained a compressive strength of not less than num psi num mpa as determined from concrete cylinder breaks provided curing of the concrete is continued for the full period in accordance with specifications and the shaft concrete is not exposed to salt water or moving water for seven days .
c permanent casings .
num .
general .
permanent casing shall be used when shown in the contract documents .
the casing shall be continuous between top and bottom elevations prescribed in the plans .
after installation is complete the permanent casing shall be cut off at the prescribed elevation and the shaft completed by installing necessary reinforcing steel and concrete in the casing .
exterior surfaces of permanent casings shall be cleaned and coated with the prime coat only of a system numa coating in accordance with the requirements given in section num and as shown on the plans .
the exterior surfaces shall be coated prior to the installation of the casings .
after the installation of the casings all damage to the coated surfaces of the casings exposed to the air shall be repaired by a repeated application of the same prime coat .
when not shown in the contract documents permanent casing may be used if determined to be necessary by the engineer and if approved by the bridge engineer .
num .
multiple casings .
in cases where special temporary casings are shown on the plans or authorized in writing by the engineer the contractor shall maintain alignment of both the temporary outer and permanent inner casing and a positive watertight seal between the two casings during excavation and concreting operations .
num use of slurry .
a general .
slurries shall have a mineral grain size that will remain in suspension and sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport excavated material to a suitable screening system .
the percentage and specific gravity of the material used to make the suspension shall be sufficient to maintain stability of the excavation and allow proper concrete placement .
b mixing and storage .
the mineral slurry shall be premixed thoroughly with clean fresh water and adequate time allotted for hydration prior to introduction into the shaft excavation .
slurry tanks of adequate section num drilled shaft construction num capacity will be required for slurry circulation storage and treatment .
excavated slurry pits will not be allowed in lieu of slurry tanks without the written permission of the engineer .
c desanding .
desanding equipment shall be provided by the contractor as necessary to control slurry sand content at less than num percent by volume at any point in the borehole .
desanding will not be required for setting temporary casing sign post or lighting mast foundations unless required by the plans or special provisions .
d required fluid level .
num .
general .
during construction the level of the slurry shall be maintained at a height sufficient to prevent caving of the hole .
in the event of a sudden significant loss of slurry in the hole the construction of that foundation shall be stopped until methods to stop slurry loss or an alternate construction procedure have been approved by the engineer .
num .
required head .
mineral slurry in a shaft excavation shall be maintained at a level not less than num feet num m above the highest expected static water surface along the depth of the shaft .
if at any time the engineer determines the slurry construction method fails to produce the desired final results the contractor shall discontinue this method and propose an alternate method for approval of the engineer .
e control of slurry .
num .
setup prevention .
the contractor shall take all steps necessary to prevent the slurry from setting up in the shaft .
such methods may include but are not limited to agitation circulation andor adjusting the properties of the slurry .
num .
control testing .
control tests using suitable apparatus shall be carried out on the mineral slurry by the contractor to determine density viscosity and ph .
an acceptable range of values for these physical properties is shown in the following table mineral slurry sodium bentonite or attapulgite in fresh water acceptable range of values property units at time of slurry introduction in hole at time of concreting test method density pounds per cubic foot kgmnum num num num num num num num num density balance viscosity seconds quart seconds liter num num num num num num num num marsh cone ph num num ph paper ph meter increase by num pounds per cubic foot num kgmnum in salt water a .
tests should be performed when the slurry temperature is above num f. b .
if desanding is required sand content shall not exceed num percent by volume at any point in the bore hole as determined by the american petroleum institute sand content test .
section num drilled shaft construction num f testing of slurry .
num .
frequency .
tests to determine density viscosity and ph value shall be done during the shaft excavation to establish a consistent working pattern .
a minimum of four sets of tests shall be made during the first num hours of slurry use .
when the results show consistent behavior the testing frequency may be decreased to one set every four hours of slurry use .
num .
test reports .
reports of all tests required above signed by an authorized representative of the contractor shall be furnished to the engineer on completion of each drilled shaft .
g disposal .
disposal of all slurry shall be done off site by the contractor .
num excavation measurement and cleaning .
a general .
the contractor shall provide equipment and personnel for checking the dimensions and alignment of each permanent shaft excavation .
the dimensions depth and alignment shall be determined under the direction and to the satisfaction of the engineer after final cleaning .
b cleaning .
unless otherwise stated in the contract a minimum of num percent of the base of each shaft will have less than num inch num mm of sediment at the time of concrete placement .
the maximum depth of sediment or any debris at any place on the base of the shaft shall not exceed num inches num mm .
shaft cleanliness will be determined by visual inspection for dryshafts .
for wet shafts the bottom of the shaft shall be sounded with an airlift pipe a tape with a heavy weight mass attached to the end of the tape or other means acceptable to the engineer .
in addition for dry excavations the maximum depth of water covering the bottom of the excavation shall not exceed num inches num mm prior to concrete pour .
num reinforcing steel construction and placement .
a general .
the reinforcing steel cage consisting of longitudinal and transverse bars ties cage stiffeners spacers centralizers and other necessary appurtenances shall be completely assembled and placed as a unit immediately after the shaft excavation is inspected and accepted and prior to concrete placement .
the reinforcing steel in the shaft shall be securely tied and supported so that the reinforcing steel will remain within allowable tolerances given in subarticle numc of this specification .
b spacers .
num .
concrete spacers or other approved noncorrosive spacing devices shall be used at sufficient intervals near the bottom and at intervals not exceeding num feet up the shaft to insure concentric spacing for the entire cage length .
num .
spacers shall be constructed of approved material equal in quality and durability to the concrete specified for the shaft .
the spacers shall be of adequate dimension to insure the proper annular space between the outside of the reinforcing cage and the side of the excavated hole andor permanent casing as detailed on the plans or proposed in the installation plan .
if not detailed on the plans a minimum num inch num mm annular space will be required .
c cage supports .
cylindrical concrete feet bottom supports shall be provided to insure that the bottom of the cage is maintained at the proper distance above the base as specified by the project plans .
d cage extension .
if the drilled shaft excavation is extended to an elevation lower than the plan bottom elevation reinforcing cage length shall also be extended by the same amount .
cages may be extended at the plan bottom elevation by lap splicing additional longitudinal bars per planned cage requirements of sufficient length to provide a compression splice num feet num mm in length plus the required extension .
hoops for the extension shall be spaced the same as shown for other hoops .
any additional splices of the cage above the plan bottom elevation and not shown on section num drilled shaft construction num the plans must have prior approval of the bridge engineer .
stiffeners spacers and other appurtenances shall also be extended as required .
num concrete placement requirements .
a general .
concrete used for drilled shaft construction shall meet the requirements of subarticle numb .
after the reinforcing steel has been placed and before the concrete is ordered the bottom of the drilled shaft must be resounded to verify cleanliness .
b concrete placement time limitations .
num .
general .
concrete shall be placed as soon as possible after the reinforcing steel has been placed and the bottom of the shaft has been resounded .
the concrete placement shall be continuous from the bottom to the top elevation of the shaft .
the elapsed time from the beginning of concrete placement in the shaft to the completion of placement shall not exceed num hours except as allowed by the engineer .
the engineer may allow the concrete placement time to exceed num hours if the contractor adequately demonstrates that the slump of the concrete will not be less than num inches num mm during the entire time of concrete placement .
num .
slump losstime relationship .
a .
general .
the contractor may choose either a laboratory test or a field test to demonstrate the slump losstime relationship .
adjustments to chemical admixture dosages will be allowed for the sole purpose of extending the time of concrete placement provided that the admixtures are included in the approved concrete mix design .
a new slump loss test will be required if changes are made to the concrete mix including adjustments to chemical admixtures .
b .
laboratory test .
the contractor shall demonstrate by trial mix and slump loss tests that the slump of the concrete will not be less than num inches num mm during the longer placement time .
these tests shall be conducted by an independent testing laboratory approved by the department as per aldotnum and in the presence of a department representative .
the slump loss tests shall be performed at intervals not to exceed num minutes and shall be made from a trial mix proportioned from the approved concrete mix design .
the temperature of the trial mix shall be kept at a level representative of construction site conditions .
c. field test .
the contractor shall demonstrate by construction site slump loss tests that the slump of the concrete will not be less than num inches num mm during the longer placement time .
the slump loss tests shall be performed at intervals not to exceed num minutes and shall be made from the first batch of concrete that is placed in a trial drilled shaft .
the concrete used for these slump loss tests shall be sampled at the trial drilled shaft site and shall be kept covered during testing .
if a trial shaft is not required then a field test may be performed at the construction site prior to the beginning of the work .
the slump test shall be performed by the contractors concrete technician certified by the department as per aldotnum in the presence of a department representative .
c placement through slurry andor encased excavations .
num .
general .
the contractor shall insure that a heavily contaminated slurry suspension which could impair the free flow of concrete has not accumulated in the bottom of the shaft .
num .
required slurry sampling .
prior to placing concrete in a slurry filled shaft excavation the contractor shall take slurry samples using a sampling tool .
slurry samples shall be extracted from the base of the shaft and at intervals not exceeding num feet num m up the shaft until two consecutive samples section num drilled shaft construction num produce acceptable values for density viscosity ph and sand content as noted in subarticle numc and item numenum respectively .
num .
unacceptable sampling results .
when any slurry samples are found to be unacceptable the contractor shall take whatever action is necessary to bring the mineral slurry within specification requirements .
concrete shall not be poured until resampling and testing results produce acceptable values .
num .
required concrete level during placement .
the level of fresh concrete placed into a casing shall be a minimum of num feet num m above either the hydrostatic water level or the level of drilling fluid whichever is higher .
as a temporary casing is withdrawn care shall be exercised to maintain an adequate level of concrete within the casing so that fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward and discharged at the ground surface without contaminating or displacing the shaft concrete .
num concrete placement methods .
a general .
if a method of concrete placement has not been specifically identified in the contract documents the contractor may use any of the placement methods described hereafter .
if a concrete pump is used to move the concrete to the drilled shaft a standby pump shall be immediately available to pump the concrete if there is a pump failure .
details pertaining to compliance with this specification shall be presented as part of the contractors installation plan as outlined in item numanum .
concrete placement shall continue after the shaft excavation is full until good quality concrete is evident at the top of the shaft .
any overflow of concrete at the top of the shaft shall be removed to maintain a uniform appearance and the proper dimensions of the shaft .
b free fall placement .
num .
general .
the free fall placement of concrete shall only be permitted in dry vertical shafts where the clear opening inside the reinforcing cage is not less than num inches num mm in diameter .
the height of free fall placement shall not exceed num feet num m. concrete placed by free fall shall fall directly to the placement location without contacting either the reinforcing cage or the shaft sidewall .
the engineer will observe the falling of the concrete within the shaft .
if the concrete strikes the reinforcing cage or sidewall or if there is excessive spatter from the impact of the falling concrete the contractor shall reduce the rate of concrete placement reduce the height of free fall or provide a drop chute for concrete placement as directed by the engineer .
num .
drop chute requirements .
a .
general .
drop chutes shall consist of a smooth tube of either one piece construction or sections which can be added and removed .
concrete may be placed through either a hopper at the top of the tube or side openings as the drop chute is retrieved during concrete placement .
b. chute support .
the drop chute shall be supported so that the free fall of the concrete measured from the bottom of the chute to the point of deposition is less than num feet num m. if concrete placement causes the shaft excavation to cave or slough or if the concrete strikes the rebar cage or sidewall the contractor shall reduce the height of free fall andor reduce the rate of concrete flow into the excavation .
num .
disqualification of free fall method .
if in the opinion of the engineer placement can not be satisfactorily accomplished by the free fall and drop chute method the contractor shall change to either tremie or pumping methods to accomplish the pour .
c tremie concrete placement .
tremies may be used for concrete placement in either wet or dry holes .
num .
tremie requirements .
section num drilled shaft construction num a .
general .
tremies shall consist of a tube of sufficient length weight mass and diameter to discharge concrete at the shaft base elevation .
the tremie shall not contain aluminum parts which will have contact with the concrete .
the tremies inside diameter shall be at least num times the maximum size of aggregate used in the concrete mix but shall not be less than num inches num mm .
b. tremie tube wall .
inside and outside surfaces of the tremie shall be clean and smooth to permit both flow of concrete and unimpeded withdrawal during concreting .
the wall thickness of the tremie shall be adequate to prevent crimping or sharp bends which restrict concrete placement .
c. concrete placement .
the tremie used for wet concrete placement shall be watertight .
underwater placement shall not begin until the tremie is placed to the shaft base elevation .
valves bottom plates or plugs may be used to insure concrete discharge begins within one tremie diameter of the base .
plugs shall either be removed from the excavation or be made of a material which will not cause a defect in the shaft if not removed .
the discharge end of the tremie shall be constructed to permit the free radial flow of concrete during placement operations .
num .
placement requirements .
a .
general .
the tremie discharge end shall be immersed at least num feet num m in concrete at all times after starting the flow of concrete .
the flow of the concrete shall be continuous .
the concrete in the tremie shall be maintained at a positive pressure differential at all times to prevent water or slurry intrusion into the shaft concrete .
b .
defective shafts .
if at any time during the concrete pour the tremie line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level the shaft shall be considered defective .
in such case the contractor shall either remove the reinforcing cage and concrete complete any necessary sidewall removal directed by the engineer and repour the shaft or the tremie shall be replugged recharged with concrete and inserted a minimum of num feet num m below the existing top level of concrete prior to continuing the pour .
the contractor shall be responsible for correcting any defect caused by this procedure without additional compensation .
all costs for replacement of defective shaft concrete shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
d pumped concrete placement .
concrete pumps and lines may be used for concrete placement in either wet or dry excavations .
num .
equipment requirements .
pump lines shall have a minimum diameter of num inches num mm and shall be constructed with watertight joints .
except as modified herein requirements pertaining to tremie lines as stated in item numcnum also apply to pump lines and their use .
the concrete pump unit shall have sufficient power to insure continuous placement of concrete under all foreseeable placement conditions .
num .
placement requirements .
a .
discharge orifice location and pressure .
the discharge orifice shall remain at least num feet num m below the surface of the fluid concrete .
when lifting the pump line during concreting the contractor shall temporarily reduce the line pressure until the orifice has been repositioned at a higher level in the excavation .
b .
defective shafts .
if at any time during the concrete pour the pump line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level the shaft section num drilled shaft construction num shall be considered defective .
in such case the contractor shall remove the reinforcing cage and concrete complete any necessary sidewall removal directed by the engineer and repour the shaft .
all costs for replacement of defective shaft concrete shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num testing requirements for drilled shafts .
a crosshole sonic logging of drilled shafts .
num .
general requirements .
the nondestructive testing method called crosshole sonic logging csl shall be used on all production and trial drilled shafts a when constructed with the placement of concrete underwater or through slurry b when required by special note on the plans c when a full length temporary casing is used to prevent water from entering the shaft or d when determined to be necessary by the engineer .
the testing shall not be conducted until num hours after the placement of all concrete in a shaft and must be completed within num calendar days after placement .
the csl tests shall be conducted by an experienced independent testing consultant approved by the engineer prior to testing .
the csl tests measure the time it takes for an ultrasonic pulse to travel from a signal source in one access tube to a receiver in another access tube .
in uniform good quality concrete the travel time between equidistant tubes will be relatively constant and correspond to a reasonable concrete pulse velocity from the bottom to the top of the foundation .
in uniform good quality concrete the csl test will also produce records with good signal amplitude and energy .
longer travel times and lower amplitudeenergy signals indicate the presence of irregularities such as poor quality concrete void honeycomb and soil intrusions .
the signal will be completely lost by the receiver and csl recording system for the more severe defects such as voids and soil intrusions .
num .
preparation for testing .
a number of tubes shall be installed in each shaft to permit access for csl .
the number of tubes installed will depend on the diameter of the shaft as specified below shaft diameter d minimum number of tubes d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num num feet num mm d num feet num mm num the tubes shall have a num inch num mm inside diameter and shall be schedule num steel pipe .
the pipes shall have a round regular internal diameter free of defects or obstructions including any at pipe joints in order to permit the free unobstructed passage of a num inch num mm diameter source and receiver probes .
the tubes shall be watertight and free from corrosion with clean internal and external faces to ensure passage of the probes and a good bond between the concrete and the tubes .
the pipes shall each be fitted with a water tight shoe on the bottom and a removable cap on the top .
the pipes shall be securely attached to the interior of the reinforcement cage with a minimum cover of num inches num mm.the tubes shall be installed in each shaft in a regular symmetric pattern such that each tube is equally spaced from the others around the perimeter of the cage .
the contractor shall submit to the testing organization his selection of tube size along with his proposed method to install the tubes prior to construction .
the tubes shall be as near to parallel as possible .
the tubes shall extend from num inches num mm above the shaft bottoms to at least num feet num m above the shaft tops .
if the shaft top is subsurface the tubes shall extend at least num feet num mm above the ground surface .
any joints required to achieve full length tubes shall be made watertight .
care shall be taken during reinforcement installation operations in the drilled shaft hole so as not to damage the tubes .
as the cage is being lowered into the shaft the tubes shall be checked to assure that section num drilled shaft construction num they are vertical and parallel and that all connections are water tight .
after placement of the reinforcement cage the tubes shall be filled with clean water as soon as possible .
after the tubes are filled with water the tube tops shall be capped or sealed to keep debris out of the tubes prior to concrete placement .
the pipe caps or plugs shall not be removed until the concrete in the shaft has set .
care shall be exercised in the removal of caps or plugs from the pipes after installation so as not to apply excess torque hammering or other stresses which could break the bond between the tubes and the concrete .
num .
typical csl test equipment .
typical csl test equipment consists of the following components a microprocessor based csl system for display of individual csl records analogdigital conversion and recording of csl data analysis of receiver responses and printing of csl logs .
ultrasonic source and receiver probes for num inch num mm id pipe as appropriate .
an ultrasonic voltage pulser to excite the source with a synchronized triggering system to start the recording system .
a depth measurement device to determine and record depths .
appropriate filteramplification and cable systems for csl testing .
num .
csl logging procedures .
before the placement of concrete a minimum of one tube per shaft shall be plumbed and the tube length recorded including a notation of the stickup of the tubes above the shaft tops .
information on the shaft bottom and top elevations andor length along with construction dates shall be provided to the engineer and the approved testing organization before the csl tests are performed .
the csl tests shall be carried out with the source and receiver probes in the same horizontal plane unless test results indicate potential defects in which case the questionable zone may be further evaluated with angled tests source and receiver vertically offset in the tubes .
csl measurements shall be made at depth intervals of num inches num mm or less and shall be done from the bottom of the tubes to the top of each shaft .
the probes shall be pulled simultaneously starting from the bottoms of the tubes over a depth measuring device .
any slack shall be removed from the cables prior to pulling to provide for accurate depth measurements of the csl records .
prior to leaving the job site the approved testing organization shall notify the engineer that all data was collected satisfactorily or if there were discrepancies in the supplied csl tube lengths difficulties in obtaining the data or if tube access was obstructed anywhere in the supplied lengths .
csl tests shall be conducted between pairs of tubes .
the approved testing organization shall test at least two diagonals through the center and between each tube pair around the perimeter of all tested shafts .
two diagonal tests shall be as close as possible to being at right angles to each other .
additional logs shall be conducted at no additional cost in the event anomalies are detected .
the contractor shall attempt to clear all tube obstructions reported to the engineer so that tubes can be retested to full depth while the approved testing organization is on site .
if obstructions can not be cleared in a tube the approved testing organization shall conduct the csl test in the adjacent pair of unobstructed tubes so that the measurements are made as close as possible to the obstructed tubes .
any anomalies indicated by longer pulse arrival times and significantly lower amplitudeenergy signals shall be reported to the engineer and further tests such as fan shaped tests tests with probes raised at a fixed offset distance or other topographical techniques shall be conducted as required to evaluate the extent of such anomalies .
additional ndt methods which may be used to evaluate possible defects include singlehole sonic logging gammagamma nuclear density logging andor surface sonic echo and impulse response tests .
section num drilled shaft construction num num .
csl testing results .
the csl results shall be presented to the engineer in a report .
this report shall include recommendations as to the acceptability unacceptability soundness etc .
of the drilled shaft .
the report shall be checked stamped approved and signed by a professional engineer licensed by the alabama board of licensure for professional engineers .
this professional engineer shall not be an employee of the aldot .
the report shall be submitted directly to the materials and tests engineer with a copy to the project manager .
the test results shall include csl logs with analyses of initial pulse arrival time versus depth pulse energyamplitude versus depth a csl log shall be presented for each tube pair tested with any defect zones indicated on the logs and discussed in the test report as appropriate .
num .
evaluation of csl test results .
the engineer will evaluate the csl test results and determine whether or not the drilled shaft construction is acceptable .
this evaluation will be completed within num calendar days of the date of receipt of the report by the materials tests engineer .
if the engineer determines that the drilled shaft is acceptable the csl tubes shall be dewatered and grouted .
the grout shall be of the same strength or higher than the strength of the concrete used in the original drilled shaft .
the contractor may use any of the grout mixes listed in table num of item numbnum .
with the exception that calcium chloride will not be allowed .
the contractor may submit another design mix for approval .
if the engineer determines that the drilled shaft is unacceptable the shaft shall be cored in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numb to allow further evaluation of the shaft .
cores shall be taken without additional compensation unless the testing of the cores indicates that the concrete in the shaft meets all specification requirements .
if the testing of the cores indicates that the concrete meets specification requirements the cost of the coring will be paid for as extra work .
b core drilling of drilled shaft concrete .
production or trial drilled shafts that are determined to be unacceptable by the csl tests may be cored to determine the quality of the shaft .
the required number and depth of cores will be determined by the engineer .
because it is necessary to obtain a high percentage of core recovery for visual inspection and compressive strength testing the core bit used for core drilling shall be warranted by the manufacturer as being capable of coring the concrete as strong as could possibly be present in the shaft .
a new bit or new core barrel will be required at any time the engineer determines that the equipment may not be capable of obtaining good quality cores .
the minimum diameter of the cores shall be num inches num mm .
an accurate log of cores shall be kept and the cores shall be placed in a crate and properly marked showing the shaft depth at each interval of core recovery .
the cores along with three copies of the coring log shall be transported to the aldot bureau of materials and tests montgomery alabama for inspection .
construction shall not proceed above a drilled shaft until the quality of the shaft as represented by the core samples is determined to be acceptable and notification to continue construction is given by the construction engineer .
if the engineer determines that the drilled shaft is acceptable the core holes and the csl tubes shall be dewatered and grouted .
the grout shall be of the same strength or higher than the strength of the concrete used in the original drilled shaft .
the contractor may use any of the grout mixes listed in table num of item numbnum .
with the exception that calcium chloride will not be allowed .
the contractor may submit another grout design mix for approval .
if the quality of thedrilled shaft is determined to be unacceptable then the contractor shall construct another foundation to carry the load that will be placed on the shaft or perform corrective work as required by the department .
this foundation or the corrective work shall be constructed without compensation from the department .
the details of the replacement foundation shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in article num for working drawings .
section num drilled shaft construction num num drilled shaft construction tolerances .
the following construction tolerances apply to drilled shafts unless otherwise stated in the contract documents .
drilled shaft excavations and completed shafts not constructed within the required tolerances are unacceptable .
the contractor shall correct all unacceptable shaft excavations and completed shafts to the satisfaction of the engineer .
materials and work necessary to complete corrections for out of tolerance drilled shaft excavations andor completed shafts including engineering analysis and redesign shall be furnished without either cost to the state or an extension of the contract time of the project .
a general location .
the drilled shaft shall be within num inches num mm of plan position in the horizontal plane at the elevation of the top of the shaft .
b vertical alignment .
the vertical alignment of a shaft excavation shall not vary from the plan alignment by more than num inch per foot num mmm of depth .
the alignment of a battered shaft excavation shall not vary by more than num inch per foot num mmm of depth from the prescribed batter .
c reinforcing steel cage .
the spacers for the reinforcing cage shall have a tolerance of minus num inch num mm from the required spacing shown on the plans .
the reinforcing steel cage shall be within num inch num mm of plan position in the horizontal plane at the elevation of the top of the shaft .
after all the concrete is placed the top of the reinforcing steel cage shall be no more than num inches num mm above and no more than num inches num mm below plan position .
d casings .
all casing diameters shown on the plans refer to od outside diameter dimensions .
casing shall be clean round straight and free of weld breaks andor holes that would permit passage of water or wet concrete .
when approved by the engineer the contractor may elect to provide a casing larger in diameter than shown in the plans .
no payment will be made for additional construction materials used in accommodating the contractors request for a larger casing diameter .
e shaft socket .
the diameter of an excavated socket shall have a tolerance of minus num inches num mm from the plan diameter .
f top elevation of shafts .
the top elevation of the shaft shall have a tolerance of plus num inch num mm or minus num inches num mm from the plan top of shaft elevation .
g excavation equipment and methods .
excavation equipment and methods shall be designed so that the completed shaft excavation will have a planar bottom .
the cutting edges of excavation equipment shall be normal to the vertical axis of the equipment within a tolerance of num of the diameter .
num method of measurement .
a drilled shaft excavation .
drilled shaft excavation will be measured by the linear foot meter of excavated shaft .
b special drilled shaft excavation .
special drilled shaft excavation will be measured by the linear foot meter of excavated shaft .
c drilled shaft construction .
drilled shaft construction will be measured by the linear foot meter of shaft .
d exploration below drilled shaft .
the exploratory drilling below the bottom of a drilled shaft will be measured by the linear foot meter of core hole .
e permanent drilled shaft casing .
permanent drilled shaft casings will be measured by the linear foot meter of casing left in place .
section num drilled shaft construction num f crosshole sonic logging csl .
testing by the csl method will be measured per each shaft tested .
num basis of payment .
a drilled shaft excavation .
the linear foot per meter bid price shall be full compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to complete and support the excavation .
this shall also be full compensation for the utilization of slurry and temporary casings for the disposal of all surplus excavated materials and for incidentals necessary to complete the work .
no additional payment will be made for larger diameter or deeper excavations that are made by the choice of the contractor .
b special drilled shaft excavation .
the linear foot per meter bid price shall be full compensation for all labor materials and special equipment required to complete and support the excavation .
this shall also be full compensation for the removal of obstructions the utilization of slurry and temporary casings for the disposal of all surplus excavated materials and for incidentals necessary to complete the work .
no additional payment will be made for larger diameter or deeper excavations that are made by the choice of the contractor .
c drilled shaft construction .
the linear foot per meter bid price shall be full compensation for all labor materials equipment and incidentals required for the construction of a shaft except for reinforcing steel which will be paid for under item numa .
no additional compensation will be made for larger diameter or deeper shafts that are constructed by the choice of the contractor .
d exploration below drilled shaft .
the linear foot per meter bid price shall be full compensation for all labor materials equipment and incidentals required for coring and sample retrieval .
e trial drilled shaft .
payment for a trial drilled shaft will be made under the appropriate production drilled shaft items of numa b c f or g as they may apply .
no separate payment will be made for cutting off the trial shaft or site restoration .
f permanent drilled shaft casing .
the linear foot per meter bid price shall be full compensation for all labor materials equipment and incidentals required for furnishing painting and installing the casing .
no payment will be made for cutoffs .
if there is no pay item in the contract for permanent casing then the casing will be paid for as extra work as outlined in article num extra work .
g crosshole sonic logging .
the price bid for each shaft tested shall be full compensation for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to perform the required test and furnish the engineer with the test results .
the bid price shall also include dewatering the tubes and filling the tubes with grout .
where a drilled shaft consists of different shaft diameters the price bid shall be full compensation for the sonic logging of the complete depth of the drilled shaft regardless of differences in the diameter of the shaft .
the shaft diameter shown in the pay item for sonic logging is for identification purposes and will be the smallest diameter portion of a drilled shaft .
h payment will be made under item no .
numa drilled shaft excavation diameter per linear foot meter numb special drilled shaft excavation diameter per linear foot meter numc drilled shaft construction diameter class concrete per linear foot meter numd exploration below drilled shaft per linear foot meter numf permanent drilled shaft casing diameter per linear foot meter section num abutment and bulkhead anchors num numg crosshole sonic logging diameter per each specify diameter of shaft in feet and inches millimeters .
specify either dsnum dsnum or dsnum .
section num abutment and bulkhead anchors num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing complete abutment andor bulkhead anchor assemblies for precast concrete bridges timber bridges andor timber metal or concrete bulkheads all in accordance with the details shown on the plans and at the locations shown on the plans or directed .
special reference is made to section num bridges .
num materials .
all materials shall comply with the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the following unless otherwise noted or provided by plan details all miscellaneous hardware turnbolts clamps bolts etc .
shall be new galvanized metal galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
wire rope cable for rope anchor assemblies shall be of num inch num mm nominal diameter .
wires shall meet the requirements of astm designation a num siemens martin grade having a class a galvanization coating or an approved equal .
galvanizing of materials completely encased in concrete will not be required .
precastprestressed members of anchor assemblies shall comply with the appropriate requirements for precasting and prestressing concrete as noted in sections num and num .
num construction requirements .
all anchor assemblies shall be erected in accordance with the details shown on the plans or directed .
fabrication of integral parts of an anchor assembly shall be in accordance with the requirements of other appropriate sections of the specification for the type material involved with specific reference made to sections num num num and num .
num method of measurement .
an anchor assembly for an abutment shall consist of the number of sets of tieback cables or arms designated on the plans to connect an abutment to the anchors and includes the connecting system of fastening the cables or arms to the anchors and the abutment .
only one assembly will be measured for each abutment regardless of the number of anchors attached to the abutment .
an anchor assembly for a bulkhead shall consist of the number of sets of tieback cables or arms designated on the plans to connect a section of a bulkhead to one anchor and includes the connecting system of fastening the cables or arms to the anchor and bulkhead .
a separate assembly will be measured for each anchor attached to a bulkhead .
the anchors will be measured and paid for under the appropriate item of piling designated for use as the anchors .
the abutment or bulkhead will be measured and paid for under the appropriate items of which the abutments or bulkheads are constructed .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
accepted anchor assemblies measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price per each which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials along with the installation of the anchor assemblies complete in place attached to the anchors and the abutment or bulkhead and includes all incidental excavation backfill and compaction thereof miscellaneous hardware etc .
and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa wire rope abutmentbulkhead anchor assembly per each section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num numb prestressed concrete abutmentbulkhead anchor assembly per each section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num description .
the work under this section shall cover the furnishing fabricating erecting and painting both shop and field all structural steel and metal work .
all work shall be in conformity with the dimensions shapes and designs shown on the plans .
erected materials shall conform to lines and grades shown on the plans .
structural metals covered in this section shall include structural steel shapes except piling and plates bolts and other types of fasteners welding special and alloy steels steel forgings and castings and all types of metal casting as well as any incidental metal construction not covered in other sections .
welding of structural steel and other metals shall conform to the requirements of article num and any modification thereto provided in the contract .
applicable requirements of sections num and num shall also apply to this section .
issues concerning nonconforming work repair procedures requests for variances andor clarification of contract plans andor specifications including approved shop drawings shall be addressed by submitting aldot bridge bureau form bbfnum request for approval rfa to the state bridge engineer for review and approval along with any supporting documentation .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the provisions of division num materials specific reference is made to the following section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals .
section num coatings paints enamels and varnishes for metal and wood structures .
except where otherwise provided all members shall be of structural carbon steel .
pipe or tubing for railing shall be as specified on the plans .
forgings shall be of carbon steel and shall be annealed before machine finishing .
castings shall be made of the type metal specified by the plans but in general cast iron shall be used only for unimportant parts .
high strength steel fasteners shall conform to the requirements of article num .
high strength steel lockpin and collar fasteners will not be permitted unless noted in the plan details .
materials for bridge deck drainage systems shall conform to the requirements shown on the plans .
galvanizing if required shall conform to astm a num for pipe aashto m num for forgings shapes etc .
aashto m num for miscellaneous hardware and anchor bolt assemblies anchor bolts nuts and washers and astm b num class num for bolt assemblies bolts nuts and washers .
num construction requirements .
a general .
attention is directed to the requirements of sections num and num concerning approval of drawings mill orders and shipment statements and notice and facilities for inspection before fabrication of structure members .
all exposed structural steel surfaces including piling not in contact with concrete shall unless otherwise noted by the plans or proposal be painted in accordance with the provisions of section num utilizing green bridge paint for the top coat or other color as specified by plans .
the painting of the steel and the cost thereof is considered incidental to the furnishing of the structural steel .
when a structure utilizing aashto m num grade numw weathering steel is designated to be unpainted the steel shall be cleaned after fabrication includes drilling and reaming in accordance with the provisions of steel structures painting council specification sspcspnum .
all foreign material which adheres to the steel after fabrication including tight mill scale shall be removed without additional compensation .
tight mill scale on the top of the top flanges of girders and beams may remain except in the locations where studs are to be attached .
the surface of the steel shall be cleaned to bright metal just prior to attaching studs .
section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num all temporary markings shall be removed before the final acceptance of the structural steel .
b shop fabrication .
the requirements for shop fabrication are given in section num .
within num days after the award of the contract the contractor shall submit the following items to the bridge engineer name address and location of the plant where the structural steel will be fabricated .
a current copy of the fabricators american institute of steel construction certification including fracture critical endorsement fc or sophisticated paint endorsement spe where required .
a written statement naming the aldot iiinum coating system that will be applied to the structural steel .
construction survey data if this is shown to be required on the plans .
the review of the shop drawings and the time allowed for the review given in section num will not begin until all of the required items have been received by the bridge engineer .
additional evidence of the fabricators qualifications and experience shall be furnished if requested by the bridge engineer .
no material shall be fabricated before the department has been notified where the fabrication order has been placed .
the fabricator is responsible for notifying the bridge engineer of any outsourced work to be done by another facility the name and address of the outside source and the proposed schedule .
shops fabricating main structural steel members as defined by subarticle numb andor items paid for under pay item numb with the exception of navigational light brackets inspection catwalks platforms and ladders shall be certified by the american institute of steel construction .
these facilities shall conform to the aisc certification program for steel bridge fabricators for either intermediate bridge or advanced bridge depending on the complexity of the structure by design for all steel bridges .
for fracture critical work shops shall be certified for either intermediate bridge or advanced bridge with the fracture critical endorsement .
shops fabricating expansion dams finger joints etc .
for interior and exterior bridge joints shall be certified by the aisc certification program for bridge and highway metal component manufacturers or by the intermediate aisc bridge certification program for steel bridge fabrication .
shops producing miscellaneous steel bridge items other than those described above shall be qualified to do such work by placement on the aldot list inum producers of inlet grates and seats for drainage structures and miscellaneous fabricated bridge items .
for the purpose of aldot quality assurance inspection and scheduling a completed aldot bridge bureau form bbfnum shall be submitted to the bridge engineer stating the tentative schedule for fabrication no less than num days in advance of the actual fabrication of numb pay items and no less than num days for numa pay items .
c storage .
all material shall be stored in such manner as to prevent corrosion or loss of minor parts .
it shall be placed on skids or dunnage a minimum of num foot num mm above the ground .
it shall be kept clean and properly drained .
girders and beams shall be placed upright and shored no welding .
long members such as columns and chords shall be supported on skids placed near enough together to prevent injury from deflection .
all storage and storage sites are subject to the approval of the engineer .
reference is made to articles num and num. d erection .
num .
working drawings .
working drawings outlining a procedure and the equipment to be used for erection of all continuous span steel units trusses and other metal work requiring field splices shall be submitted for distribution in accordance with article num .
if falsework is to be used as part of the erection procedure these plans etc .
shall be submitted along with the erection procedure .
if temporary bracing is used on any type of steel girder to stabilize the girder the details and design of the bracing shall be submitted as working drawings in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num num .
bearings and anchorage .
a .
uniform bearing surface .
bridge bearings shall be set level in exact position and shall have a full and even bearing on the masonry and shall not be placed on masonry bearing areas which are irregular or improperly formed .
b. bedding material required under rocker bearings .
where rocker bearings are used filler or fabric materials meeting the following shall be placed as bedding material under masonry plates .
such material shall be of the type specified or as ordered or approved by the engineer and shall be installed to provide full bearing on contact areas .
immediately before placing the bedding material and installing bearings or masonry plates the contact surfaces of the concrete and steel shall be thoroughly cleaned .
preformed fabric pads used as bedding shall be composed of multiple layers of num ounce per square yard num gm cotton duck impregnated and bonded with high quality natural rubber or of equivalent and equally suitable materials compressed into resilient pads of uniform thickness .
the thickness of the preformed fabric pads shall be num inch num inch num mm num mm .
cotton duck shall meet the requirements of military specification milcnumd for num ounce per square yard num gm cotton army duck or equivalent .
the number of plies shall be such as to produce the specified thickness after compression and vulcanizing .
the finished pads shall withstand compression loads perpendicular to the plane of the laminations of not less than num psi num mpa without detrimental reduction in thickness or extrusion .
sheet lead used as bedding shall be common desilverized lead conforming to astm b num .
the sheets shall be of uniform thickness and shall be free from cracks seams slivers scale and other defects .
unless otherwise specified lead sheets shall be num inch num mm in thickness with a permissible tolerance of num inch num mm plus or minus .
c. vertical positioning of rocker bearings .
rocker bearings shall be adjusted so that they will be in vertical position at an ambient temperature of num f num c. d. installation of masonry plates .
masonry plates for selflubricating bronze bearing plates or ptfe coated bearing plates shall be set num inch num mm minimum into the cap in portland cement mortar not more than num inch num mm thick and the depression filled with mortar so that no water will be trapped .
no superstructure or other load shall be placed thereon until this mortar has been allowed to set for at least num hours in a well moistened condition throughout this period .
prior to erecting girders the top plate shall be rotated to fit the grade of the girder and the bearing plate shall be adjusted for temperature so that it will be centered on the masonry plate at num f num c. e. anchor bolt installation .
the reinforcing steel in the concrete shall be adjusted as directed by the engineer prior to pouring in order to permit the correct placement of the anchor bolts .
if the required details of the anchor bolt installation are not given on the plans the contractor shall have the following options for installing the bolts supporting the bolts with a template during the placement of concrete casting anchor bolt wells in the concrete drilling holes in the concrete after the concrete has cured .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing of the option selected for the installation of the bolts .
anchor bolt wells shall be large enough to allow adjustments to the location of the bolts to fit adjustments to the superstructure unit but shall not exceed num inches num mm in diameter unless approved otherwise by the bridge engineer .
the form for the anchor bolt wells shall be removed before wells are filled .
water shall not be allowed to enter the wells or the drilled holes .
freezing water may crack the concrete .
if anchor bolt wells are used a num psi num mpa num day compressive strength portland cement grout mix or a proprietary nonshrink grout mix shall be used to fill the wells .
if anchor bolts are installed in drilled holes a num psi num mpa num day section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num compressive strength portland cement grout mix a proprietary nonshrink grout mix or an approved epoxy adhesive shall be used to fill the wells .
the grout shall not be placed until after the superstructure unit has been erected and adjusted .
a description of the grout mix portland cement or proprietary shall be submitted to the materials and tests engineer for approval prior to installation of the anchor bolts .
f. location of anchor bolts .
anchor bolts shall be located as shown on the plans and shall be set vertical to the plane of the bridge bearing seat .
anchor bolts required at expansion bearings shall be installed so that the centerline of the anchor bolt aligns with the center of the slotted hole of the expansion bearing at num f num c. num .
handling members .
all members shall be carefully handled to prevent damage to them and in a manner that any camber put into them will not be changed .
one pickup point will be permitted on pieces num feet num m or less in length .
two pickup points located at or between the num and num points will be required on pieces over num feet num m in length .
calculations showing that the pieces will not be damaged along with erection plans will be required when pickup points are requested to be located outside of these areas .
this data shall be submitted in accordance with subarticle numd .
reference is made to article num .
num .
erection assembly .
the parts shall be accurately assembled as shown on the plans and any match marks shall be strictly followed .
splices and field connections shall have at least num of the holes filled using bolts either erection or untorqued permanent bolts and an adequate number minimum num of forged barrel or drift type erection pins for fit up and alignment .
the diameter of the erection pins shall be num inch num mm larger than the diameter of the bolts .
splices and connections carrying traffic during erection shall have num of the holes so filled .
erection bolts shall be tightened to snug tight condition .
snug tight is defined as the tightness that exists when the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
this may be attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a person using an ordinary spud wrench .
before beginning high strength bolting the structure shall be adjusted to correct grade and alignment .
bolts and nuts for bolted beam and girder splices shall be placed so that num flange splices have nuts on the exterior face of the splice num web splices have bolt heads on the outside face of exterior beams or girders .
filler plates for bolted beam and girder splices have been based on theoretical dimensions the thickness of the plates shall be adjusted in the shop to take care of any difference greater than num inch num mm between the theoretical and actual dimensions .
splices in members of the same theoretical size will require filler plates if the actual dimensions vary more than num inch num mm .
num .
defective or damaged material .
any material that is damaged distorted or in any way defective and is considered to be repairable shall be corrected by means approved by the central office .
the contractor shall submit a detailed proposed procedure for approval prior to making any corrections .
minor misfits involving occasional reaming of a hole will not require central office approval .
wholesale reaming of holes will require central office approval .
num .
high strength bolting .
a .
general .
high tensile strength heavy hex bolts shall be used for all field fasteners unless otherwise noted on the plans or in the proposal .
the bolts nuts washers and direct tension indicators shall conform to the requirements of article num .
all requirements for testing of materials and for calibration of equipment shall be met prior to installation .
b. bolted parts .
surfaces of bolted parts in contact with the bolt head and nut shall not have a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
bolted parts shall fit solidly together when assembled and shall not be separated by gaskets or any other interposed compressible material .
section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num when assembled all joint surfaces including those adjacent to the washers shall be free of scale .
they shall be free of dirt loose scale burrs and other defects that would prevent solid seating of the parts .
contact surfaces within frictiontype joints shall be free of oil paint lacquer or galvanizing unless noted otherwise on the plans or in the proposal .
c. bolt assemblies .
the contractor shall take special care in storing the bolt assemblies bolts nuts washers and direct tension indicators to prevent them from rusting .
any components of the bolt assemblies that are rusted shall be thoroughly cleaned or replaced prior to installation .
bolts that have been cleaned shall be lubricated in the field prior to installation .
plain ungalvanized bolts shall be oily to the touch when installed .
galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant beeswax or equivalent containing a visible dye so that a visual check can be made for proper lubrication prior to installation .
special care shall be taken in storing galvanized bolts with water soluble lubricants .
d. installation .
galvanized nuts shall be checked to verify that a visible lubricant is on the threads .
high strength fasteners plain and galvanized shall be subjected to jobsite rotationalcapacity tests performed in accordance with item numcnum .
prior to the start of any bolt installation .
washers are required as part of the test .
a skidmorewilhelm gage or equivalent a standard torque wrench a suitable steel joint to conduct test on short bolts if needed and any other miscellaneous tools or materials required for this test shall be provided by the contractor .
this test shall be performed by the contractor and witnessed by the engineer .
prior to beginning the tensioning operation each day a minimum of one rotationalcapacity test shall be performed to verify that the bolt assemblies are still properly lubricated .
the bolt assembly to be tested will be determined by the engineer and may come from any that are in question including erection bolts which have been placed but not tensioned .
if this test fails any assemblies which have been subjected to similar conditions as the failing sample shall be either cleaned and lubricated or replaced prior to tensioning .
additional rotationalcapacity tests may be required at the discretion of the engineer .
bolts shall be installed with a hardened washer under the nut or bolt head whichever is the element turned in tightening .
if the markings on the nuts are raised then the nuts shall be installed with the markings to the outside .
a flat washer may be used when the abutting surface adjacent to the bolt head or nut does not have a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
where an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis a smooth beveled washer shall be used to compensate for lack of parallelism .
before tightening the bolts to the required minimum tension all bolts shall first be tightened to snug tight condition progressing from the most rigid part of the joint towards the free edges .
see item numdnum .
for a definition of snug tight condition .
at snug tight all joining pieces shall be in firm contact .
all bolts shall then be tightened to give the minimum tension values shown in table num .
tightening shall be done by either the calibrated wrench method turnofnut method or direct tension indicator method .
the element not being turned bolt or nut shall be held with a wrench during tightening to prevent rotation of the fixed element .
section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num table num nominal bolt diameter thread pitch required minimum bolt tension astm a num high strength bolts only .
num inch num pounds num inch num pounds num inch num pounds num inch num pounds num inch num pounds num num inches num pounds num num inches num pounds num num inches num pounds num num inches num pounds astm a numm high strength bolts only .
mnum x num num kn mnum x num num kn mnum x num num kn mnum x num num kn mnum x num num kn mnum x num num kn mnum x num num kn e. calibrated wrench method .
the contractor shall furnish all wrenches necessary to install the high strength bolts .
he shall also furnish a calibration device skidmorewilhelm calibrator or equivalent and use it to calibrate the wrenches used for bolt installation and inspection .
the calibration device shall be calibrated by the state testing laboratory or other approved laboratory prior to being used .
the calibration results will be valid for a period of six num months after the date of calibration under normal conditions .
the engineer may require that the calibration device be recalibrated at any time .
wrenches shall be calibrated on the project at least once daily and for each lot of nuts and bolts to be used .
calibration shall be accomplished by the tightening in the calibration device of not less than num typical bolts of each lot to be installed .
power wrenches shall be adjusted to stall or cutout at a tension slightly greater than the minimum required .
if manual torque wrenches are used the torque indication corresponding to the calibration tension shall be noted and used in the installation of all bolts of the tested lot .
nuts shall be in tightening motion when torque is measured .
when using calibrated wrenches to install several bolts in a single joint the wrench shall be returned to touch up bolts previously tightened which may have been loosened by the tightening of subsequent bolts until all are tightened to the prescribed amount .
impact wrenches shall be of adequate capacity and sufficiently supplied with air to perform the required tightening in approximately num seconds .
the contractor shall spot check the completed bolt assembly installations at the direction and under the supervision of the engineer .
the spot checking shall be done to insure that the minimum bolt tension has been achieved in all of the bolts in the completed connection .
the spot checks shall be made with a manual torque wrench that has been furnished by the contractor and calibrated as noted herein to measure the minimum required bolt tension .
f. turnofnut method .
all bolts shall first be brought to snug tight condition as described in item numdnum .
the element being turned bolt or nut shall then be turned an additional fraction of a turn as specified in table num .
where the exterior faces of the members to be joined are sloped from normal to the bolt axis up to a num slope and beveled washers are not specified a minimum num turn from snug tight is required for all bolts .
the contractor shall furnish a calibration device skidmorewilhelm calibrator or equivalent and manual torque wrench .
this equipment shall be calibrated and used to spot check the completed bolt assemblies as required under the calibrated wrench method .
section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num table num nut rotation from the snugtight condition a b geometry of outer faces of bolted parts bolt length measured from underside of head to end of bolt .
both faces normal to bolt axis .
one face normal to bolt axis and other face sloped not more than num .
beveled washer not used .
both faces sloped not more than num from normal to bolt axis .
beveled washers not used .
up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters c num turn num turn num turn a nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
for bolts installed by num turn and less the tolerance should be plus or minus num degrees for bolts installed by num turn and more the tolerance should be plus or minus num degrees .
b applicable only to connections in which all material within grip of the bolt is steel .
c no research work has been performed by the research council riveted and bolted structural joints to establish the turnofnut procedure when bolt lengths exceed num diameters .
therefore the required rotation must be determined by actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating the actual conditions .
g. direct tension indicator method .
the contractor shall furnish direct tension indicator washers also called load indicator washers to be installed as a part of the final bolt assembly .
he shall also furnish the gap measuring devices feeler gages to be used for inspection purposes .
the direct tension indicator washers noted herein as dti washers shall be installed by one of the following methods however they shall not in any case be installed in a position where the extrusions or cleats are in contact with the pieces being joined plain finished bolts the nut is the turned element the hardened washers are placed adjacent to the nuts and the extrusions or cleats on the dti washers are placed in contact with the bolt heads .
the nut is the turned element the hardened washers are placed adjacent to the nuts and the extrusions or cleats on the dti washers are placed in contact with the hardened washers .
the bolt head is the turned element the hardened washers are placed adjacent to the bolt heads and the extrusions or cleats on the dti washers are placed in contact with the hardened washers .
galvanized bolts the nut is the turned element the hardened washers are placed adjacent to the nuts and the extrusions or cleats on the dti washers are placed in contact with the bolt heads .
all bolts shall first be brought to snug tight condition as described in item numdnum .
the bolts shall then be tightened to compress the extrusions on the dti washers .
the dti washers shall be compressed to the point that the gap between the dti washer on the extrusion side of the washer and the adjacent element is reduced to that shown in table num .
the maximum allowable gap minimum allowable bolt tension is section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num the condition where the feeler gage can be entered to the shank of the bolt in only one half of the number of places where inserted around the circumference of the washer .
the minimum allowable gap is the condition where the feeler gage can not be entered in one half or more of the applied places and the gap is not completely closed .
the contractor shall furnish a calibration device skidmorewilhelm calibrator or equivalent to be used at the job site to determine the acceptability of the dti washers .
this calibration device shall be calibrated as noted under the calibrated wrench method .
three bolt assemblies of each diameter length and grade shall be checked at the job site in the calibration device .
these bolt assemblies shall be installed in the calibration device in the same manner as the intended installation in the structure and shall be tightened with the same equipment intended for job use .
a calibration test shall be conducted by tensioning a bolt assembly to the point that the maximum allowable gap is present between the dti washer and the adjacent element .
at this point the tension reading taken from the calibration device shall not be less than five percent greater than the tension required .
the engineer will use the feeler gages to spot check the completed bolt assembly installations .
the contractor shall furnish a manual torque wrench which shall be calibrated and used to spot check the completed bolt assemblies as required under the calibrated wrench and turnofnut methods .
table num direct tension indicator method uncoated bolts wdti under turned element maximum allowable gap num in .
num mm minimum allowable gap uncoated bolts wdti under unturned element maximum allowable gap num in .
num mm minimum allowable gap galvanized bolts wdti under unturned element maximum allowable gap num in .
num mm minimum allowable gap see fourth paragraph of this subitem numdnum.g .
above h. correction of deficiencies .
all deficiencies found during calibration installation and spot checking of the bolt assemblies shall be corrected by the contractor .
i .
cleaning .
all exposed surfaces of bolt assemblies shall be cleaned prior to painting with a cleaning solvent such as mineral spirits or turpentine .
this cleaning shall not damage the existing primer coats of paint .
num .
bolted connections .
the bolt length used shall be such that the end of the bolt is flush with but does not extend more than  beyond the outer face of the nut when properly installed .
in bolted connections other than high strength steel bolts the bolts shall be drawn up tight and the threads burred at the face of the nut with a pointed tool .
num .
welded shear connector studs .
in compliance with ohsa safety requirements structural steel bridges which would require welded shear connector studs shall have the studs installed on all steel girder top flanges at the project site after formwork has been totally installed between all completely set and erected girder lines thus minimizing fall hazards for workers .
the required locations of the studs shall be marked at the bridge fabrication shop .
the fabricator shall center punch the steel at the center of all stud locations to provide a durable marking .
a highly visible indelible paint marker shall also be applied over the center punch points prior to shipment of girders to the project .
the contractor shall notify the project manager of the date that installation of the studs will begin in the field .
this notification shall be given a minimum of five calendar days prior to the date of installation .
the project manager will notify the bridge engineer of the installation date so that the inspection of the installation can be made by a representative of the bridge engineer .
studs shall not be installed until the representative of the bridge engineer is given the opportunity to inspect the preparation of base metal layout and the section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num location of the studs including the studs and ceramic ferrules to be used in the operations .
the fusion areas on the top flange to which studs are to be welded shall be cleaned to bright metal before welding .
the fusion area of the studs should be clean and free of rust .
once the stud welding operations are underway one stud out of every tenth row of studs on each girder line will require bend testing to num from its original axis for assurance that the studs are being applied properly .
any stud that exhibits a failure will be replaced with a new stud after the base metal location of the failed stud is repaired by grinding to bright and sound metal .
studs shall be one of those shown in list iinum of the aldot manual materials sources and other devices with special acceptance requirements .
studs shall be attached in accordance with the requirements given in the aashtoaws dnummdnum bridge welding code seventh edition .
num .
painting .
painting shall conform to requirements of section num .
num .
name plates .
no permanent plates or markers other than those shown on the plans or approved will be permitted on any structure .
any marks or signs painted on structural steel by the fabricator or contractor shall be obliterated prior to applying the first field coat by cleaning andor painting over the marks or signs with paint of the same type used for the shop coat .
e field inspection .
all work shall be subject to the inspection of the engineer who shall be given all facilities required for all necessary inspection .
material and workmanship not previously inspected will be inspected after its delivery to the site of the work .
whether shop inspection is made or not workmanship and materials which do not conform to the specifications may be rejected at any time prior to acceptance of the project .
f cleaning up of worksite .
upon completion and before final acceptance the contractor shall remove all falsework and other temporary construction and shall leave the site in a condition acceptable to the engineer .
num method of measurement .
a items no .
numa and numd .
the theoretical poundage mass of accepted metal in the per pound kilogram price items complete in place will be computed in conformity with the following num .
the weight mass of steel shall be assumed at num pounds per cubic inch num kgm .
the weight mass of cast iron shall be assumed at num pounds per cubic inch num kgm .
the weight mass of bronze shall be assumed at num pounds per cubic inch num kgm .
num .
the weights masses of rolled shapes in the completed structure shall be calculated on the basis of their theoretical weights masses and dimensions given in the handbooks of the mills rolling the various sections and shapes .
the weights masses of steel plates shall be computed on the basis of their detailed dimensions as shown on the approved shop drawings .
weights shown on the approved shop drawings shall not be used for payment purposes .
num .
the weight mass of castings shall be calculated from the detail dimensions shown on the approved shop drawings with an addition of num percent for fillets overrun and finishing .
num .
only the weight mass of materials used in the completed permanent work will be measured for payment .
num .
no allowance in weight mass will be made for shop or field paint .
num .
for the purpose of measurement and payment incidentals such as bearing plates pedestals and other minor metal parts shall unless otherwise provided be considered as structural steel even though made of other materials except the bronze bearing plates and the ptfe coated bearing plates will be paid for under item numc .
num .
for purposes of measurement and payment when payment is on a per pound kilogram basis required welded shear connection studs will be included in the quantity of structural steel .
section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num b item no .
numb .
num .
the number of units measured will be the accepted number of structural span units complete in place .
num .
any estimated weights masses shown on the bidding plans or proposal are approximate only and the contract price for each item shall include full compensation for the specified structural unit complete in accordance with the plans and specifications regardless of the final weight mass required and no claim will be allowed for any increase over the estimated weight mass of a structural unit unless same is caused by a change in plans or specifications .
the cost of any additional work caused by a change in plans or specifications will be paid for as extra work .
c item no .
numc .
unless otherwise specified on the plans the contractor will have the option of furnishing either selflubricating bronze bearing plates or ptfe coated bearing plates .
the bearing plates furnished will be measured in sets complete in place .
a set shall include all the bearing plates required for each structure .
steel plates used in the bronze plate assembly or any other steel plates used in the ptfe plate assembly will be measured as item numa numb or numd whichever is applicable .
d item no .
nume .
inspection ladders when specified for separate payment shall consist of all ladders required in accordance with plan details for the locations designated measured as one unit .
when no separate payment is designated the cost of such shall be included in the unit price bid for the item of structural steel provided in the contract .
e item no .
numf .
when separate payment is designated for a bridge deck drainage system the complete system required to drain each separate structure in accordance with plan details will be measured as one unit per bridge structure .
when no separate payment is designated for a bridge deck drainage system the cost of such will be considered incidental to the work and absorbed in the unit prices bid for other items of work .
num basis of payment .
a items no .
numa and numd .
the accepted theoretical poundage mass of metal in the per pound kilogram price items computed as prescribed will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for structural steel complete in place which will be payment in full for fabricating furnishing transporting erecting and painting field painting not included in item no .
numd all material and for all labor equipment tools falsework cleaning up and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
unless noted otherwise on the plans these items shall include the following bridge joint armor plates both sides of the joint pile cap channels and plates connection angles clip angles used with prestressed concrete girders swedged anchor bolts nuts and washers smooth and swedged dowels pipe sleeves b item no .
numb .
accepted metal superstructure span units will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for each respective unit complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing fabricating transporting erecting and painting all materials and for all labor equipment tools falsework cleaning up and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
unless noted otherwise on the plans this item shall include the following all structural steel in the superstructure unit structural steel in the bearing devices except the ptfe coated bearing plates expansion dams finger joints etc .
for interior and exterior open bridge joints where separate pay items are not provided this item shall also include furnishing fabrication painting or galvanization transporting and installing ladders platforms catwalks and navigational lighting brackets .
section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num joint armor plates channels angles anchor bolts etc .
for sealed interior and exterior bridge joint design shall be as specified in section num and are not as a part of this item .
this item does not include reinforcing steel and concrete .
structural steel bearing plates for type num num and num elastomeric bearings shall be included in the payment for elastomeric bearings under pay item numa and are not a part of this item .
c item no .
numc .
payment for bearing plates furnished complete and installed as shown on the plans will be made at the contract unit price per set which shall be compensation in full for furnishing and installation and for all tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
d item no .
nume .
accepted ladders measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid for this item .
said lump sum price bid shall be full compensation for all ladders designated complete in place and including all cost for furnishing fabricating painting galvanizing erection and installing the ladders and for all materials tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
e item no .
numf .
accepted bridge deck drain systems measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid for each system complete in place .
said lump sum price bid shall be payment in full for furnishing and installing of all materials fabrication of materials erection of materials paint if required and for all tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
f partial payment .
num .
partial payment for steel plates and shapes prior to fabrication .
partial payment may be made for steel plates and shapes prior to fabrication .
the requirements given in article num shall be applicable to these partial payments except as amended or supplemented by the following a written request for partial payment shall be submitted by the contractor that shall include the number of pounds kilograms of steel for which payment is requested and the dollar amounts and percentages of partial payment for each contract pay item affected by the request the request for partial payment shall include the dimensions heat numbers purchase order numbers and inventory markings for all plates and shapes only one request per fabricator for partial payment for steel plates and shapes for fabrication will be considered prior to fabrication the written request must be approved by the construction engineer and bridge engineer before further consideration will be given to making partial payment all of the plates and shapes required for fabrication on the project shall be available for inventory prior to the beginning of fabrication and shall be clearly marked with an inventory identification plates and shapes shall be stored in a manner that will allow the easy identification of each plate and shape the contractor shall make arrangements with the engineer for the inventory to be made by the aldot bridge bureaus structural steel inspection personnel num .
partial payment after fabrication .
partial payment will be allowed after the completion of fabrication in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
num .
partial payment after installation .
after the structural steel is installed all connections are complete all splice plates and bolts have been cleaned and painted and the entire shop coating has been acceptably applied and cured num of the payment may be made for the structural steel .
num .
final payment .
after the completion of installation the acceptable application and curing of the field coating and the cleaning of the superstructure num of the payment may be made .
if weathering steel is installed and painting is not required num of the payment may be made after the superstructure concrete is placed and the superstructure has been cleaned .
section num timber num g payment will be made under item no .
numa structural steel per pound kilogram numb structural steel superstructure specialty item per each numc bearing plates per set numd structural steel except field painting per pound kilogram nume furnishing fabrication installation of ladders per lump sum numf bridge deck drainage system per lump sum length of continuoussimple span lane if applicable approximate weight mass of structural steel if a specific type of bearing plate is required so designate bronze or ptfe example numb structural steel superstructure num continuous span left lane approx .
num pounds specialty item section num timber num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing preparing and erection of timber or lumber of the stress values grade size and dimensions designated by the plans or proposal .
the timber may be treated or untreated as specified by the plans and may require painting if so specified .
it shall also include all structural steel iron casting other metal parts and all hardware required by the specifications and plans .
the type of preservative used shall be the type called for in the plans andor proposal form .
where more than one type of preservative is included in the contract each type shall be used as indicated by the plans .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the appropriate provisions of division num materials .
specific reference is made to section num lumber and timber untreated and treated num construction requirements .
a handling and storage .
timber and lumber shall be carefully handled without dropping breaking of outer fibers bruising or penetrating the outer surface with tools .
tongs cant hooks peavys hooks pike poles or other equipment likely to break the surface shall not be used .
b workmanship .
only competent carpenters shall be employed and all framing shall be true and exact .
nails and spikes shall be driven with just sufficient force to set the heads flush with the surface of the wood .
deep hammer marks in wood surfaces shall be considered evidence of poor workmanship and sufficient cause for the removal of workmen causing them .
any metal work required in conjunction with timber construction shall conform to the requirements of section num. c holes for bolts dowels rods and lag screws .
holes for round drift bolts and dowels shall be bored with a bit num inch num mm less in diameter than the bolt or dowel to be used .
the diameter of holes for square drift bolts or dowels shall be equal to the least dimension of the bolt or dowel .
holes for machine bolts shall be bored with a bit of the same diameter as the bolt .
holes for rods shall be bored with a bit num inch num mm greater in diameter than the rod .
holes for lag screws shall be bored with a bit num inch num mm less in diameter than the nominal diameter and for a depth not greater than num the length of the lag screws being used .
countersinking shall be done wherever smooth faces are required .
recesses formed for countersinking shall be painted with hot creosote oil and after the bolt or screw is in place shall be filled with an asphalt base roofing patch .
d bolts and washers for timber construction .
one washer of the size and type specified shall be used under all bolt heads and nuts which would otherwise come in contact with wood .
cast iron washers shall have a thickness equal to the section num bridges num diameter of the bolt and a diameter of four times the thickness .
for malleable or plate washers the diameter or side size of the square shall be equal to four times the diameter of the bolt and the thickness of the washers shall be equal to onehalf the diameter of the bolt .
cast iron washers shall be used when the timber is in contact with the earth .
all bolts shall be checked after the nuts have been finally tightened .
bolts shall be of such length that not more than num inch num mm will protrude beyond the nut when finally tightened .
e additional details .
additional requirements for timber construction will be listed under the type work for which the timber is used including but not limited to sections num num num num num num num and num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be measured shall be the number of thousand feet board measure cubic meters of lumber and timber complete in place and accepted .
measurements of lumber and timber will be computed using the nominal width and thickness and the actual length of each piece shown on the plans unless changes in such dimensions have been authorized in writing .
the nominal size dimensions shall be used in the computations even though the actual size be scant in the amount provided above .
the measurements of timber will include only such timber as is a part of the completed and accepted work and will not include timber used for erection purposes such as falsework bracing sheeting etc .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
accepted timber and lumber will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices bid per thousand feet board measure cubic meter for untreated timber treated timber of the designated type preservative complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing of all materials preservative treatment equipment tools labor hardware as provided by article num and incidentals necessary for the erection and painting where provided by the plans andor proposal form of the work as shown on the plans or specified .
it shall include compensation for any excavation and backfill necessary to complete the timber portion of the structure within the limits of the abutments or end bent and when provided by the plans andor proposal forms it shall further include compensation for removal of any untreated or treated timber replaced by new material as directed .
num .
accepted treated timber any preservative salvaged material will be paid for at the contract unit price bid complete in place which shall cover the cost of furnishing equipment tools hardware incidentals materials hauling handling and placing of materials salvaged from old structures or furnished by the state .
it shall also cover the cost of removal of any material replaced by salvaged material as provided by the plans .
b metal parts and piling .
metal parts other than hardware as provided by article num will be paid for at the contract prices per linear foot meter or per pound kilogram for such items the weight mass being computed in the manner as specified for structural steel .
piling will be paid for as specified under piling .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa untreated timber per mbm cubic meter numb treated timber type preservative per mbm cubic meter numc treated timber any preservativesalvaged material per mbm cubic meter section num bridges num description .
the work under this section shall cover the construction of bridges or parts thereof .
when widening or modification of an existing facility is required the work under this section shall include the cutting or breaking away of portions of the existing structural material and the preparation of the section num bridges num exposed structural materials for joining of new materials to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed .
num materials .
all materials incorporated in the structure shall be new except where otherwise specified on the plans or in the proposal .
the requirements set forth in the sections listed in this article together with any other specifications contributing to the complete structure shall be applicable to this section .
section num excavation for bridges section num structure concrete section num steel reinforcement section num piling section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals section num treated and untreated timber section num prestressed concrete bridge members section num bridge painting all steel reinforcement used in a castinplace concrete bridge deck shall be aashto m num m numm grade num grade num unless otherwise specified on the plans .
num construction requirements .
a general .
num .
bridges shall be constructed in accordance with lines grades dimensions and other details shown on the plans and in conformity with these specifications .
num .
construction requirements of sections num num num num num num num num num num num num and num shall also apply to this section .
num .
concrete tolerances except for bridge deck riding surfaces shall be as follows width and depth dimensions of girders barrier rails and columns shall not vary more than num inch per foot num mmm and not more than num inch num mm total from plan dimensions .
for barrier rail overhang and curb horizontal and vertical alignment shall not vary more than num inch in num feet num mmnum m and not more than num inch num mm total from that shown on the plans .
the finished concrete shall be free from objectionable projections swells ridges depressions waves holes and other defects .
num .
the requirements for curing and finishing the concrete are given in section num .
num .
attention is directed to the requirements of article num concerning safety .
b substructures .
num .
foundations .
foundations shall be prepared in accordance with the plans and section num .
num .
concrete and steel substructures .
see construction requirements of sections num num and num .
num .
piling .
see section num .
num .
drilled shafts .
see section num. c superstructures .
num .
general .
no superstructure load shall be placed upon finished piers or abutments until directed .
moreover before any superstructure load is placed on concrete portions of a substructure one of the following shall be accomplished num a minimum time of num days exclusive of days where four hours or more the temperature is below num f num c shall be allowed for the hardening of concrete or num the concrete shall indicate a development of minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa from cylinders prepared in conformity with aashto t num .
num .
bearings and anchorage .
see item numdnum .
section num bridges num num .
steel girders .
see section num .
num .
prestressed concrete bridge members .
see section num .
num .
castinplace concrete girders see sections num and num .
camber due to dead load and vertical curvature shall be put into the falsework and formwork as required to produce the finished lines and grades shown on the plans .
num .
reinforced concrete bridge decks .
a. prepour conferences .
prepour conferences shall be held between the contractor and project manager prior to placing any bridge deck concrete .
as a minimum this conference shall include a discussion of the rate of pour personnel and equipment to be used type of finish and curing details .
b .
placing concrete .
in addition to the requirements given in section num the following shall also apply .
the rate of pour shall be controlled so that all concrete between construction joints can be placed and compacted in a continuous operation before initial set takes place in contiguous portions of the concrete .
in case of breakdown of equipment or other reasons necessitating suspension of placing and compacting the concrete for a period in excess of num minutes for mixes without retarders or num minutes for retarded concrete and part of the work involved is such that a construction joint will not be permitted all of the previously placed concrete in that section shall be removed and replaced by the contractor without extra compensation .
a deck pour shall not be started when it is raining or threatening rain .
should inclement weather develop during the pour it will be the contractors responsibility to protect the plastic concrete so that placing and finishing operations can be satisfactorily completed without damage to the concrete or concrete surface .
should damage occur the concrete shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
the placing of skin patches the scabbing on of the concrete or grout on a bridge deck will not be permitted .
all concrete deck slabs shall be placed full thickness in one operation .
unless otherwise shown on the plans on r.c.d.g .
spans concrete in the girders and slab shall be placed in one operation .
webwalls may be poured and allowed to set up prior to pouring the bridge deck .
if a longitudinal screed is to be used for finishing the concrete in the bridge deck the concrete for the bridge deck shall not be placed until the webwall concrete has reached a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa as determined from the testing of cylinders .
on all continuous spans a pouring sequence will be shown on the plans .
all lower numbered or lettered pours shall be made prior to proceeding to the next higher numbered or lettered pour .
adjacent pours shall not be made until after the previously placed concrete has reached an age of num hours .
simple spans shall be constructed in one pour except on simple spans over num feet num m in length transverse slab construction joints will be permitted .
on simple spans over num feet num m transverse slab construction joints will be required .
where slab construction joints are used on simple composite spans construction joints shall be placed at approximately the quarter points of the span after pouring the center portion of the span and when the concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi num mpa by cylinder tests or after four days the end slab portions of the span may be poured .
consideration will be given to reducing the number of construction joints specified above where transverse screeding is to be employed however all requests for changes to pouring sequences must be submitted in writing to the construction engineer for approval .
if the number of construction joints is reduced a minimum pour rate of num cubic yards num m per hour may be required and an approved retarder may be required in the deck concrete .
section num bridges num during the placing operation the concrete shall be placed in strips just ahead of the screed for the entire length or width of the pour whichever applicable .
a small roll of grout shall be kept on the leading edge of the screed so that all depressions ahead of the screed will be filled .
c. finishing .
num general screed requirements .
all screeds shall be mechanically operated .
screeds and screed supports shall be designed so that they may be preset to provide the finish grade and crosssection of the concrete deck surface shown on the plans .
they shall be of substantial construction so that the proper settings will be maintained throughout the pour .
screed supports shall be placed and adjusted to properly provide for the deflection of forms falsework and structural supporting members which will occur during the placement of concrete .
immediately before concreting operations are started the screed shall be operated over the full length and width of the bridge segment to be paved .
this test run shall be made with the screed adjusted to its finishing position .
while operating the screed during this test all aspects of the screed and supports shall be checked for proper adjustments .
after the contractor has satisfied himself that the finishing equipment has been adjusted to conform with plan and specification requirements another test run shall be made for the engineer for the purpose of recording slab thickness and steel clearance measurements prior to the pour being made .
num longitudinal screeds .
longitudinal screeds shall be supported at the ends by transverse headers or by a section of slab previously poured .
screeds must be long enough to span the entire pour as required by the plans and specifications .
intermediate screed supports between approved construction joints will not be permitted .
screeding shall be accomplished by working the longitudinal screed parallel to the centerline of the road from low side to high side on superelevated curves in such a manner that laitance surplus water and inert materials are removed from the surface .
num transverse screeds .
transverse screeds shall be of sufficient weight mass to strike off the plastic concrete placed in front of the screed without riding up on the concrete .
transverse screeds shall be supported by vertically adjustable rails set a sufficient distance from the gutter line to allow free movement of the screed from gutter line to gutter line .
supports for the screed rail shall be located a maximum of num inches num mm centertocenter with the slab overhang support brackets located a maximum of num inches num mm centertocenter .
exceptions to the maximum allowable screed rail and support bracket spacing will be considered if the increased spacing is adequately addressed in the design calculations that are required as a part of the working drawings for falsework .
satisfactory means of load distribution with minimum rail deflection shall be provided .
the screed rails for any deck pour shall be completely in place for the full length of the pour and shall be firmly secured prior to making test runs and subsequently placing deck concrete .
in making the test runs a telltale device attached to the screed carriage may be used to check the proper clearance on the top mat of the reinforcing steel .
num work bridges .
portable work bridges shall be provided and used to perform finishing and inspection work on the bridge deck after the screeding operation .
surface tolerance as described in subitem numcnum.d shall be accomplished before grooving the deck surface .
num final finishing .
the final finish behind longitudinal screeds shall be obtained by wood floating or by broom finish .
the final finish behind transverse screeds shall be obtained by either wood floating broom finish or burlap drag .
brooms for broom finishing shall have medium to stiff nylon bristles .
the final texture shall be obtained by the cutting of transverse grooves in the cured concrete .
section num bridges num the bridge decks shall be grooved perpendicular to the centerline .
the grooving operation shall not be started until the bridge deck has been cured in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the grooves shall be cut into the hardened concrete using a mechanical saw device which will leave grooves approximately num inches num mm wide and num inches num mm deep .
the grooves shall be unevenly spaced and randomly varying between num inches num mm and num inches num mm .
the grooved finish shall be at right angles to the centerline of the bridge deck regardless of skew and shall extend across the roadway from num feet num mm inside the face of the curb or barrier rail to num feet num mm inside the face of the opposite curb or barrier rail .
each pass of the grooving machine shall be adjacent to the previous pass without overlapping .
all residue slurry and other waste resulting from the grooving operation shall be continuously removed from the bridge deck so that there is never a buildup of these waste materials .
upon approval by the engineer these waste materials may be disposed in earthwork when earthwork is a part of the bridge construction project .
the waste materials may be tilled into the earthwork so that water runoff will not transport these materials from the construction site .
if the engineer does not approve of the disposal of the waste material on the construction site the contractor shall remove the waste material from the project and dispose of it in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances for disposal .
d. surface tolerance .
the floor shall be constructed to correct elevation including vertical curvature within a tolerance of num inch num mm except that camber in spans num feet num m and longer may exceed the designated amount by num inch num mm at the midpoint of span .
a slight excess of camber is preferred .
as soon as the surface has set sufficiently it shall be straightedged by the contractor under the direction of the engineer and all areas exceeding num inch in num feet num mm in num m from the longitudinal and transverse lines shown on the plans shall be marked and corrected by approved methods .
the num foot num m straightedge shall be lapped at least num feet num m over the prior num foot num m check .
e. curing .
the requirements for curing are given in section num. f. drainage .
deck drains or scuppers shall be installed in the gutters at locations and in accordance with details shown on the plans .
g. slab overhang .
the under surface of overhanging slabs shall be provided with a continuous v groove num of an inch num mm in depth at a point not more than num inches num mm from the outside face for the purpose of arresting the flow of water and thus preventing staining h. expansion joints .
plates channels or other structural shapes shall be accurately shaped in the shop to conform to the section of the concrete floor .
the fabrication and painting shall conform to the requirements of these specifications andor the plans covering those items .
care shall be taken to insure that the surface in the finished plane is true and free from warp .
positive methods shall be employed in placing the joints to keep them in correct position during the placing of the concrete .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the joint opening shown on the plans is the opening when the temperature of the structure is num f num c. special care shall be taken to insure that all expansion joint devices and expansion joint openings are correctly set prior to pouring the concrete adjacent to the joint .
expansion joints shall be so constructed as to permit freedom of movement of the spans .
open joints shall be cleared of all mortar and other obstructions as soon as possible after pouring the spans .
sealing of joints if required shall be in accordance with plan details .
i. blank .
section num bridges num j .
barrier rails placed by slip forming .
bridge barrier rails constructed by the use of a slip form extrusion machine shall be well compacted dense concrete meeting all the requirements of section num except for the requirement for fixed forms .
the forming portion of the extrusion machine shall be readily adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine so that the top of the barrier can be maintained at the required grade .
open joints shall be located as required on standard drawing no .
inum .
longitudinal bars shall be cut at joint locations to provide for num inch num mm end cover .
the contractor shall be responsible for marking these locations in advance of placement of concrete so that sawed joints will be properly located .
the joints shall be sawed as soon as the concrete has hardened to the degree that tearing and raveling is not excessive and before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking begins .
this time may be as short as four hours or even less in extremely warm weather but not over num hours unless authorized by the engineer .
if extreme conditions exist which make it impractical to prevent uncontrolled cracking by early sawing the procedure shall be revised immediately to adjust the sequence of sawing .
a minimum saw cut width of num of an inch num mm shall be maintained .
on the inside of the barrier the saw cut shall extend from the top to the bottom of the rail to the point of intersection with the bridge deck .
on the outside of the barrier the saw cut shall extend from the top to within num inches num mm of the bottom of the rail .
k. placement of cranes on bridge decks .
a crane shall not be placed on a bridge deck until working drawings for the placement and operation of the crane are distributed by the department .
working drawing shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the working drawing submittal shall include num specifications of the crane andor equipment to be placed on the structure .
num mobilization wheel location diagram of the crane with respect to centerline of structure as it is being mobilized for final positioning on the structure .
num final positioningusage diagram once the crane is on the structure showing the location of the outriggers and timber mat requirements i.e .
mat thickness width orientation of mats maximum load to be lifted for a particular positioning of the boom etc .
num a complete stress analysis superstructure and substructure on all components affected by loads resulting from the use of the crane andor equipment on the structure .
the analysis shall be provided in accordance with aashto allowable stress design method .
mobilization analysis item num as well as final positioningusage analysis item num will be required .
the results of the analysis shall be noted on the submittal by a written conclusion that the placement of the crane will not damage any part of the bridge .
num .
concrete railings curbs sidewalks and parapets .
in no case shall concrete railings sidewalks and parapets be placed until the falsework for the span has been released rendering the span selfsupporting .
the surface of all bridge sidewalks shall have a woodfloat finish .
no other finish will be required .
num .
grounding .
if grounding is required by the plans each exterior girder of bridges or portions of the bridges using steel girders shall be made electrically continuous by means of copper bonding jumpers across each expansion joint .
jumpers shall be extra flexible copper conductor no .
num awg or larger .
they shall be exothermically welded on the inside of the web close to the bottom flange .
jumpers shall be sized to permit num inches num mm movement between girders without straining the jumper or connections .
grounding fields shall be provided at each end of such bridges or portion of bridges .
where end of bridge terminates at an abutment the field shall consist of one or more driven ground rods as required to give a resistance to ground not to exceed num ohms .
multiple grounds or sectional ground rods will be acceptable .
connections between ends of bridge and ground field shall be copper conductor no .
num. or larger protected against mechanical injury in all exposed portions by galvanized steel conduit .
resistance measurements shall not be made within num hours after a rain section num bridges num shower or until the ground is reasonably dry after prolonged rainy weather .
where steel sections of bridges terminate at intermediate bents the grounding field shall consist of no .
num standard stranded copper conductor welded to steel piling or steel reinforcing rods whichever extends to the lowest depth and a num foot num mm or longer section of copperweld grounding rod extended num inches num mm above the bent cap adjacent to end of steel section .
all welds shall be exothermic .
connection between ground rod and structure shall be a no .
num awg or larger extra flexible electric copper conductor with provisions for not less than num inches num mm horizontal movement of the structure at point of connection .
reference is made to article num for additional material requirements .
num method of measurement .
a general .
the quantities of concrete steel reinforcement structural steel timber piling and other various contract pay items which constitute the completed and accepted structure shall unless otherwise provided herein be measured for payment according to the specifications for the individual contract pay items provided .
accepted work constructed to the dimensions shown on the plans or ordered in writing will be used to determine the quantities of the respective pay items involved all in accordance with the provisions of the applicable section of these specifications .
attention is directed to the major items of work such as section num for reinforcing steel section num for structural steel section num for timber section num for piling etc .
b item numa and numb .
num .
volumetric measure .
the volume of accepted concrete within the neat lines of the structure as shown on the plans or revised at the written direction of the engineer will be computed in cubic yards cubic meters .
the method of average end areas will not be used where results obtained differ from those obtained by more accurate mathematical computation .
num .
deductions .
no deduction will be made for the volume of concrete displaced by steel reinforcement drainage scuppers weep holes service pipes conduits anchor bolts castings of grillages or structural shapes and plates .
no deductions will be made for chamfers of less than num inch num mm leg measurements .
the volume of precast concrete or timber pile heads imbedded in concrete will be deducted .
num .
additional cement or concrete used .
no payment will be made on account of additional cement used or additional volume of concrete used unless ordered in writing .
no payment will be made for footing concrete used outside line drill limits or other neat lines shown on the plans where no forms are used .
additional cement ordered used will be paid for as described in section num. c item numc .
each accepted bridge concrete superstructure unit will be measured for payment as a lump sum unit .
partial payments will be allowed on monthly estimates in accordance with subarticle numc .
d item nume .
grooving of bridge decks acceptably completed in accordance with subitem numcnum.c .
will be measured by the square yard square meter .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted structural concrete measured as noted above will be paid for under the respective unit price bid for the appropriate item or items provided for such in the proposal .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for the concrete complete in place which shall be payment in full for all backfilling compacting disposal of surplus material all falsework piling falsework forms bracing all materials except as specified below and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to finish and complete the items in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
nonmetal expansion joints scuppers and drains electrical conduit and section num elastomeric bearings num equipment shall be included in the bid price for the concrete unless otherwise provided on the plans or in the proposal .
steel reinforcement metal expansion joints and metal bearings will not be included in the price bid for the concrete but shall be paid for under the appropriate pay item .
in case of widening or extension of an existing structure the breaking away of existing concrete to the approximate lines shown on the plans and disposing of broken concrete and preparing steel reinforcement for splicing as required will be paid for under section num .
no additional compensation will be allowed for constructing or placing expansion joints scuppers drains weep holes or for placing service pipes or conduits anchor bolts plates castings grillages or metal bearings or appurtenances as such are considered incidental to the placing of concrete or other items of the work unless otherwise noted by the plans or proposal .
payment for grooving concrete bridge decks will be made at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which will be full compensation for furnishing the necessary equipment tools and labor to perform the work .
b items numa and numb .
payment for concrete measured on a cubic yard cubic meter basis as described above will be made at the contact unit price per cubic yard cubic meter complete in place for the various classes of concrete listed on the plans and the proposal .
c item numc .
payment for each accepted bridge concrete superstructure unit will be made at the contract lump sum price bid for each unit complete in place .
partial payments will be made on monthly estimates based on the percentage of the total work performed on each unit as estimated by the engineer .
the number of cubic yards cubic meters shown on the plans and in the proposal is approximate only and the lump sum amount bid for each unit will not be increased or decreased except as outlined below .
structural steel reinforcement and precastprestressed concrete units are covered by other pay items .
an increase or decrease in the approximate quantity of surface deck area for bridge concrete superstructure required from that shown on the plans which is caused by a design change after the contract has been let will result in an increase or decrease in the compensation due the contractor .
this compensation will be made either increase or decrease as a proportional amount of the contract bid price of item numc .
for any other changes in the approximate quantity of bridge concrete superstructure price adjustments will be made in accordance with article num. d payment will be made under item no .
numa bridge substructure concrete per cubic yard cubic meter numb bridge concrete class ___ per cubic yard cubic meter numc bridge concrete superstructure per lump sum nume grooving concrete bridge decks per square yard square meter station number bridge identification number bin ramp number etc .
lane if applicable approximate quantity of superstructure concrete in cubic yards cubic meters section num elastomeric bearings num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing elastomeric bearings for all types of bridge girders .
an elastomeric bearing shall consist of at least a single layer of elastomer and may consist of a possible combination of elastomeric layers internal steel sheet laminates ptfe layer bearing andor sole plates and a stainless steel plate .
num materials .
elastomeric bearings shall be fabricated to conform with the material requirements given on the plans and in section num .
section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num num construction requirements .
unless noted otherwise on the plans or in these specifications shop drawings for the elastomeric bearings shall be submitted to the bridge engineer for approval .
shop drawings will not be required for the elastomeric bearings for precast concrete bridge components furnished under section num .
the elastomeric bearings will be identified on the plans by type type num num num num or num and may be further identified by a mark mark bnum bnum vbnum etc .. rust that occurs on the portions of bearing plates that are left ungalvanized for welding shall be cleaned to bare metal prior to welding .
all exposed surfaces of the sole plate all uncoated surfaces of the bearing plate and all weld metal shall be coated after welding with galvanizing repair paint that meets the requirements given in section num .
num method of measurement .
the elastomeric bearings will be measured per each for each type of bearing .
the bearings measured for payment do not include the randomly selected samples for testing .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the unit price bid per bearing shall include all costs for equipment materials including bearing plates sole plates ptfe and stainless steel plates cleaning painting labor bearings furnished for sampling and testing shop drawings and all incidentals necessary to furnish and install the complete bearing assembly .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa elastomeric bearing type mark per each bearing type num num num num or num optional bearing mark bnum bnum vbnum etc .
section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members .
num materials .
a aldot procedure .
material requirements for the production of precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members are given in this section and also in aldotnum production and inspection of precast nonprestressed and prestressed concrete .
b reinforcing steel .
reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements given in section num .
reinforcing steel shall be grade num grade num. c concrete mixture requirements .
num .
general .
the precast concrete producer shall establish the proportion of materials following the guidelines given in aldotnum method of controlling concrete operations for structural portland cement concrete and aldotnum production and inspection of precast non prestressed and prestressed concrete .
the concrete producer shall submit the proposed concrete mixture proportions to the materials and tests engineer for approval following the guidelines given in aldotnum .
the distribution of the approved concrete mixture shall be in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum and aldotnum .
any changes of the materials andor proportions of the approved concrete mixture excluding chemical admixture dosages shall require a concrete mixture resubmittal and approval .
section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num num .
concrete compressive strength .
the numday compressive strength of bridge substructure members bent caps abutment caps panels etc .
shall be num psi num mpa unless the numday compressive strength is shown otherwise on the plans .
the numday compressive strength of bridge superstructure members deck curb barrier rail etc .
less than num feet num meter in length shall be num psi num mpa unless the numday compressive strength is shown otherwise on the plans .
the numday compressive strength of bridge superstructure members deck curb barrier rail etc .
num feet num meter and over in length shall be num psi num mpa unless the numday compressive strength is shown otherwise on the plans num .
conventional concrete mixture design requirements .
the mixture design shall be based on the following requirements required design properties of conventional concrete mixtures property requirement minimum cementitious factor lbsydnum kgmnum num num maximum watercementitious material ratio num maximum slump prior to admixture in mm num num the maximum allowable total air content is num by volume .
the concrete mixture design shall be based on a target total air content of num .
chemical admixtures for the production of conventional concrete shall be selected from list iinum of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
chemical admixtures may be used to increase the slump of the concrete to a maximum of num inches num mm if this is proposed in the mixture design submittal and approved for inclusion in the mixture .
the approved watercementitious material ratio shall not be exceeded in order to increase the slump .
num .
selfconsolidating concrete mixture design requirements .
selfconsolidating concrete scc for the production of precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members shall meet the additional requirements of this item .
scc is utilized to fill the formwork and encapsulate the reinforcing steel without or with only minimal applied vibratory consolidation .
the concrete producer shall establish the scc mixture proportion in accordance with the guidelines given in aldot num with the exception that the producer shall determine the scc mixture proportion to meet the required design properties given in the following table .
section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num required design properties of scc mixture properties shall be measured from a minimum size batch of num cubic yards num cubic meters .
property requirement compressive strength at num days the compressive strength shall meet item numcnum .
cementitious materials content minimum num lbydnum num kgmnum of concrete .
watercementitious materials ratio maximum num .
nominal aggregate size maximum  inches num millimeters .
finetotal aggregate ratio num to num by volume .
total air content maximum num by volume .
the design of the mixture shall be based on a target total air content of num .
temperature freshly mixed concrete temperature as limited in aldotnum .
slump flownum minimum num inches num millimeters and maximum num inches num millimeters .
passing abilitynum difference between slump flow and jring flow num inches num millimeters or less .
stabilitynum vsi num or less .
robustness slump flow num inches num millimeters or less and vsi num or less .
note num .
test shall be completed within num minutes after completion of mixing .
chemical admixtures for the production of scc shall be selected from list iinum of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
approved viscosity modifying admixtures vma may be used as a part of the chemical admixtures if they are shown in the approved mixture design .
num .
cementitious materials .
the cementitious materials used in the concrete mixture shall meet the requirements given in sections num and num .
fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag and microsilica can be substituted for a portion of portland cement .
various options of maximum percent allowable mineral admixture substitutions for portland cement are defined in the following table .
maximum percent of allowable mineral admixture substitution for portland cement by weight substitution option class c or class f fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag microsilica num num num num num num num num num num num num num construction requirements .
a manufacturing plant and personnel requirements .
the precast concrete bridge member manufacturing plant shall be certified by either the precastprestressed concrete institute pci plant certification program or the national precast concrete association npca plant certification program .
certification of plants under pci shall be at least category bnum precast bridge products .
the manufacturer shall submit proof of the plant certification to the materials and tests engineer prior to the start of production .
section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num the manufacturing plant shall have on site at the time of manufacturing bridge components for aldot at least one technician that is certified as an aldot concrete technician .
this technician shall also have a npca certification or be certified as pci level iii .
the manufacturer shall submit proof of this certification to the materials and tests engineer prior to the start of production and during production when required by the engineer .
the manufacturers laboratory and laboratory personnel shall be qualified in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum certification and qualification program for concrete technicians and concrete laboratories .
b concrete testing .
the producers quality control qc technician shall be responsible for concrete sampling and testing .
the qc technician shall determine and document the point of sampling and testing and the testing schedule for each line of production .
sampling and testing shall be done as close as possible to the casting bed and in accordance with the requirements of aldotnum .
num .
conventional concrete testing requirements during production .
conventional concrete shall be in compliance with the requirements given in the following table during production .
required properties of conventional concrete mixtures during production property requirement compressive strength at num days the compressive strength shall meet item numcnum temperature freshly mixed concrete temperature as limited in aldotnum total air content maximum num by volume .
slump maximum num in num mm without chemical admixtures maximum num in num mm with chemical admixtures num .
scc testing requirements during production .
scc shall be in compliance with the requirements given in the following table during production .
required properties of the scc mixture during production property requirement compressive strength at num days the compressive strength shall meet item numcnum .
temperature freshly mixed concrete temperature as limited in aldotnum .
total air content maximum num by volume .
slump flow minimum num inches num millimeters and maximum num inches num millimeters .
stability vsi num or less or sieved fraction num or less for gradation with  nominal aggregate size or smaller or sieved fraction num or less for gradation with  nominal aggregate size .
num note num .
the sieve fraction is determined by the sieve stability test in accordance with aldotnum .
c surface finish of precast bridge members .
the roadway surface of bridge deck span sections shall be finished with either a wood float finish or with a broom finish done with a broom with medium to stiff bristles .
a broom finish shall be applied in a transverse direction and shall penetrate the surface approximately num of an inch .
section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num curb and barrier rail sections shall have a class num surface finish in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
all other surfaces shall have a class num surface finish in accordance with the requirements given in section num. d handling storing and transporting members .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for handling storing and transporting precast concrete bridge members in a manner that will prevent damage to the members .
members shall be lifted and stored in an upright position .
lifting hooks or similar devices for lifting shall be placed at points close to each end of each member or at the locations shown on the plans .
devices shall be of sufficient strength and embedment to provide safe handling of the members .
blocking under units during storage and handling shall be placed to prevent damage .
precast concrete bridge members shall be held at the plant for a minimum of num days after casting .
precast concrete bridge members shall not be transported until the minimum numday compressive strength is obtained and verified by test cylinders .
e installation of precast bridge members .
num .
damaged members .
members that are damaged in any way shall be replaced or repaired without extra compensation .
num .
installation of deck members .
deck members shall be installed so that the difference in the surface of the deck across adjacent members does not exceed num of an inch num mm .
deck members shall be replaced without extra compensation if the difference in the surface is not within the allowable num of an inch num mm difference .
members not meeting the installation tolerance may be installed in other locations in the structure if this results in an acceptable deck surface .
deck members shall be bolted together as shown on the plans to provide snug tight fit .
beveled washers shall be provided if the flat washers bolt heads and nuts are not in full bearing on each other after tightening .
snug tight is defined as the tightness that can be produced by one or two solid blows from an impact wrench or by full effort of a person using an ordinary num foot num mm spud wrench .
the threads of the bolts shall be burred to prevent removal after the members have been acceptably bolted together .
the concrete keyway shall be filled with concrete after the members have been acceptably installed .
the keyway shall be filled with a num concrete mixture by weight mass of cement fine aggregate and coarse aggregate respectively .
the maximum size of the coarse aggregate shall be num of an inch num mm and the maximum amount of water allowed shall be num gallons per num pounds num liter per num kg of cement ..
the keyways shall be filled in accordance with the following standard mixing of the concrete shall be completed a minimum of num minutes in advance of placement the mixture shall be retempered by remixing the concrete without additional water just prior to placing the concrete mixture shall be placed in the keyway tamped and packed as necessary to insure complete filling of the joint the exposed surface of the newly place concrete keyway shall be struck to the same elevation as the adjacent deck sections the surface shall be given a wood float finish the concrete keyway shall be cured as per subarticle numj .
num .
installation of bent and abutment caps .
all piling shall be properly aligned transversely and longitudinally prior to the establishment of the pile cutoff elevations .
gaps anywhere between the cap anchor plate and the top of the pile are unacceptable without adequate correction .
the contractor shall submit a written procedure for providing a structurally acceptable connection when a gap is greater than num inch num mm .
the corrective procedure shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements for working drawings given in article num .
where all gaps between the cap anchor plate and the top of the pile are less than or equal to num inch num mm attachment welds shall be provided in accordance with the requirements given in the following table .
section num precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members num weld required for the attachment of precast concrete cap anchor plate to the top of a steel pile size of largest gap anywhere at top of pile size of fillet weld required all around the top of the steel pile full contactno gap num inch num mm per standard details on plans less than or equal to num inch num mm num inch num mm per standard details on plans less than or equal to num inch num mm num inch num mm less than or equal to num inch num mm num inch num mm the connection between the top of the pile and the steel plate embedded in the cap shall be made by a welder that is aldot certified numf qualified for fillet welding in the overhead position using the manual shielded metal arc welding smaw method .
welding shall be done in accordance with the requirements given in section num. f placement of cranes on bridge decks .
cranes shall not be placed on a bridge deck unless approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall submit a placement plan for review prior to placing a crane on a bridge deck .
the placement plan shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in section num. g pile painting .
all exposed surfaces of piles shall be painted in accordance with the requirements given in sections num and num .
the surface of the piling that is in contact with the abutment panels shall be painted with the coating applied to the other surfaces of the piling or with a system num coating if the abutment panels are installed prior to the painting of the other surfaces .
num method of measurement .
precast concrete bridge members will be measured per each for each type and size of member .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
a precast concrete member will be paid for at the contract unit price for the required type and size depth width and length .
this unit price shall be full compensation for manufacturing delivery and installation accessories all items cast into the concrete tie bolts expansion materials cover concrete over fittings grout and grouting surface finishing and for all other materials equipment labor and incidentals required to make the bridge member a part of the completed bridge .
structural steel handrail and bearings will be paid for under other items of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa precast concrete abutment caps ____ wide by ____ deep by ____ long per each numb precast concrete intermediate bent caps ____ wide by ____ deep by ____ long per each numc precast concrete type span section ____ wide by ____ deep by ____ long per each numd precast concrete section ____ long per each nume precast concrete abutment panels type ____ per each numf precast concrete wing panels type ____ per each numg precast concrete abutment wing cap panels per each types of span sections type num interior span section type numa exterior span section for curb a section type numb exterior span section for curb b section type numc exterior span section for barrier rail type numd exterior span section with curb d section type nume exterior span section with curb e section types of sections curb a curb b barrier rail intermediate section num prestressed concrete bridge members num barrier rail end note see plan details for size shape dimensions etc .
of the various types of span curbs and barrier rail sections .
section num prestressed concrete bridge members num description .
this section shall cover the furnishing and installation of prestressed concrete bridge members .
the required details of the members and the required details for the installation of the members in the structure will be shown on the plans .
num materials .
a aldot procedure .
material requirements for the production of precast prestressed concrete bridge members are given in this section and also in aldotnum production and inspection of precast nonprestressed and prestressed concrete .
b reinforcing steel and prestressing steel .
reinforcing steel and prestressing steel shall meet the requirements given in section num .
reinforcing steel shall be grade num grade num .
prestressing steel strands and bars shall be the type shown on the plans .
c concrete mixture requirements .
num .
general .
the prestressed concrete producer shall establish the proportion of materials following the guidelines given in aldotnum method of controlling concrete operations for structural portland cement concrete and aldotnum production and inspection of precast non prestressed and prestressed concrete .
the prestressed concrete producer shall submit the proposed concrete mixture proportions to the materials and tests engineer for approval following the guidelines given in aldotnum .
the distribution of the approved concrete mixture shall be in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum and aldotnum .
any changes of the materials andor proportions of the approved concrete mixture excluding chemical admixture dosage shall require a concrete mixture resubmittal and approval .
the numday compressive strength for prestressed concrete bridge members shall be num psi num mpa or the numday compressive strength shown on the plans .
num .
conventional concrete mixture design requirements .
the mixture design shall be based on the following requirements mixture design criteria all members minimum cementitious factor lbsydnum kgmnum num num maximum watercementitious material ratio num maximum slump prior to admixture in mm num num the maximum allowable total air content is num by volume .
the concrete mixture design shall be based on a target total air content of num .
chemical admixtures may be used to increase the slump of the concrete to a maximum of num inches num mm if this is proposed in the concrete mixture design submittal and approved for inclusion in the mixture .
the approved watertototal cementitious material ratio shall not be exceeded in order to increase the slump .
num .
selfconsolidating concrete mixture design requirements .
selfconsolidating concrete scc for the production of prestressed concrete members including piles shall meet the additional requirements of this item .
scc is utilized to fill the formwork and encapsulate the reinforcing steel without or with only minimal applied vibratory consolidation .
the concrete producer shall establish the scc mixture proportion in accordance with the guidelines given in aldot num with the exception that the producer shall determine the scc mixture proportion to meet the required design properties given in the following table .
section num prestressed concrete bridge members num required design properties of the scc mixture properties shall be measured from a minimum size batch of num cubic yards num cubic meters .
property requirement compressive strength at num days the compressive strength shall be num psi num mpa or the compressive strength shown on the plans .
cementitious materials content minimum num lbydnum num kgmnum of concrete .
watercementitious materials ratio maximum num .
nominal aggregate size maximum  inches num millimeters .
finetotal aggregate ratio num to num by volume .
total air content maximum num by volume .
the design of the mixture shall be based on a target total air content of num .
temperature freshly mixed concrete temperature as limited in aldotnum .
drying shrinkage maximum of num after num days of drying .
slump flownum minimum num inches num millimeters and maximum num inches num millimeters .
passing abilitynum difference between slump flow and jring flow num inches num millimeters or less .
stabilitynum vsi num or less .
robustness slump flow num inches num millimeters or less and vsi num or less .
note num .
test shall be completed within num minutes after completion of mixing .
chemical admixtures for the production of scc shall be selected from list iinum of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
approved viscosity modifying admixtures vma may be used as a part of the chemical admixtures if they are shown in the approved mixture design .
num .
cementitious materials .
the cementitious materials used in the prestressed concrete mixture shall meet the requirements given in sections num and num .
fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag and microsilica can be substituted for a portion of portland cement .
various options of maximum percent allowable mineral admixture substitutions for portland cement are defined in the following table .
maximum percent of allowable mineral admixture substitution for portland cement by weight substitution option class c or class f fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag microsilica num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
special requirements for piles constructed in severe exposure conditions .
piles constructed in a marine environment within num miles num kilometers from coastline completely or partially submerged in seawater located within the tidal and splash zones exposed to seawater spray exposed to brackish water or as shown on the plans shall meet the requirements of this item .
section num prestressed concrete bridge members num cement for piles shall be type ii and thus low in tricalcium aluminate content .
if requested by the contractor and approved by the materials and tests engineer type i or type iii cement containing a maximum of num tricalcium aluminate may be used .
concrete mixtures used in piles shall have a maximum permeability of num coulombs .
the concrete for piles shall contain class f fly ash and microsilica as components of the cementitious material .
the required percentage of fly ash and microsilica by weight mass of the total cementitious material content shall be as follows cementitious material content in piles cement type ii num fly ash class f num microsilica num total cementitious materials content num num construction requirements .
a manufacturers plant laboratory and personnel requirements .
the concrete bridge member manufacturing plant shall be certified by the precastprestressed concrete institute pci plant certification program .
certification of the production plants shall be category bnum prestressed deflected strand bridge members .
the manufacturer shall submit proof of the plant certification to the materials and tests engineer prior to the start of production .
the manufacturing plant shall have on site at the time of manufacturing bridge components for aldot at least one technician that is certified as an aldot concrete technician .
this technician shall also be certified as pci level iii .
the manufacturer shall submit proof of this certification to the materials and tests engineer prior to the start of production and during production when required by the engineer .
the manufacturers laboratory and laboratory personnel shall be qualified in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum certification and qualification program for concrete technicians and concrete laboratories .
b shop drawings and notification of manufacturer .
the contractor shall submit shop drawings to the bridge engineer for approval prior to production .
the complete details of prestressed concrete members shall be submitted as shop drawings in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
the submittal shall include the proposed tensioning and detensioning procedures .
within num days after the award of the contract the contractor shall notify the materials and tests engineer in writing of the name and address of the manufacturer of the prestressed concrete bridge members .
the notification shall include the manufacturers proposed fabrication schedule .
c concrete testing .
sampling and testing shall be done in accordance with the requirements of aldotnum .
the departments inspector will determine the point of sampling and testing schedule for each line of production .
sampling and testing shall be performed as close as possible to the casting bed in the presence of a department inspector .
num .
conventional concrete testing requirements during production .
conventional concrete shall be in compliance with the requirements given in the following table during production .
section num prestressed concrete bridge members num required properties of conventional concrete mixtures during production property requirement compressive strength at num days the compressive strength shall be num psi num mpa or the compressive strength shown on the plans .
temperature freshly mixed concrete temperature as limited in aldotnum total air content maximum num by volume .
slump maximum num inches if chemical admixtures are used .
num .
scc testing requirements during production .
scc shall be in compliance with the requirements given in the following table during production .
required properties of the scc mixture during production property requirement compressive strength at num days the compressive strength shall be num psi num mpa or the compressive strength shown on the plans .
temperature freshly mixed concrete temperature as limited in aldotnum .
total air content maximum num by volume .
slump flow minimum num inches num millimeters and maximum num inches num millimeters .
stability vsi num or less or sieved fraction num or less for gradation with  nominal aggregate size or smaller or sieved fraction num or less for gradation with  nominal aggregate size .
num note num .
the sieve fraction is determined by the sieve stability test in accordance with aldotnum .
d camber of girders and bridge deck spans .
the theoretical camber of girders will be shown on the plans .
the camber of girders shall be a minimum of  inch num mm at the time of shipment .
the camber of span sections shall be a minimum of  inch num mm at the time of shipment .
e surface finish .
all surfaces shall except as noted below in this subarticle have a class num surface finish in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the outside of all exterior girders shall have a class num surface finish in accordance with the requirements given in section num if a class num is not shown to be required on the plans .
the final class num finish shall not be applied until after the completion of the construction of the bridge deck on the girders .
a class num surface shall be applied to the final exposed surface of concrete piles if shown to be required on the plans .
girder top surfaces shall be intentionally roughened with transverse grooves that penetrate the concrete surface to a minimum depth of  of an inch num mm spaced at no more than  of an inch num mm in the hardened concrete .
riding surfaces cast integrally as part of the precast member for example in bridge deck span sections shall be finished with either a wood float finish or with a broom finish done with a broom with medium to stiff bristles .
a broom finish shall be applied in a transverse direction and shall penetrate the surface approximately  of an inch .
surfaces of precast bridge deck span sections that will be bonded to an overlay shall be raked in a transverse direction to provide a roughened surface for the application of the overlay .
the roughened surface shall have a minimum of  inch num mm ridges raised in the hardened concrete .
section num prestressed concrete bridge members num f handling storing and transporting members .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for handling storing and transporting prestressed concrete bridge members in a manner that will prevent damage to the members .
girders shall be handled and stored in an upright position .
lifting hooks or similar devices for lifting shall be placed at points close to each end of each member or at the locations shown on the plans .
devices shall be of sufficient strength and embedment to provide safe handling of the members .
blocking under units during storage and handling shall be placed to prevent damage .
piles shall be lifted stored transported and placed in the pile driving leads in a manner that will eliminate the possibility of damaging bending stresses cracking and spalling .
piles shall be lifted by means of a suitable bridle or sling attached to the pile at pickup points designated on the plans .
cracked piles will be rejected and shall be immediately removed and replaced without additional compensation .
all prestressed concrete bridge members except piles shall be held at the plant for a minimum of num days after casting .
piles shall be held at the plant for a minimum of num days after casting .
all prestressed concrete bridge members shall not be transported until the minimum num day compressive strength is obtained and verified by test cylinders .
g installation of prestressed concrete members .
num .
damaged members .
members that are damaged in any way shall be replaced or repaired without extra compensation .
num .
prestressed concrete girders .
prestressed girders shall be lifted by attachment at the lifting points shown on the shop drawings .
girders shall be supported at the bearing points shown on the plans when they are put into the structure .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for the stability of the girders during construction .
the contractor shall submit working drawings in accordance with the requirements given in article num for temporary bracing installed to provide stability for the girders .
num .
installation of deck span members .
deck span members that will not be covered by an overlay shall be installed so that the difference in the top surface of adjacent members does not exceed num of an inch num mm .
deck members shall be replaced without extra compensation if the difference in the surface is not within the allowable num of an inch num mm difference .
members not meeting the installation tolerance may be installed in other locations in the structure if this results in an acceptable deck surface .
deck span members shall be bolted together as shown on the plans to provide snug tight fit .
beveled washers shall be provided if the flat washers bolt heads and nuts are not in full bearing on each other after tightening .
snug tight is defined as the tightness that can be produced by one or two solid blows from an impact wrench or by full effort of a person using an ordinary num foot num mm spud wrench .
the threads of the bolts shall be burred to prevent removal after the members have been acceptably bolted together .
at the completion of the bolting together of the members the concrete keyway shall be filled with a num concrete mixture by weight mass of cement fine aggregate and coarse aggregate respectively .
the maximum size of the coarse aggregate shall be num of an inch num mm and the maximum amount of water allowed shall be num gallons per num pounds num liter per num kg of cement .
the keyways shall be filled in accordance with the following standard mixing of the concrete shall be completed a minimum of num minutes in advance of placement the mixture shall be retempered by remixing the concrete without additional water just prior to placing the concrete mixture shall be placed in the keyway tamped and packed as necessary to insure complete filling of the joint the exposed surface of the newly placed concrete keyway shall be struck to the same elevation as the adjacent deck sections the surface shall be given a wood float finish .
the concrete keyway shall be cured as per subarticle numj .
section num prestressed concrete bridge members num h placement of cranes on bridge decks .
cranes shall not be placed on a bridge deck unless approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall submit a placement plan for review prior to placing a crane on a bridge deck .
the placement plan shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num method of measurement .
a item no .
numa .
girders will be measured per each girder of each type and length .
b item no .
numb .
each type of girder will be measured per linear foot of casting length shown on the approved shop drawings minus the length of elastic shortening and shrinkage .
this will be the length recorded on the shipping notice bmtnum prepared by the departments plant inspector .
a copy of bmtnum shall be sent with the shipment of the girders .
c items numc and numd .
concrete span sections will be measured per each type and size .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
items numa and numb .
concrete girders will be paid for at the contract unit price for each type of girder .
this price shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials accessories tools and labor necessary to manufacture and install the girders .
this price shall also be full compensation for premolded bituminous filler for all items cast into the concrete including metal bearing plates and studs welded to these plates and for obtaining a class num surface finish on the outside of all exterior girders .
num .
items numc and numd .
concrete deck span sections will be paid for at the contract unit price for each type and size .
this price shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials accessories tools and labor necessary to manufacture and install the span sections .
this price shall also be full compensation for all items cast into the concrete for the tie bolts for expansion and bearing materials for cover concrete over fittings for grout and grouting for placement of keyways and for surface finishing .
other structural steel items and handrail will be covered under other items of work .
num .
partial payment .
partial payments will be made in accordance with the following schedule fabrication and delivery to approved storage site .
approved storage sites and partial payment for stored materials are addressed in article num erected and the required finish applied to girder units or the bolting up and casting of keyway on deck units num .
partial payments for members that are unacceptable because of damage improper installation or any other reason will be recovered by the department on the next monthly estimate or final estimate whichever is applicable .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa pretensionedprestressed concrete girders type specialty item per each numb pretensionedprestressed concrete girders type specialty item per linear foot meter numc prestressed concrete interior span sections ____ wide by ____ deep by ____ long specialty item per each numd prestressed concrete exterior span sections ____ wide by ____ deep by ____ long specialty item per each length type i ii iii etc .
section num waterproofing and dampproofing num section num waterproofing and dampproofing num description .
a general .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and applying a waterproofing or dampproofing surface to concrete in accordance with the methods prescribed for the several classes of waterproofing or dampproofing described below each to be applied where called for on the plans and in conformity with the requirements of these specifications .
b methods .
the following four classes of waterproofing and one of dampproofing are covered by these specifications num .
class a waterproofing .
prime coat mop coat of hot asphalt and num alternate layers of fabric and moppings of hot asphalt .
num .
class b waterproofing .
prime coat mop coat of hot asphalt and num alternate layers of fabric and moppings of hot asphalt with a mortar protection course .
num .
class c waterproofing .
prime coat mop coat of hot asphalt and num alternate layers of fabric and moppings of hot asphalt with an asphalt plank protection course .
num .
class d waterproofing .
manufactured waterproofing products .
num .
dampproofing .
prime coat and num mop coats of hot asphalt .
num materials .
a general .
all materials shall conform to the provisions of division num materials .
specific reference is made to the following section num fine aggregates .
section num mineral filler .
section num cement .
b primer .
primer used with asphalt mop coats shall meet the requirements of astm d num. c mop coat .
asphalt for mop coat shall meet the requirements of astm d num type i ii or iii as designated by plan details however unless otherwise designated type ii shall be used .
d water proofing fabrics .
waterproofing fabric shall be woven cotton fabric meeting requirements of astm d num. e asphalt plank .
asphalt plank shall be in accordance with requirements of astm d num. f class d waterproofing materials .
all class d waterproofing materials furnished by the contractor for use shall be listed on list iinum waterproofing materials of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
section num waterproofing and dampproofing num class d waterproofing materials shall meet the requirements given in the following table .
required physical properties for class d waterproofing materials property requirements test method thickness num of an inch minimum num mm minimum permeance permsgrainssq.ft.hr.in.hg num ngsmnumpa num maximum num maximum astm e num water method at num f num c tensile strength num poundsinch minimum num nmm minimum astm d num puncture resistance fabric num lb .
minimum num n minimum astm e num pliability num nummm mandrel num bend at num f num c no cracks in fabric or rubberized asphalt astm d num g mortar for protection course .
mortar for protection course shall be in accordance with requirements of section num .
num construction requirements .
a class a waterproofing .
num .
preparation of surface .
the surface to be waterproofed shall have cured for at least seven days and shall be reasonably smooth and free from projections or depressions which might cause puncture of the membrane .
the surface shall be dry so as to prevent the formation of steam when the hot asphalt is applied and immediately before the application of the waterproofing the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of dust and loose material .
no waterproofing shall be done in wet weather nor when the temperature is below num f num c without special authorization from the engineer .
num .
application .
the surface to be waterproofed shall be given a complete coat of primer which shall be permitted to set before the first mop coat is applied .
asphalt shall be heated to a temperature between num f num c and num f num c with frequent stirring to avoid local overheating .
heating kettles shall be equipped with thermometers and oil jackets .
in all cases the waterproofing shall begin at the low point of the surface to be waterproofed so that water will run over and not against or along the laps .
the first strip of fabric shall be of half width the second shall be full width lapped the full width of the first sheet and the third and each succeeding strip shall be full width and lapped so that there will be two layers of fabric at all points with laps not less than num inches num mm wide .
all end laps shall be at least num inches num mm .
beginning at the low point of the surface to be waterproofed a section of about num inches num mm wide and the full length of the surface shall be mopped with the hot asphalt and there shall be rolled into it immediately following the mop the first strip of fabric of half width which shall be carefully pressed into place so as to eliminate all air bubbles and obtain close conformity with the surface .
this strip and an adjacent section of the surface of a width equal to slightly more than half the width of the fabric being used shall then be mopped with hot asphalt and a full width of fabric shall be rolled into this completely covering the first strip and pressed into place as before .
this second strip and an adjacent section of the concrete surface shall then be mopped with hot asphalt and the third strip of fabric shingled on so as to lap the first strip not less than num inches num mm .
this process shall be continued until the entire surface is covered each strip of fabric lapping at least num inches num mm over the second preceding strip .
the entire surface shall then be given a final mopping of hot asphalt .
the completed waterproofing shall be a firmly bonded membrane composed of an asphalt prime coat a mopping of asphalt and two alternating layers of fabric and moppings of asphalt .
under no circumstances shall one layer of fabric touch another layer at any point section num waterproofing and dampproofing num or touch the surface of concrete as there must be at least three complete moppings of asphalt .
in all cases the mopping on concrete shall completely cover the surface and on cloth it shall be sufficiently heavy to completely conceal the weave .
on horizontal surfaces not less than num gallons num l of asphalt shall be used for each num square feet each square meter of finished work and on vertical surfaces not less than num gallons per num square feet num lm shall be used .
the work shall be so regulated that at the close of a days work all cloth that is laid shall have received the final mopping of asphalt .
special care shall be taken at all laps to see that they are completely sealed down .
num .
details .
at the edges of the membrane and at any points where it is punctured by such appurtenances as drains or pipes suitable provisions shall be made to prevent water from getting between the waterproofing and the waterproofed surface .
all flashing at curbs and against girders spandrel walls et cetera shall be done with separate sheets lapping the main membrane not less than num inches num mm .
flashing shall be closely sealed either with a metal counter flashing or by embedding the upper edges of the flashing in a groove poured full of joint filler .
joints which are essentially open joints but which are not designed to provide for expansion shall be caulked with oakum and lead wool and then filled with an approved bituminous material before the membrane is placed .
expansion joints both horizontal and vertical shall be provided with sheet copper in u or v form and premolded joint filler as called for on the plans .
expansion joints shall be sealed on the face adjacent to the membrane with an approved bituminous material .
the membrane shall be carried continuously across all expansion joints .
at the ends of the structure the membrane shall be carried well down on the abutments and suitable provision made for all movement .
num .
damaged membrane patching .
care shall be taken to prevent injury to the finished membrane .
any damage which may occur shall be repaired by patching utilizing original waterproofing methods as set forth above .
patches shall extend at least num inches num mm beyond the outermost damaged portion and the second ply shall extend at least num inches num mm beyond the first .
num .
backfilling .
no backfilling shall be done without the permission of the engineer and in no case until the final mop coat has hardened .
backfill shall be placed in such a manner that the waterproofing will not be damaged .
no stones broken concrete bricks or other material likely to damage the membrane shall be placed adjacent to waterproofed surfaces .
b class b waterproofing .
in addition to the requirements for class a waterproofing noted in subarticle a above class b waterproofing shall require a mortar protection layer as follows mortar protection layer .
over the waterproofing membrane constructed as specified in subarticle a above there shall be constructed a protection layer which unless otherwise specified or shown on the plans shall be a num inch num mm thickness of portland cement mortar .
this mortar layer shall be reinforced midway between its top and bottom surfaces with wire netting of num inch num mm mesh and num gage num mm wire or its approved equivalent .
the top surface shall be troweled to a smooth hard finish and where required true to grade .
on undercut surfaces the underside of surfaces making an angle of less than num with a horizontal plane the membrane shall be protected with a layer of numply roofing felt laid in hot asphalt in lieu of the mortar covering .
the asphalt used for this purpose shall be the same as that used in building up the membrane .
the construction of the protection course shall follow the waterproofing so closely that the latter will not be exposed without protection for more than num hours .
the protection course shall be cured in accordance with the requirements for curing concrete section num .
no backfilling shall be done until the protection course has been in place seven days .
section num waterproofing and dampproofing num c class c waterproofing .
in addition to the requirements for class a waterproofing noted in subarticle a above class c waterproofing shall require an asphalt plank protection layer as follows asphalt plank protection layer .
over the waterproofing membrane constructed as specified in subarticle a above there shall be constructed a protection layer of plain asphalt plank num inches num mm thick whole planks in regular straight courses shall be used except as required to make closures and trim around openings and obstructions .
closing and trimming pieces shall be carefully cut to size .
the entire surface of the membrane shall be covered with the plank .
before laying all surplus talc or other powder shall be removed from the plank with a stiff brush or broom .
each plank shall be laid in a mopping of hot asphalt and the edge and end of planks in place shall be coated with hot asphalt before the next plank is placed .
the asphalt used for this purpose shall be the same as that used in building up the membrane .
each individual plank shall be crowded tightly against the adjacent plank and the completed work shall have a uniform smooth surface without open cracks or spaces .
d class d waterproofing .
waterproofing materials for class d waterproofing shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
no backfilling shall be done without the permission of the engineer .
backfill shall be placed in such a manner that the waterproofing will not be damaged .
no stones broken concrete bricks or other material likely to damage the waterproofing material shall be placed adjacent to waterproofed surfaces .
e dampproofing .
num .
preparation of surface .
the provisions of subarticle a above shall govern .
num .
application .
surfaces to be dampproofed shall be given one coat of hot primer before the first mop coat .
the primer shall be well worked in to give a uniform coating .
the priming coat shall be applied approximately num hours before applying the first mop coat .
the primer shall be dry before this first mop coat is applied .
after the primer is dry the first mop coat of asphalt shall be applied hot over the entire surface to be dampproofed and well worked in .
after the first mop coat is dry a second mop coat shall be applied .
the amount of material for each mop coat shall be not less than num gallons per hundred square feet num lm of surface .
asphalt shall not be heated above a temperature of num f num c .
the material shall be stirred frequently while being heated .
kettles shall be equipped with armored thermometers and oil jackets .
backfilling shall be as provided by subarticle a above .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of waterproofing and dampproofing to be paid for under this section shall be the actual number of square yards square meters of waterproofing of the various types as previously described and dampproofing respectively measured in place completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the quantity of waterproofing and dampproofing measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter for the particular type of waterproofing specified which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including the protection course and for all equipment tools and labor necessary for the satisfactory completion of the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa class waterproofing per square yard square meter numb dampproofing per square yard square meter section num bridge and sidewalk handrail num section num bridge and sidewalk handrail num description .
this section shall cover the work of fabricating furnishing and installing handrail on structures in accordance with details and at the location shown on the plans all in conformity with the requirements noted herein or shown on the plans .
num materials .
materials used in fabrication and installation shall conform to the applicable section of the specifications that the structure to which the railing is to be attached was constructed the details shown on the plans and the following galvanized steel pipe handrail .
galvanized steel pipe shall meet the requirements of astm a num grade b this grade of pipe to include rail elements and post .
steel shapes plates and accessories shall be structural or alloy steel galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
bolts nuts washers and other fasteners shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num class c with nuts tapped after galvanization in accordance with astm a num a numm .
galvanized steel handrail .
galvanized steel shall be structural or alloy steel hot dipped galvanized after fabrication in accordance with aashto m num .
bolts nuts washers and other fasteners shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num class c with nuts tapped after galvanization in accordance with astm a num a numm .
beam type handrail .
beam type handrail shall meet the requirements for beam guardrail as provided in sections num and num .
ornamental handrail shall meet the requirements shown on the plans .
aluminum or galvanized steel sidewalk handrail .
material for use in aluminum or galvanized steel sidewalk handrail shall meet the requirements specified on the plans .
concrete handrail .
concrete handrail shall be castinplace type conforming to the appropriate requirements of section num and the details shown on the plans .
posts for beam type handrail .
steel posts shall meet the requirements of sections num and num .
timber posts shall be treated in accordance with section num .
num construction requirements .
rail shall be erected in accordance with the best construction practices and in conformity with lines elevations and other details indicated on the plans .
the plans will show construction details and will specify the type or alternate types of handrail to be used .
where the contractor is permitted to choose the type rail he wishes to use he shall indicate in the proposal his choice .
one type once selected shall be used throughout the project .
num method of measurement .
the accepted bridge and sidewalk handrail will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num of a foot num m along the axis of the top rail between extreme limits of the handrail without deductions for laps posts or joints .
all stair railing posts and appurtenances for one stair tower including pipe railing on the superstructure but not a part of the bridge or sidewalk handrail installed and accepted complete in place will be measured as one set of stair railing .
no measurement or separate payment will be made for post or miscellaneous hardware required for installation of handrail and stair railing such being considered incidental to the installation of the rail .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the number of linear feet meters of bridge andor sidewalk handrail and the number of sets of stair tower handrail measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit prices of section num repair or raising existing bridges num the appropriate pay items complete in place which shall be payment in full for all materials including rail elements posts hardware and paint for forms for constructing bracing and erecting and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the items in accordance with plans and specifications .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa handrail per linear foot meter numb beam type handrail type posts per linear foot meter numc type railing stair railing per set numd aluminumgalvanized steel sidewalk handrail per linear foot meter galvanized steel galvanized steel pipe ornamental or castinplace concrete section num repair or raising existing bridges num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing all materials tools equipment labor falsework or cribbing and all incidental items necessary to repair members or portions of an existing bridge or change the elevation of an existing bridge as may be required by the detailed plans .
the work shall also include the removal and satisfactory disposal of all waste material damaged portions replaced and all falsework andor temporary bracing etc .
num materials .
since the majority of the work required under this section is primarily a work item materials not to be incorporated into the completed structure shall be of such quality as to serve the needs adequately .
however any material which is to become a part of the completed structure shall meet the requirements of division num materials for the respective type of member or part involved .
num construction requirements .
a repairing of existing bridge .
the contractor shall assemble all materials and equipment required to complete the repairs on any particular member of the bridge and shall adequately strut and brace members which are to be cut to ensure maintaining correct distance between joints and provide temporary load carrying members and supports during such time as members are cut prior to the cutting of any main member .
prior to beginning work the contractor shall submit to the engineer his plans for bracing main members for approval .
b raising existing bridge .
the contractor shall furnish sufficient equipment of adequate capacity to raise any particular unit of the bridge or the entire bridge without injury to same giving num uniform support and bearing at sufficient intervals and num adequate falsework each as approved by the engineer to support safely the portion of or the entire bridge while being raised until it is set on its new permanent supports .
prior to beginning work the contractor shall submit to the engineer num his plans for falsework and num list of equipment proposed for use .
both of these must be approved before the actual raising operation begins .
when raising of a bridge involves a truss structure the contractor may be permitted to remove existing trusses from the bridge piers and store them at an approved storage site provided a satisfactory method of removal transporting and reinstallation of the trusses is submitted and approved by the bridge engineer .
in such event the contractor shall make all necessary arrangement for and furnishing of any storage area .
note storage areas must be approved by the engineer and a site will not be considered for approval unless the proposed site is under the direct control of the contractor and its location is either on the project or in close proximity thereto .
num method of measurement .
each existing bridge to be repaired raised or bridge having a portion or portions of same to be repaired or raised will be shown on the plans and in the proposal by its station number and for the purpose of measurement and payment will be considered a complete and separate unit .
section num steel bridge coating num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
item numa .
payment for repairs to existing bridge shall be made at the contract bid price lump sum which shall be payment in full for all material equipment tools labor falsework struts support and incidentals necessary to complete the work required by this section and detailed in the plans .
num .
items numb and numc .
payment will be made at the respective contract lump sum prices for items of raising existing bridges or portions of existing bridge at designated stations listed in the contract .
the lump sum price shall be payment in full for the furnishing of all equipment tools labor falsework andor cribbing storage area and incidentals necessary to complete the work including the removal and satisfactory disposal of falsework andor cribbing .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa repairs to existing bridge station _____ per lump sum numb raising existing bridge station _____ per lump sum numc raising portion of existing bridge station _____ per lump sum section num steel bridge coating num description .
this section shall cover the work of applying coatings to steel for new construction and to existing bridges in the field for the protection of structural steel portions of bridges .
special requirements are given for the removal of coatings on existing bridges and for the disposal of the removed coating material .
the requirements for coating are applicable regardless of whether or not payment for the coating is included in the payment for the steel usually new construction or is a separate payment for the field application of the coating on an existing bridge .
num materials .
coating materials shall conform to the requirements given in section num coatings paints enamels and varnishes for metal and wood structures .
requirements for coating are also given in section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals .
there are three basic types of coating systems .
these systems are system num zinc primer with various types acrylic epoxy urethane of intermediate and top coats system num acrylic primer intermediate and top coats system num epoxy mastic .
the required dry film thickness and the required color of each coat are given in article num .
num selection of coating system .
the type of required coating system will be shown on the plans or designated elsewhere in the contract .
the coating system proposed for application shall be selected from the list of approved coating components if a proprietary coating system is not shown on the plans .
the contractor shall submit a written notification of the following the name and address of the supplier of the coating system the product names of each coat proposed for application the supplier number from the list of approved coating systems .
if the coating is proposed for application on existing structures the contractor shall give this written notification to the project manager at least num calendar days prior to the beginning of the application of the coating .
if the coating system is proposed for new construction the contractor shall give this written notice to the project manager and forward a copy of the notification to the bridge engineer prior to or with the first submittal of the structural steel shop drawings .
section num steel bridge coating num num blast cleaning mechanical cleaning and surface roughness .
a potential hazardous waste from cleaning existing steel surfaces .
historically the results of testing performed on existing coatings shows that there is a strong likelihood that the blast waste will be hazardous due to the presence of the heavy metals lead andor chromium .
existing coatings may be tested prior to bidding for potential hazardous materials .
the results of this testing should it be performed will be provided to potential bidders by plan notes or other supplementary documentation that will be included in the bidding proposal .
all cleaning waste blast waste mechanical cleaning waste etc .
shall be handled as hazardous waste until appropriate testing toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp epa test method num test given in the epa manual swnum has been conducted and a determination has been made to the contrary .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for all expenses that may be due to the handling and disposal of hazardous waste that is generated from cleaning existing steel bridge surfaces .
b blast cleaning surface preparation for coating systems num and num .
unless noted otherwise on the plans the surfaces that are to be coated with coating system num shall be blast cleaned to conform to the requirements given in steel structures painting council specification sspcsp num nearwhite blast cleaning .
unless noted otherwise on the plans the surfaces that are to be coated with coating system system num shall be blast cleaned to conform to the requirements given in steel structures painting council specification sspcsp num commercial blast cleaning .
c mechanical cleaning surface preparation for coating system num .
unless noted otherwise on the plans the surfaces that are to be recoated with coating system num shall be prepared by sspcsp num hand tool cleaning or sspcsp num power tool cleaning sspcsp num surface preparation by high and ultrahighpressure water jetting or other means to remove loose paint and loose rust prior to recoating .
d required surface roughness after blast cleaning .
after blast cleaning the anchor pattern shall be from num m to num m deep in a dense and uniform pattern of depressions and ridges as determined by use of a pressofilm type tape and a spring micrometer or equal as approved by the department for all coating systems .
the presso film type tape and a spring micrometer shall be provided by the contractor .
num containment system for removal of coating from existing bridge .
the preparation blasting and final cleaning of surfaces for the application of system num and system num coatings on an existing bridge shall be done in a containment system unless designated otherwise on the plans .
the preparation of surfaces for the application of system num coatings will not require a containment system unless designated otherwise on the plans .
the containment system shall consist of vertical and horizontal if necessary screening with a collectionrecovery area in position at all times that coating removal work is in progress .
screening material shall consist of approved material suitably stiffened by bracing to form an assembly with sufficient strength to withstand winds and adverse weather conditions normally encountered during the season in which the work is performed .
the screening shall extend the full vertical distance between bridge steel and collection area .
the containment system shall not cause a hazard to the traveling public .
the containment system shall be designed to have airmoving equipment capable of maintaining osha acceptable airborne concentrations of hazardous material providing adequate worker visibility preventing any spent material or dust from leaving the enclosure and collecting the material for disposal .
air quality will be visually monitored by the engineer .
any dust outside the containment structure shall be justification for suspension of the work .
num collection and disposal of coating material waste from existing bridge .
coating material and other debris removed from an existing bridge shall be collected by the contractor in the containment system .
this material shall be stored in approved containers for subsequent transportation to an approved disposal site .
the contractor shall store and dispose of contaminated debris in accordance with the requirements of the adem .
any testing required by the adem to be performed on the collected waste shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
section num steel bridge coating num the contractor shall collect representative samples of the waste as generated in a storage vessel .
a composite sample shall be collected for each num cubic yards num m generated per bridge site .
adjacent dual bridges will be considered as one site unless noted otherwise on the plans .
a composite sample shall be made by taking several small samples from random locations in the collected waste .
the contractor shall have the sample tested for hazardous materials using the toxic constituents leaching procedure tclp as specified in epa manual swnum .
test results shall be submitted to the engineer within num days from the date that the results are received by the contractor .
waste which exceeds any regulatory threshold for a characteristic waste shall be handled as a hazardous waste .
the contractor shall be responsible for complying with all hazardous waste rules and regulations of the epa and the adem including but not limited to such things as generator i.d .
numbers labeling manifesting etc .
the waste shall not be stored for over num days .
it must be transported only by a permitted transporter and must be disposed of in an authorized hazardous waste facility .
no treatment shall be conducted at the coating removal site .
any land ban certifications shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor acting on behalf of the department is the generator of the waste and shall sign any manifest or similar documents as such .
the contractor shall secure the approval of the engineer for the transporter and the disposal facility at least five days prior to initiation of a shipment of waste .
all personnel involved in the waste generation or handling shall be trained in accordance with epaosha directives .
the contractor shall reimburse the department for all costs that may be incurred by the department due to the failure of the contractor in complying with all regulatory requirements for the containment collection storage and disposal of the blast waste .
waste which does not exceed the regulatory threshold for a characteristic waste shall be handled as an industrial solid waste .
it shall be stored in accordance with the adem land divisionsolid waste branch directives .
disposal shall be in accordance with the adem guidelines at an adem approved facility .
the contractor shall secure in writing the adem authorization for said disposal .
the engineer shall be given a copy of the authorization upon receipt by the contractor .
if contaminated material is transported to or through another state work performed in that state shall be in conformance with any applicable regulatory agencies in the state involved .
copies of all required regulatory documentation including adem form num shall be delivered to the engineer at the time that they are submitted to the regulatory agencies .
the work will not be accepted until all required notifications and permit terminations have been completed and copies of the receipt of termination for all permits including the adem form num provided to the engineer .
num surface preparation plan submittal for the removal of existing coatings .
prior to beginning the work of removing coatings from existing bridges the contractor shall submit a surface preparation plan for review and distribution by the construction engineer .
copies of the plan shall be submitted as working drawings in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the contractor will not be required to have the plan stamped and signed by a licensed professional engineer unless the preparation of details shown on the plan for example temporary structural supports is addressed in alabama law regulating the practice of engineering .
the plan shall be created to comply with all rules and regulations of epa adem osha and any other agency that has regulatory authority and shall include the cleaning methods and products proposed for removal of paint with product manufacturer documentation of the effectiveness of the cleaning methods and products in producing non hazardous blast waste a work phase diagram describing how the debris shall be contained while blasting and coating operations are conducted a detailed drawing andor description of the enclosure listing the type of covering details of the covering support materials details of the connections to the bridge structure methods and equipment proposed for collecting the blast debris description of the containers and the location proposed for storing the blast debris drawing at an appropriate scale to show the location of the storage of the blast waste in relation to the location of the work copies of the submittal of adems form num .
if tclp testing of blast waste proves that it is nonhazardous the contractor may request release from adems form num with approval of the engineer .
description of the details location and procedures for disposal of the blast debris .
section num steel bridge coating num num final cleaning of blast cleaned surfaces .
blast cleaned surfaces shall be cleaned immediately prior to the application of the primer coat .
all weld spatter flux slag fume and other objectionable deposits shall be removed prior to blast cleaning .
the area of the welds shall be neutralized with suitable chemicals if this is required for the successful application of the primer .
all areas repaired after blasting by welding grinding or any other method shall be reblasted if deemed necessary by the engineer .
before the application of the primer to the blasted surfaces the surfaces shall be brushed with clean bristle brushes blown with compressed air or vacuumed to remove all abrasives and other loose material from the surfaces .
this cleaning shall also be done to remove abrasive deposits from cracks crevices corners and pockets .
oil and grease shall be removed from blast surfaces by means of a suitable solvent .
potentially hazardous materials collected from the final cleaning on existing bridges shall be collected for proper regulatory disposal .
num required location for application of coats .
unless noted otherwise on the plans the primer coat for new construction shall be applied in the fabrication shop .
all other coats for new and existing construction shall be applied in the field after the installation of the steel has been completed .
num compliance with coating manufacturers requirements .
all coats shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and precautions for use .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall have a representative of the coating manufacturer present at the initial application of the coats .
the representative shall remain for a period of time necessary to insure that the coatings are being applied satisfactorily and curing properly .
num equipment for the application of the coatings .
coats shall be applied by spray .
rollers and brushes may be used only on flat surfaces for stripe coating and small coating repairs as directed by the engineer .
coats shall be applied uniformly to insure complete coverage and to give the required thickness on all surfaces .
equipment for spraying shall produce satisfactory results without the use of thinner if the use of a thinner is not allowed by the coating manufacturer .
if drift of the spray away from the surface to be coated becomes a problem the engineer may require spraying to be suspended until conditions are favorable .
spray equipment shall include traps or separators to remove oil and water from the compressed air .
the spray equipment shall be kept clean so that dirt dried coating material and other foreign materials are not deposited in the coat film .
subsequent coats shall not be applied over a previously applied coat prior to the time that is specified by the manufacturer for the applied coat to cure or dry .
num time of application of primer coat after final cleaning .
the primer coat shall be applied at the time recommended by the coating manufacturer if that time is less than num hours after final cleaning .
the primer coat shall always be applied within num hours after final cleaning .
under no circumstances shall the steel be permitted to rust before coating regardless of the time elapsed .
rust shall be cleaned by blasting or other methods approved by the engineer .
num quality control for application of coatings in the fabricators shop .
if requested by the engineer the fabricator shall have a representative of the coating manufacture present at the initial application of the coating .
the representative shall remain for a period of time necessary to insure that the coatings are being applied satisfactorily and curing properly .
the fabricator shall keep a daily record of each coating operation .
the record shall be kept more frequently if the materials or coating operations change during the coating process .
the coating records shall be kept on a form furnished by the fabricator that is acceptable to the representative of aldot .
each coating record shall contain the ambient temperature steel temperature relative humidity dewpoint average anchor profile coating system number batch number time and date blasted time and date coated and all other information that is pertinent to the application of the coating .
section num steel bridge coating num after each required coat of paint has cured the average coating thickness of each member shall be recorded .
the minimum and maximum thickness as specified on the coating manufacturers written data shall be required .
the averages shall be taken from three evenly divided sections over the length and on each side of the member under examination .
the averaging shall be based on sspcpa num guidelines .
each coating record form shall be signed by the fabricators quality control supervisor .
a copy of each coating record form shall be given to the aldot representative within five working days that coating work was performed .
a copy of the manufacturers certifications of all batch numbers of the applied coatings shall also be submitted to the aldot representative with the coating record forms .
average anchor profile of blasted steel shall be checked using pressofilm type tape .
the actual pressofilm type tape used for the measurement of the anchor profile shall be included with the copy of the coating record .
where materials other than beams and girders have been accumulated during a single shift or production run the anchor profile of randomly selected members shall be checked .
coatings shall not be applied until the surface to be coated has been inspected and approved by the fabricators quality control inspector or coatings shop supervisor after final cleaning .
this prior approval also applies to additional coats that may be required .
num worker protection .
the contractor shall comply with all requirements of the occupational safety and health administration osha and other applicable regulatory agencies with regard to exposure to hazardous materials in construction .
the contractor shall be responsible for the training of all workers exposed to hazardous materials .
the workers shall be informed of the hazards of exposure to these materials and shall be trained in the precautions to take when performing the work .
the contractor shall provide respiratory protection and protective clothing to all workers and persons entering an area where there is the possibility of exposure to hazardous materials .
protective clothing and equipment shall be approved by osha or other applicable regulatory agencies .
num ambient conditions for surface preparation and coating application .
a ambient conditions for surface preparation .
final surface preparation shall not be performed on steel surfaces which may come into contact with rain fog snow or dew prior to application of the coating .
final surface preparation operations specifically meaning the num hour period within actual coating of steel surfaces shall not take place when the steel surface is within num f num c of the dew point or when the steel surface is below num f num c. the equipment to check the dew point humidity and steel temperature shall be furnished by the contractor .
surface preconditioning such as sspcsp num brushoff blast cleaning is allowable when dew point steel surface temperatures or other conditions are outside of allowable ranges as long as final surface preparation requirements specifically regarding sspcspnum and sspcspnum are completed within the num hour period of coating steel surfaces .
b ambient conditions for coating application .
coating operations shall take place only when the surrounding air temperature or temperature of the steel is above num f num c and not expected to drop to or below num f num c prior to drying of the coating .
coatings shall not be applied to damp or frozen steel surfaces .
coatings shall not be applied when the steel surface is within num f num c of the dew point or at a relative humidity above num unless the conditions of application recommended by the coating manufacturer are different and are allowed by the engineer .
coatings shall not be applied during rain snow or fog conditions or when it is likely that moisture in the form of rain fog snow or dew will contact coated surfaces which have not cured to water resistance .
num additional requirements for applying primer coat in the shop .
a exposed surfaces .
unless designated otherwise on the plans or in these specifications all steel surfaces that will be exposed with the exception of weathering steel shall be coated in the shop with a primer coat .
limited painting of weathering steel is required .
only the exposed noncontact surfaces of weathering steel within a distance from an open joint or finger tooth joint of num times the depth of the girder depth at the bearing shall be painted unless noted otherwise on the plans .
section num steel bridge coating num b contact and inaccessible surfaces .
shop contact faying surfaces shall not be coated .
surfaces that are not in contact but will be inaccessible after assembly or erection shall be coated with all required coats before assembly or erection except for bolted field splice surfaces .
all areas required to be painted that are not readily accessible to spray painting operations shall have primer applied by other means .
these areas include but shall not be limited to all holes in fabricated items and all clips of stiffeners or gusset plates .
all seams of fabricated items that will not be sealed by welding shall receive a brush applied stripe coat of inorganic zinc prior to the application of the primer coat .
the inorganic zinc coating shall be the same as that used for the primer coat .
additional touch up of the stripe coat will be required if necessary before final approval is given to the primer coat .
c machined surfaces and surfaces at future field welds .
primer coats shall not be applied in the shop to machined surface finishes noted in article num. d surfaces of expansion dams .
all surfaces of expansion dams shall be coated with primer to the maximum thickness recommended by the coating manufacturer .
e coating with inorganic zinc primer .
when an inorganic zinc primer coat is required the area of the girder web and flange the splice plates filler plates gusset plates for all diaphragms crossframes and lateral bracing top of the top flange of steel members supporting concrete slabs and the edges of the top flange shall be coated with the inorganic zinc primer in the shop .
the zinc primer shall have been tested for the determination of the slip coefficient as described in article num .
when an inorganic zinc primer coat is required the intermediate coat shall not be applied until the primer coat has cured .
the contractor shall ensure that this does not occur by testing the primer coat curing by means of a method recommended by the coating manufacturer .
all overspray loose or foreign that would inhibit successful bonding of a subsequent topcoat shall be removed by a method approved by the manufacturer of the product .
f protection of the primer coat in the shop .
the freshly coated steel shall not be handled or moved except when unavoidable until the primer coat is dry .
all handling shall be performed using methods that will prevent the primer coat from being damaged .
storing shall be done in such a manner that the coating will not be removed or covered with dust dirt or other foreign material .
in the case that debris does settle and harden on the coated surfaces during periods of extended shop storage power washing shall be required before materials are staged for delivery .
any surfaces which require cleaning shall be restored to the original acceptable conditions prior to delivery to the project site .
loading supporting and securing the steel for shipping shall be done in a manner to prevent damage the primer coating during loading and shipping .
nylon tiedowns or other materials that will not damage the coating shall be used to secure the steel members during shipment .
g erection marks .
erection marks corresponding to those of the erection diagram submitted by the contractor shall be plainly marked on primer coated surfaces .
num requirements for applying additional coats over a shop primer coat .
a cleaning surfaces after erection .
all debris shall be cleaned from the primed and bare surfaces before the application of additional coats .
the contractor shall use cleaning methods and materials that will not damage the primer coat .
oil and grease shall be removed by the use of a suitable solvent .
care shall be taken not to damage an underlying coat however if damage occurs the underlying coat or coats shall be immediately repaired .
on welded work all slag flux and spatter shall be removed prior to coating .
b coating surfaces after erection .
immediately after the erection of materials all connections complete all bolted connections such as girder connection plates diaphragm connection plates field splice plates galvanized bolts nuts washers and other portions of the structure except portions in contact section num steel bridge coating num with the concrete which have received a shop applied primer coat and all completed bolt assembly installations shall be cleaned .
all surfaces that have been scraped chipped or damaged during shipping and erection and all surfaces of the prime coat that have deteriorated shall be coated as per the coating manufacturers recommendations to restore the prime coat to an acceptable condition prior to top coating operations .
all surfaces that have been scraped chipped or damaged during shipping and erection and all surfaces of the prime coat that have deteriorated shall be coated to restore the prime coat .
the coating of structural steel bridge superstructure with a concrete deck shall not be done until after the construction of the deck has been completed .
all concrete spills and splashes shall be washed from the structural steel prior to the mortar taking a set .
a succeeding coat shall not be applied until the previous coat has dried throughout the full thickness of the coating film .
the coatings shall be protected from discoloration and disfigurement by dust insects and other causes until dry .
the contractor shall protect pedestrian vehicular and other traffic that moves on or underneath the bridge from damage and disfigurement by errant spray and other coating operations .
the contractor shall protect all uncoated surfaces of the bridge from damage and disfigurement .
if traffic produces an objectionable amount of dust and dirt the contractor shall without extra compensation take means to prevent the dust and dirt from coming in contact with the surfaces that are being cleaned and are being coated .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to protect all property public and private from damage that may result from the cleaning and coating operations .
num additional requirements for coating surfaces on an existing bridge .
steel and other metals shall consist of the metals of the substructure and superstructure structural steel areas and contiguous metal surfaces and such surfaces as galvanized pipe conduits and junction boxes metal ladders gratings railings platforms operators houses metal or other material navigation light stands guyed masts supporting overhead cable excluding public utility masts cable brackets and appurtenances traffic gate housing metal drains on steel spans and surfaces of all machinery housing and parts that do not require lubrication .
any cleaning that is deemed by the engineer to be harmful to the metal shall be discontinued .
a succeeding coat shall not be applied until the previous coat has dried throughout the full thickness of the coating film .
the coatings shall be protected from discoloration and disfigurement by dust insects and other causes until dry .
the contractor shall protect pedestrian vehicular and other traffic that moves on or underneath the bridge from damage and disfigurement by errant spray and other coating operations .
the contractor shall protect all uncoated surfaces of the bridge from damage and disfigurement .
if traffic produces an objectionable amount of dust and dirt the contractor shall without extra compensation take means to prevent the dust and dirt from coming in contact with the surfaces that are being cleaned and are being coated .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to protect all property public and private from damage that may result from the cleaning and coating operations .
num method of measurement .
the completed and accepted work shall be measured in lump sum units each identified by station number or mile kilometer post number in the proposal .
the quantities of surface area that may be shown on the plans are approximate estimates of the surface area that will be required to be coated .
the contractor shall determine the actual amount of surface area that is required to be coated and base the bid on this actual amount .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
separate payment for applying a coating to a new bridge will be made only when the proposal includes a pay item for this work .
otherwise payment for this work shall be included in items numa numb nume or numf whichever is appropriate .
items numa and numb measured as provided above will be paid at the contract lump sum prices for the specified units .
these prices shall be full compensation for all shop or field cleaning of metal for containing collecting storing testing transporting and disposing of cleaning debris for furnishing abrasives and cleaning solvents for furnishing a surface profile comparator for section num bridge joint seals num furnishing and applying the coating material for supplying safety equipment and clothing and for all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa coating new bridge at ______ per lump sum numb coating existing bridge at ______ per lump sum section num bridge joint seals num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing bridge joint seals at the locations shown by the plans or directed all in accordance with this specification and plan details .
said seals are for the purpose of preventing the passage of water and other materials through the joint .
types of bridge joint seals have been classified as follows compression seals and diaphragm type seals .
num materials .
materials furnished for use under this section shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the plan details .
bridge joint seals for existing bridges shall be the type of seal material shown on the plans .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the sealing of bridge joints shall be limited to those joints noted by the plans to be sealed .
the plans and proposal will designate the total joint movement for which a joint is to function .
shop drawings of the bridge joint seal system designated by the plans or if allowed selected by the contractor from the plan designated alternates must be approved by the bridge engineer .
shop drawings etc .
of the seal system shall be submitted to the bridge engineer for approval .
after final approval of the drawings the contractor shall resubmit seven copies of the drawings plus one set of satisfactory reproducibles mylar or equal for distribution .
b forming of joint .
special attention shall be given to joint construction to insure that proper allowances for temperature skew etc .
are made in forming the joint width .
in the same manner the anchorage system bolts plates etc .
or joint armor shall be carefully set in the formwork to insure proper anchorage and functionability of the completed joint .
all elements of the joint seal system shall be on hand before commencing forming of the joint .
c installation of bridge interior joints .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to insure that the joint width alignment etc .
is in accordance with the bridge plan details and approved shop drawing .
any deviation from the plans and approved shop drawings shall be reported and corrective remedial action taken before installing the seal element .
installation of the seal element shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation and departmental directives .
care shall be taken to insure the proper cleaning of the joint and use of lubricants adhesives or combination lubricantadhesive during the installation .
splicing of the seal elements will not be permitted in a joint system unless so noted by plan details or the approved shop drawings .
d installation of bridge end joints .
the bridge contractor shall install that portion of the bridge end joint anchorage system required to be installed in the bridge deck in accordance with bridge plan details and approved shop drawings .
the remaining elements shall be matchmarked and properly stored as directed until such time as the bridge end slab is constructed or the contract is terminated at which time the stored elements shall be turned over to the engineer .
the contractor constructing the bridge end slab shall have the responsibility of incorporating that portion of the joint seal system required by the bridge plans and approved shop drawings into section num bridge joint seals num the bridge end slab .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to insure that the joint width alignment etc .
is in accordance with above noted requirements any deviation shall be reported and corrective remedial action taken before installing the seal element .
the portion of the joint seal system to be installed in the bridge end slab and the seal element will be made available to the bridge end slab contractor along with installation details if such is not provided by the plan details .
the contractor shall have full responsibility for protection etc .
of elements of the joint seal system furnished him until the joint seal system is accepted .
any damage to the elements caused by his operations shall be corrected as directed without additional compensation .
installation of the seal element shall be as noted in the second paragraph of subarticle numc .
e bridge joint seal .
the contractor shall obtain the manufacturers recommendations for the installation of the joint seals and shall furnish these recommendations to the engineer prior to the installation of the seals .
the seals shall be installed as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
a items numa numb and numc .
ordered and accepted sealed joints will be measured in linear feet meters along the top surface of the designated joint between the bridge gutters to the nearest num foot millimeter .
no measurement will be made for that portion of the seal required by plan details to extend through or above the gutter line such being considered incidental to the sealing of the joint .
b items numd and nume .
these items when provided will be measured as a lump sum unit for the designated bridge structure .
said measurement will cover the sealing of all the bridge joints of the type designated interior or end all in accordance with the plan requirements and the details noted in this section .
c item numg .
the joint seal will be measured in linear feet meters along the top of the installed and accepted seal .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
item numa .
the accepted sealed bridge joints measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for each designated joint width which shall be full compensation for the fabrication and furnishing of all materials necessary to provide a complete functional sealed joint armor plates anchor bolts extrusions channels seal elements etc .
for the incorporation and installation of all elements into the structure and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to provide a complete operational sealed joint .
num .
item numb .
the accepted bridge end joint seal system measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for each designated joint width which shall be full compensation for the fabrication and furnishing of all materials necessary to provide a complete functional sealed joint armor plate anchor bolts extrusions channels seal element etc .
except the lubricantadhesive used to install the seal element for the partial installation of that portion of the seal system required to be installed in the bridge decks and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
item numc .
the accepted partial installation of the bridge end joint seal system measured in the same manner as noted for a complete sealed system will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for incorporation of that portion of the bridge end joint seal system required to be installed into the bridge end slab and the installation of the seal element all components of the seal system except the lubricantadhesive used to install the seal element for the lubricantadhesive and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to provide a completely operational joint system .
num .
item numd .
the accepted sealed bridge measured as noted will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid which shall be full compensation for the fabrication and furnishing of all section num reinforced concrete box culverts num materials necessary to provide completely functional joint seal systems armor plates anchor bolts extrusions channels seal elements etc .
for the structure for the incorporation and installation of all elements into the structure and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to provide the structure with complete functional joints .
num .
item nume .
the accepted bridge end joint seal systems measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid which shall be full compensation for the fabrication and furnishing of all materials necessary to provide the completely functional bridge end joints systems armor plates anchor bolts extrusions channels seal elements etc .
except the lubricantadhesive used to install the seal element for the structure for the partial installation of the seal systems that portion of the seal systems required to be installed in the bridge decks and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
item numg .
the accepted bridge joint seal measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract price bid per linear foot which shall be full compensation materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to furnish and install the seals .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa furnishing and installing bridge interior or end joint seal system ___ inch mm total joint movement per linear foot meter numb furnishing and partial installation of bridge end joint seal system ___ inch mm total joint movement per linear foot meter numc partial installation of bridge end joint seal system per linear foot meter numd furnishing and installing bridge interior or end joint seal systems station ______ per lump sum nume furnishing and partial installation of bridge end joint seal systems station ______ per lump sum numg bridge joint seal per linear foot meter section num reinforced concrete box culverts num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing reinforced concrete box culverts in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
the contractor shall have the option of constructing either castinplace or precast concrete culverts if the required type of culvert is not shown on the plans .
num materials .
a applicable sections .
the requirements given in the following sections shall be applicable unless modified by the requirements given in this section to the construction of box culverts .
section num structure excavation and backfill for drainage structures and minor structures section num structural portland cement concrete section num steel reinforcement section num precast concrete products b concrete for culverts cast in place .
concrete for cast in place culverts shall be class b concrete .
c joint sealers for precast concrete culverts .
joint sealer shall be one of the types meeting the requirements given in article num unless shown otherwise on the plans .
section num reinforced concrete box culverts num num construction requirements .
a excavation backfilling and water quality protection .
num .
excavation and backfilling .
excavation and backfilling shall be in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
in addition to the requirements given in section num precast concrete culverts shall be placed on a bedding layer of backfill .
the requirement for a bedding layer will be met if extra depth excavation and backfill is required .
if extra depth excavation and backfill is not required the bedding layer shall be a minimum compacted thickness of num inches num mm of foundation backfill placed at least num feet num mm wider than the extent of the outside walls num foot num mm on each side of the culvert .
num .
water quality protection .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for protecting the quality of the water at the site of the culvert by preventing erosion and by capturing and removing sediment at diversion channels and cofferdams .
unless otherwise shown on the plans provisions for water quality protection at the culvert site shall be designed and implemented by the contractor .
details of these provisions shall be included in the stormwater management plan .
b type of required culvert .
the type either cast in place or precast of required culvert may be shown in the pay item descriptions for the culvert construction .
the contractor shall construct that type of culvert if the type designation is shown .
the contractor shall have the option of constructing either castinplace or precast concrete culverts if the required type of culvert is not shown in the pay item description .
c preparation for culvert extension .
the extension of a culvert shall include the cutting or breaking away of portions of the existing culvert and the preparation of the exposed structural material for joining with the new culvert materials .
d culverts constructed with cast in place concrete .
num .
sequence of concrete placement for slabs and walls .
concrete for the bottom slab shall be placed and allowed to set before the placement of concrete for the walls and top slab .
the walls and top slab in culverts that have an overall height of num feet num mm or less may be constructed with a continuous placement of concrete .
the walls and top slab in culverts that have an overall height greater than num feet num mm shall be constructed by separate placements of concrete .
when the walls and top slab are constructed by separate placements of concrete the concrete in the walls shall be strong enough to allow the placement of the concrete without damage to the walls .
num .
preparation of construction joints .
all construction joints shall be thoroughly cleaned of all debris .
the concrete surface shall be carefully chipped and roughened in accordance with the method of bonding construction joints given in section num .
num .
required construction joints .
construction joints shall be provided on all culverts over num feet num m in length with the spacing of the joints set to provide approximately equal length sections along the culvert .
one construction joint will be required for culvert lengths between num feet num m and num feet num m. two construction joints will be required for culvert lengths greater than num feet num m and less than num feet num m. three construction joints will be required for culverts from num feet num m to num feet num m in length .
for culverts over num feet num m in length construction joints shall be spaced at approximately equal intervals of not less than num feet num m nor more than num feet num m. all required construction joints shall be constructed normal to the center line of the culvert .
section num reinforced concrete box culverts num num .
tolerances .
the height and width of the openings shall not vary by more than num from the plan dimensions .
the slabs and walls shall not be thinner than the plan dimensions but may be thicker by num more than the plan dimensions .
the interior surfaces shall not vary by more than num of an inch num mm from a num foot num m straightedge placed anywhere on any interior surface .
the clearance of the reinforcing steel shall not be less than the plan clearance and shall not be greater than num of an inch num mm more than the required plan clearance .
e culverts constructed with precast concrete units .
num .
standard details for precast concrete culverts .
for culverts with more than num feet num mm of cover the precast units shall be manufactured in accordance with the details given in aashto m num m numm precast reinforced concrete box sections for culverts storm drains and sewers .
for culverts with less than num feet num mm of cover the precast units shall be manufactured in accordance with the details given in aashto m num m numm precast reinforced concrete box sections for culverts storm drains and sewers with less than num feet num mm of cover subjected to highway loading .
each precast unit shall be a one piece design cast as a monolithic unit .
num .
submittal of details .
details and design calculations sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall be submitted as shop drawings in accordance with all of the requirements given in article num when the conditions of loading differ from what is given in astm c num .
details and design drawings shall be submitted as working drawings for all pipe entrances connections to drainage structures bends in culvert alignment wingwalls aprons and guardrail attachment .
num .
transition for extending culverts .
a uniform transition shall be constructed where new or existing cast in place culverts are extended with precast units .
a doweled or tongue and groove connection shall be provided at the junction of the precast unit and the cast in place section .
details and design calculations for the transition shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements given in article num for the submittal of working drawings .
num .
installation and connection of precast units .
precast units shall be laid to the same line and grade requirements noted in item numanum .
for pipe .
the units shall be connected so that there are no gaps between the ends of the units and the inner surfaces are flush and even .
sealant shall be applied to the mating surfaces of each unit .
the method of sealing the joints shall be the method given for concrete pipe in subitem numdnuma .
unless shown otherwise on the plans the contractor shall have the option to use any of the type joint sealers given for rigid pipe in article num .
num .
backfill .
precast units shall be backfilled in accordance with the requirements given for pipe in subarticle nume .
num .
end sections for precast concrete culvert units .
end sections for precast units if required shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
num method of measurement .
payment for reinforced concrete box culverts will be based on units of cubic yards cubic meters of culvert concrete and pounds kilograms of steel reinforcement .
the quantity of concrete and reinforcing steel for both cast in place and precast concrete culverts shall be based on the height and width of the openings the number of barrels the length of the culvert and the quantity of concrete and reinforcing steel per unit length of the culvert shown on the plans for the construction of cast in place culverts .
the quantity of concrete and reinforcing steel shown for precast culverts will always be the quantity required for the construction of a cast in place culvert with the same height and width of openings number of barrels and length .
section num retaining wall num wingwalls parapets toewalls and apron quantities shall also always be based on the quantities given on the plans for cast in place construction regardless of a requirement for the installation of precast units .
no additional payment will be made where barrel lengths apron areas backfilling or items of work have to be increased due to the contractor selecting the option to furnish and install precast units .
fill concrete required between barrels of precast units will not be measured or paid for separately .
steel reinforcement will be measured and paid for under section num .
excavation and backfill will be measured and paid for under section num with the limitation that payment for foundation backfill for a bedding layer for precast concrete culverts will only be made for a thickness of num inches num mm and a width of num feet num mm wider than the extent of the outside walls .
separate payment will not be made for any other items of work involved .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract price for culvert concrete and culvert concrete extension shall be full compensation for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to construct the complete culvert and related structures toe walls wing walls parapets connections to drainage structures etc ..
the contract price shall also be full compensation for design and submittals construction of cofferdams temporary diversion channels protection of water quality at cofferdams and diversion channels flood protection and falsework and formwork .
payment will not be separated for individual culverts .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa culvert concrete per cubic yard cubic meter numb culvert concrete extension per cubic yard cubic meter enter either cast in place or precast if the type of construction must be designated .
section num retaining wall num description .
retaining walls shall be constructed at the locations and within the limits shown on the plans .
standard details may be shown on the plans for the construction of castinplace reinforced concrete retaining walls .
the details for the construction of other types of retaining walls may also be shown on the plans .
the submittal and approval of the design and details of a retaining wall is required if the details of the retaining wall are not shown on the plans .
num materials .
a selected backfill material .
selected backfill material for mechanically stabilized earth mse walls and gravity walls shall be well graded angular commercially produced sand or crushed stone material containing slag will not be allowed free from organic matter andor other deleterious material .
the following types of materials will be allowed concrete sand meeting the requirements of section num fine aggregates f.m .
waived .
section num coarse aggregate crushed material that is smaller than num with num or less passing the num num m sieve .
crusher run material with num passing a numinch num mm sieve and with num or less passing the num num m sieve .
section num retaining wall num b castinplace reinforced concrete retaining wall .
concrete for castinplace reinforced concrete retaining walls shall be class a concrete in accordance with the material requirements given in section num .
reinforcing steel shall be furnished and placed in accordance with the material requirements given in section num .
the bituminous expansion joint filler and waterstop shall meet the requirements given in section num .
dowels at expansion joints shall be plain grade num bars meeting the requirements given in aashto m num .
pipe sleeves at expansion joints shall be grade num sleeves meeting the requirements given in aashto m num .
castinplace walls shall have a deposit belt not less than num foot num mm wide and num foot num mm deep of approved local or commercial free draining material placed full length along the back face of the vertical walls at the line of weepholes .
this material shall conform to the requirements given in subarticle numb .
c mechanically stabilized earth retaining wall .
approved aldot mse wall systems are shown in the material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list iinum mse wall systems .
the materials required for a mechanically stabilized earth retaining wall shall meet the requirements of the approved mse wall system .
the material and construction requirements shall be shown on the details of the wall submitted by the contractor .
the details of the wall will be distributed by the engineer for inspection of the installation of the wall .
d gravity wall .
approved aldot gravity wall systems are shown in the material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list iinum gravity wall systems .
the materials required for a gravity wall shall meet the requirements of the approved gravity wall system .
the material and construction requirements shall be shown on the details of the wall submitted by the contractor .
the details of the wall will be distributed by the engineer for inspection of the installation of the wall .
e precast concrete wall components and masonry wall facing elements .
all precast and masonry concrete items shall meet the requirements given in section num .
all precast and masonry concrete items shall meet the material requirements established by the aldot through the submittal and approval of wall designs material requirements and details .
num construction requirements .
a contractors option to select the type of retaining wall .
the contractor shall have the following four options for the construction of a retaining wall if the required type of wall is not shown on the plans aldot designed castinplace reinforced concrete retaining wall contractor designed castinplace reinforced concrete retaining wall reinforced mechanically stabilized earth mse retaining wall gravity wall .
mse and gravity walls shall be designed and fabricated by or under the technical supervision of an aldot approved supplier .
approved aldot mse walls systems are shown in the material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list iinum mse wall systems .
approved aldot gravity walls systems are shown in list iinum gravity wall systems .
information concerning these lists is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
b contractor qualifications .
the contractor shall submit descriptions of the retaining wall projects completed in the last three years to serve as evidence of the capability to construct the chosen wall system .
the descriptions of the retaining wall projects shall contain names and telephone numbers of owners representatives who can verify the contractors participation on those projects .
these descriptions shall be submitted with the wall installation plan and will be evaluated by the engineer .
section num retaining wall num c requirement for the submittal of retaining wall designs details and installation plan .
the submittal of the design and details of a retaining wall is required if the details of the retaining wall are not shown on the plans .
the contractor shall submit num copies of the complete details material requirements and design calculations to the engineer for review no later than num calendar days after the date of the notice to proceed .
the contractor shall also submit a wall installation plan that includes name and experience record of the superintendent in charge of the retaining wall installation list of proposed equipment to be used details of the proposed sequence of retaining wall construction details of planned excavation and shoring methods if shoring is required details of earth reinforcement placement including methods proposed to prevent damage to the reinforcement during subsequent backfill placement .
the design calculations shall include an analysis of the internal and external stability of the wall and all structural connection details of the wall .
all proposed details material requirements and design calculations shall be stamped and signed by a licensed professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama and not employed by aldot .
the design shall be in conformance with the requirements given in the current aashto standard specifications for highway bridges as amended by interim revisions .
the engineer will review the retaining wall installation plan wall design details materials requirements and design calculations for conformance with the plans and specifications .
the engineer will not approve the submittal but will review it to make sure that it is sufficiently complete to allow the construction of the wall .
the engineer will return the submittal for corrections distribute the submittal for construction inspection or contact the contractor to establish a mutually agreeable date and time for a meeting to discuss the submittal .
the contractor will be notified of changes in the submittal deemed necessary within seven days after the meeting .
retaining wall construction shall not begin until the submittal has been distributed for construction inspection and the engineer informs the contractor in writing that the proposed wall details material requirements design calculations and wall installation plan are complete .
distribution of the submittal for construction inspection shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to satisfactorily complete the work as detailed on the plans and in the specifications .
any proposed modification of the installation plan during construction shall be submitted to the construction engineer for review and distribution .
d excavation .
the contractor shall perform the excavation in a manner that will prevent damage to adjacent structures and maintain the stability of the ground adjacent to the excavation .
excavated material that remains after the construction of the wall shall be used in the formation of the embankment roadbed base layers shoulders slopes bedding backfill for culverts and for other purposes as allowed or directed by the engineer .
the material shall be suitable for the use that is allowed or directed by the engineer .
excavated material that can not be used as a part of the construction in other areas of the project shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements given in section num for the disposal of surplus material .
e castinplace reinforced concrete retaining wall .
aldot designed castinplace walls shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on sheets num through num in aldot standard drawing rw num .
concrete for castinplace reinforced concrete retaining walls shall be furnished and placed in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
reinforcing steel shall be furnished and placed in accordance with the material and construction requirements given in section num .
all other materials shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the standard wall details or the approved wall details .
f mechanically stabilized earth mse retaining wall .
the contractor shall construct the mechanically stabilized earth mse retaining wall in accordance with the details shown on the contractors submittal of the mse wall that is distributed by the engineer .
section num roadway pipe culverts num g gravity wall .
the contractor shall construct the gravity wall in accordance with the details shown on the contractors submittal of the gravity wall that is distributed by the engineer .
h drainage layer .
a drainage layer of backfill is required where there are weepholes .
the drainage layer shall be free draining material placed full length along the back face of the walls at the line of weepholes .
the drainage layer shall not be less than num foot num mm wide and num foot num mm deep .
i final finish on the face of mse and gravity walls .
unless shown otherwise on the plans mse and gravity walls shall be built using the concrete finish provided by the manufacturer .
num method of measurement .
compensation for retaining walls will be made for the number of square feet square meters within the limits of payment shown on the plans .
the engineer will not conduct field measurements of the wall for the purposes of payment other than for partial payments under article num .
the limits of payment will be the following top of the wall bottom of the wall bottom of leveling pad or footing where the bearing capacity is shown beginning and end of the wall .
the limits for payment shown on the plans will not be altered unless directed by the engineer in writing .
all portions of the wall except barrier rails constructed outside the limits for payment shown on the plans will be considered integral and subsidiary to the construction of the wall and will not be measured for payment .
reinforced concrete barrier rails at the top of the wall will be measured and paid for under other items of work .
all other items of work including but not limited to selected backfill material for all components of the wall the furnishing and installationconstruction of all footingsleveling pads copingscaps reinforcing strips reinforcing mesh permanent and temporary facing shall be included in the contract price for the retaining wall and will not be measured separately for payment .
the cost of all excavation within num feet num m of the front face top of wall to bottom of footing of the wall and all excavation behind the wall shall be included in the square foot contract price for the wall .
separate payment will not be made for the use or disposal of the excavated material that remains after the completion of the construction of the wall .
excavation beyond num feet num m from the front face of the wall that is required for roadway construction will be paid for under other items of work .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the retaining wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot square meter which shall be full compensation for all required designs and submittals and for furnishing all materials fabrication erection construction excavation utilization and disposal of surplus excavated material furnishing and placing selected backfill material equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa retaining wall per square foot square meter retaining wall identification and supplemental description if required .
i.e .
number num number num mse wall number num etc .
section num roadway pipe culverts num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing pipe type culverts of the size shape wall thickness type material and appropriate strength designated on the plans or in the proposal .
the section num roadway pipe culverts num installation shall be at the locations shown on the plans or designated in conformity with the lines and grades shown by the plans or designated by the engineer .
the work shall include the furnishing and construction of such joints cuttings and connections to other pipes or structures as may be necessary to complete the work as shown on the plans or directed .
this section shall also cover the work of furnishing and installing pipe culverts by the jacking boring method of construction .
unless specifically authorized in writing by the engineer jacking boring shall be used only at the locations shown on the plans .
this type of pipe installation will be paid for under pay item numc .
the following abbreviations will be used concrete pipe p.c .
for plain concrete r.c .
for reinforced concrete corrugated metal c.m .
for any acceptable corrugated metal pipe covered by these specifications protective coating c. for any protective coating of metal pipe allowed by these specifications paved invert p.i .
corrugated steel c.s .
for plain corrugated steel c.c.s .
for coated corrugated steel c.c.s.p.i .
for coated c.s .
paved invert corrugated aluminum c.a .
for plain corrugated aluminum c.c.a .
for coated c.a .
c.c.a.p.i .
for coated c.a .
paved invert concrete lined c.l .
unless a specific type of pipe is designated by the plans or proposal the contractor may use one of the optional types of pipe shown by the plans or proposal .
however an installation once started shall be made with the same type of pipe throughout unless specifically designated otherwise by plan details or directed in writing .
the contractor at his option may furnish a stronger grade pipe than specified provided no additional cost is incurred by the state for such installation .
the contractor shall also have the option to use horizontal elliptical h.e .
pipe in lieu of concrete arch pipe provided the h.e .
pipe equals or exceeds the arch pipe in strength and equivalent opening .
if the contractor elects to use h.e .
pipe he shall still be paid under the pay item for which the h.e .
pipe replaces .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate provisions of division num materials with specific reference made to sections num and num and the following section num pipe culvert joint sealers section num roadway pipe if h.e .
pipe is used as outlined in article num the pipe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num m numm .
the test reports shall also state the size and class of arch pipe for which the h.e .
pipe is substituted .
concrete pipes furnished for jacking boring shall be smooth pipes without bells .
unless shown otherwise on the plans smooth steel pipe furnished for jacking boring shall be manufactured from steel having a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa .
the pipe shall be fabricated in sections for welded field joints .
the contractor shall select the wall thickness of the pipe consistent with his operation however the minimum wall thicknesses shall be as follows num inch num mm and smaller diameter num inch num mm num inch to num inch num mm to num mm diameter num inch num mm num inch num mm and larger diameter num inch num mm the pipe shall be coated inside and outside with at least one shop coat of an approved primer paint and one shop coat of asphaltum paint .
other approved protection material may be used if approved by the department .
section num roadway pipe culverts num num construction requirements .
a general .
num .
pipe inspection .
pipe shall be laid only in the presence of the engineer or his authorized representative and shall not be covered until approved .
pipe installed contrary to this requirement will be rejected and shall be replaced by the contractor without additional compensation .
num .
grade and alignment .
the pipe shall be laid with ends abutting and with not more than a num inch num mm variation from established alignment at the vertical centerline or from grade at the flowline .
the engineer will provide in the designated grade sufficient camber to prevent development of sag or reverse slope due to foundation settlement under embankment load .
num .
pipe culvert extensions .
the contractor shall extend existing pipe culverts using the same construction methods and materials required for the installation of new pipe culverts .
a pipe that extends from an existing manhole inlet or junction box and a pipe that is extended from the installation of a collar shall be a pipe extension .
a pipe that is extended from the installation of a new junction box is not a pipe extension and will be considered to be just a roadway pipe .
num .
depth of fill .
the fill height for determining the class or wall thickness of pipe will be the distance from the elevation of the top of the pipe to elevation at the top of the base course .
num .
coated paved invert and concrete lined pipe .
in the installation of coated paved invert or concrete lined pipe care shall be taken not to damage the protective coating lining or the paved invert .
any damage shall be repaired with approved material or replaced as directed .
num .
corrugated steel or corrugated aluminum pipe .
where aluminum pipe is to be connected to galvanized or other metal pipe the surfaces shall be separated from contact by an approved type of gasket .
num .
galvanized pipe .
any damage to galvanizing shall be painted with two coats of approved galvanizing repair paint section num or approved zinc spelter paint .
b excavation of trench .
details of trenching and bedding of pipe will be shown on the plans .
all pipe num inches num mm or less in horizontal diameter shall be laid in a trench extending at least num foot num mm above the elevation of the top of the pipe .
for such pipe where the ground surface is less than num foot num mm above the elevation of the top of the pipe the contractor shall first construct and compact the fill to a minimum height of num foot num mm above the elevation of the top of the pipe and for a minimum distance of num feet num m in each direction from the outside edge of the pipe .
the trench shall then be excavated as specified in section num .
caution shall be used to keep the sides of the trench vertical and to specified dimensions .
extra wide excavation to accommodate pans or other unsuitable excavating equipment will not be permitted .
excavation above subgrade will be classified and paid for as roadway excavation .
excavation below subgrade will be classified and paid for as structure excavation except that no payment will be made for excavating that part of a fill section placed more than num foot num mm above the top of the pipe .
for pipe over num inches num mm in horizontal diameter trenching will be required only where the original ground is above the elevation of the bottom of the pipe and backfilling shall be performed as specified in item numdnum .
should the material encountered at the elevation of the trench floor not be suitable to support the structure removal of unsuitable material and placement of foundation backfill shall be performed and will be paid for as specified in section num .
temporary drainage necessary for proper installations shall be provided by the contractor without additional compensation .
c pipe bedding .
num .
general .
all pipe culverts placed under this section shall be placed in a prepared bed of one of the types noted herein .
unless otherwise provided a class c bedding shall be used .
section num roadway pipe culverts num num .
class a bedding .
the pipe culvert shall be bedded in a continuous concrete cradle conforming to plan details .
num .
class b bedding .
the pipe shall be bedded with ordinary care in a prepared foundation bed to a depth of not less than num percent of the vertical diameter of the pipe plus num inches num mm .
the thickness of the foundation bed shall be a minimum of num inches num mm in thickness and shall be shaped to fit the pipe for at least num percent of the vertical outside diameter .
recesses in the trench bottom shall be shaped to accommodate the bell of the pipe when bell and spigot type pipe is used .
ordinary care in this article shall mean sufficient care to insure that the permissible variations listed in item numanum will not be exceeded .
the bedding material shall be sand or an approved selected sandy soil .
num .
class c bedding .
the pipe shall be bedded with ordinary care in a loosened soil foundation shaped to fit the lower part of the pipe exterior with reasonable closeness for at least num percent of its overall height .
use of a template for shaping will not be required .
the shaped foundation shall be loosened by pulverizing the soil to a minimum depth equal to num times the diameter of the pipe or num inches num mm maximum .
ordinary care in this article shall mean sufficient care to insure that the permissible variations listed in item numanum will not be exceeded .
where ledge rock rocky or gravelly soil hard pan or other unyielding foundation material is encountered at a culvert site the pipe shall be bedded as follows the hard unyielding material shall be excavated below the elevation of the bottom of the pipe or pipe bell for a depth of at least num inches num mm or num inch for each foot num mm for each meter of fill over the top of the pipe whichever is greater but not more than num inches num mm .
payment for this material shall be made under structure excavation .
the width of the excavation shall be num inches num mm greater than the outside diameter or span of the pipe and shall be filled with selected fine compressible material such as silty clay or loam taken from selected grading operations or areas beyond the right of way and paid for as foundation backfill .
this material shall then be lightly compacted in num inch num mm compacted lifts and shaped as specified above .
d placing pipe .
num .
general .
proper facilities shall be provided for lowering the sections of pipe into the prepared trench .
the pipe laying shall begin at the downstream end of the pipe line .
the lower segment of the pipe shall be in contact with the shaped bedding throughout its full length .
bell or groove ends of rigid pipe and outside circumferential laps of flexible pipe shall be placed facing upstream .
flexible pipe shall be placed with longitudinal laps or seams at the sides .
paved invert pipe shall be laid so that the longitudinal center line of the paved segment coincides with the designated flow line .
all flexible c.s .
or c.a .
pipes num inches num mm or larger in diameter shall be shop elongated or field strutted except for arch pipe and concrete lined pipe .
details for field strutting shall be as provided by the plans and shall be accomplished prior to placing any embankment adjacent to the structure .
only horizontal ties shall be used in strutting paved invert pipe .
the pipe shall be laid in the trench with the separate sections firmly joined together and with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing up stream and with longitudinal laps on the sides .
any metal in joints which is not protected by galvanizing shall be coated with suitable asphaltum paint .
if headwalls are to be placed the ends of the pipes laid on a skew shall be neatly cut off parallel with the centerline of the highway and flush with the outside face of the headwalls .
num .
multiple pipe culverts .
where multiple lines of pipe are used they shall be spaced far enough apart to permit thorough tamping of earth between adjacent lines .
to this end the adjacent sides of circular pipe shall be at least num times the nominal pipe diameter apart or num feet num m whichever is less .
spacing for arch pipe shall be as shown on the plans .
section num roadway pipe culverts num num .
joining pipe .
a .
rigid pipe concrete c.i .
rigid pipe may be of bell and spigot tongue and groove or other approved design unless a specific type is specified .
the method of joining pipe sections shall be such that the ends are fully entered and the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even .
joints shall be sealed with bituminous plastic cement preformed flexible sealant rubber gaskets or other type sealers that may be approved .
joints shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sealed and shall be sealed for the full circumference of the joint unless otherwise directed .
when joining round r.c .
pipe only rubber gaskets shall be used unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
when bituminous plastic cement is used the interior surface of the hub beginning at the lip of the normal interior surface of the pipe shall be coated with a layer of sealing material that will cover at least num times the distance measured along the surface of the hub parallel to the normal length of the pipe .
the thickness of the mastic placed shall be such that it will provide a uniform seal between the edges of the pipe sections being joined approximately num of an inch num mm on the inside shoulder of the hub and approximately num of an inch num mm of material on the remaining area to be covered .
when preformed flexible sealant is used it shall be placed according to the manufacturers requirements .
no joint shall be considered satisfactory when the space between the edges of the pipes being joined exceeds num of an inch num mm for more than num times the circumference of the pipe .
the inside of the joint shall be wiped and finished smooth .
rubber or other types of gaskets shall be installed as recommended by the manufacturer b .
flexible pipe c.s .
c.a .
flexible pipe shall be firmly joined by coupling bands of an approved type .
joints shall be thoroughly cleaned before being joined and shall be sealed for the full circumference of the joint with an approved sealer unless otherwise directed .
num .
inspection .
all pipe shall be inspected before any backfill is placed .
any pipe found to be out of alignment unduly settled or damaged shall be taken up and relaid or replaced .
e backfilling pipe .
num .
general .
after the pipe has been installed the pipe trench shall be backfilled with the best of the suitable material excavated from the trench if none of this excavated material is suitable material from the roadway shall be used and paid for as such or suitable material shall be hauled in and used with payment being made under the classification of the material ordered used .
for backfilling above a point num foot num mm above the top of the pipe material from the trench may be used unless unsuitable for embankment .
backfilling will not be permitted until authorized by the engineer .
num .
placing and compaction of backfill .
the backfill material shall be compacted at near optimum moisture content in layers not exceeding num inches num mm compacted thickness to a density of not less than num percent of aashto t num density by methods detailed in section num .
mechanical tampers shall be used unless another method of compaction is approved in writing inundation or jetting will not be permitted unless specified on the plans .
care shall be exercised to thoroughly compact the backfill under the haunches of the pipe and to insure that the material is in intimate contact with the pipe .
the backfill shall be brought up evenly in layers on both sides of the pipe for its full length until the trench is filled or up to subgrade elevation if the trench is in cut .
when the plans require stone or aggregate backfill the material will be compacted in layers not exceeding num inches to the satisfaction of the engineer .
mechanical tampers or vibrator plate compactors shall be used unless another method of compaction is approved in writing .
section num roadway pipe culverts num when the top of the pipe is exposed above the top of the trench embankment material shall be placed and compacted for a width on each side of the pipe equal to at least twice the horizontal inside diameter of the pipe or num feet num m whichever is less .
the embankment on each side of the pipe for a distance equal to the horizontal inside diameter of the pipe shall be of the same material and compacted in a normal manner .
all pipe after being bedded and backfilled as specified in this section should be protected by a num foot num m cover of fill before heavy equipment is permitted to cross during construction of the roadway .
num .
protection of pipe .
the contractor shall exercise necessary care in installing and backfilling pipe and it shall be his responsibility to see that the pipe is not damaged by lateral forces during backfilling by heavy loads operating over the pipe or by other causes .
all damaged pipe shall be replaced or repaired by the contractor at his own expense at the option of and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
any pipe not true to designated alignment and grade within specified tolerances or any pipe that shows settlement due to faulty installation shall be relaid or replaced by the contractor without additional compensation .
any pavement that settles or breaks over a pipe shall be replaced or repaired by the contractor at the option of the engineer without additional compensation .
all pipe lines shall be thoroughly cleaned out prior to final acceptance .
f jacking boring pipe .
for pipe sizes less than num inches num mm in diameter the tunneling equipment used in the jacking boring operation shall have a steerable cutting head equipped with a grade indicator .
for pipe sizes num inches num mm in diameter and greater the tunneling equipment used in the jacking boring operation shall be a laserguided tunnel boring machine tbm .
the use of unguided augertype boring equipment will not be permitted .
the tunneling equipment shall also be equipped with a closedface cutting head or otherwise equipped to prevent unstable soils from entering the tunnel .
the tolerance for grade control shall be plus or minus num feet per num feet num mm per num m of length .
the tolerance for line shall be num feet per num feet num mm per num m of length .
smooth steel pipe shall be continuously welded at joints to form a rigid watertight installation .
any coating disturbed during the welding procedure shall be repaired both inside and outside in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the accepted length of pipe culverts laid as ordered will be measured along the bottom flowline or invert of the pipe complete in place .
measurements will be made between inside walls of designated structures junction boxes inlets etc .
and along the centerline of the flowline of special fittings elbows wyes etc ..
the above applies to round or arch beveled or unbeveled pipe .
however in no case will measurement be made for lengths greater than the sum of the nominal laying lengths of the pipe sections used or for lengths greater than the length of culvert ordered by the engineer .
no separate measurement for payment will be made for the excavation andor backfill volume needed to reroute water for temporary drainage which might be necessary for the proper installation of the pipe or to perform the imperfect trench method of installation .
structure excavation and foundation backfill including that necessary for the installation of roadway pipe of a temporary nature when ordered will be measured and paid for as prescribed in section num .
the accepted length of pipe culverts jacked bored as ordered and acceptably installed will be measured along the bottom flowline or invert of the pipe complete in place .
the limits of measurement of jacked bored pipe under this section will not exceed the length along the flowline of the pipe from face to face of the boring pit or the length shown on the plans except as otherwise directed in writing by the engineer whichever is less .
there will be no separate measurement for payment for structure excavation and foundation backfill for pipe installed by the jacking boring method .
section num corrugated metal structural plate pipe arch pipe and arch culverts num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted length of pipe culverts measured as above provided will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices for the various sizes and types of pipe provided in the proposal complete in place which shall be payment as herein provided and also for all work equipment materials and incidentals connected with the execution of the class bedding specified for installation except that foundation backfill and structure excavation shall be paid for separately .
b pipe size class bedding and optional types .
the internal diameter of circular pipe the span and rise of arch pipe the class of pipe the class of pipe bedding if other than class c and the type or types of pipe allowed will be shown in the item name .
the internal diameter of jacked bored pipe and the type or types of pipe allowed will be shown in the item name .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm roadway pipe class bedding per linear foot meter numb ___ inch mm span ___ inch mm rise roadway pipe class bedding per linear foot meter numc _____ inch mm roadway pipe jacked installation per linear foot meter if other than class c so note .
show acceptable types of pipe .
specify smooth steel class __ r.c .
etc .
if applicable .
examples specific type class ____ r.c .
or ____ gage mm c.c.s.p.i .
or ____ gage mm c.c.s .
or ____ gage mm c.c.a.p.i .
or____ gage mm c.c.a .
optional types class ____ r.c .
or equal strength c.c.m.p.i .
or class ____ r.c .
or equal strength c.c.m .
section num corrugated metal structural plate pipe arch pipe and arch culverts num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing corrugated metal structural plate pipe arch pipes and arches coated and uncoated of the sizes plate thickness and dimensions required by the plans and installing such at the locations shown by the plans or designated all in conformity with these specifications to the lines and grades given .
the corrugated metal plate pipe shall be full circle or other approved pipe shapes .
corrugated metal plate arches shall be part of circle construction anchored on footings floor or grillage of description shown on the plans .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the provisions of division num materials .
specific reference is made to section num corrugated metal structural plate for pipe and arches .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the pipe or arch structure shall be carefully erected according to plans and erection drawings and true lines and grades as given on approved foundations .
arches shall be set in galvanized steel shapes on concrete or masonry footings or on timber grillages or concrete floors built in full compliance with the specifications for sections num num or num .
the structure shall be erected on its permanent foundations .
b erection .
structural plate pipe pipe arches and arches shall be erected in their final position by connecting the plates with bolts at longitudinal and circumferential seams .
drift pins may be used section num slotted drains num to facilitate matching of holes .
each plate shall have legible identification numerals to designate its position in the structures .
all plates shall be placed in the order recommended by the manufacturer with joints staggered so that not more than three plates come together at any one point .
all bolts shall be drawn tight before beginning the backfill and shall have not less than num nor more than num footpounds num nor more than num nm of torque in their final tightening for steel plate or not less than num nor more than num footpounds num nor more than num nm for aluminum plates .
c excavation bedding and backfill .
this work shall be performed as specified in section num. d elongation or strutting .
all structural plate pipes of num inches num mm or larger diameter shall be shopelongated or field strutted as shown on the plans .
strutting shall be accomplished prior to placing any embankment adjacent to the structure .
strutting will not be required where required elongation has been fabricated into the plates at the factory .
elongation or strutting of plate arch pipe will not be required .
elongated pipe shall be installed with the longer axis vertical .
num method of measurement .
corrugated metal structure plate pipe arch pipe and arch culverts structure excavation and foundation backfill will each be measured in the same manner as specified in article num .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the length determined as above described will be paid for at the contract unit prices per meter for corrugated structural plate pipe arch pipe or arch culverts of the several sizes as the case may be which prices and payments shall constitute full compensation for furnishing handling erecting installing and backfilling the pipe or arches and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this item but will not constitute payment for any concrete masonry steel reinforcement or excavation .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm ___ inch mm plate b.c .
if applicable corrugated steel or aluminum p.i .
if applicable structural plate pipe per linear foot meter numb ___ inch mm span ___ inch mm rise ___ inch mm plate b.c .
if applicable corrugated steel or aluminum p.i .
if applicable structural plate arch pipe per linear foot meter numc ___ inch mm span ___ inch mm rise ___ inch mm plate b.c .
if applicable corrugated steel or aluminum structural plate arch per linear foot meter section num slotted drains num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing a slotted drain which provides a drainage slot along the longitudinal section of the drain .
this drainage slot shall be formed by either the angle slot design or the grate slot design as shown by plan details .
unless the plans or proposal designates which design to use or requires a special design the contractor shall have the option to select either design but once selected the same design shall be used throughout the project .
when required by the plans the contractor shall furnish and install a specified special design slotted drain .
also when required by the plans the contractor shall furnish and install a special design slotted drain which provides a variable height drainage slot along the longitudinal section of the drain .
num materials .
the materials for the slotted drain shall meet the requirements shown on special drawing no .
cspnum and the requirements given in this section .
the department has established a list of products approved for use .
these products can be found on list iinum slotted drain pipe of the departments manual materials sources and devices with section num slotted drains num special acceptance requirements available from the bureau of materials and tests .
the contractor may choose from any of these products unless otherwise noted .
backfill material shall be class a concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
job control test cylinders will not be required for this concrete .
num construction requirements .
a general .
num .
connections to existing structures .
connections to existing structures may require the use of a transitional fitting andor sections of pipe to provide a suitable connection without damage to the grates or drains etc .
of the structures .
num .
end seals .
when the drain or pipe begins or terminates without a connection to other pipes or drainage structures the pipe end shall be sealed or plugged with a suitable cap as shown on plan details properly connected to provide a waterproof connection .
b slotted drain pipe .
this type pipe is designed to be placed with the slotted drain at or near the pavement shoulder or median surface .
the general construction requirements of article num are applicable except as modified by the following excavation shall be kept as nearly as possible to the minimum width depth and length shown on the plans .
the pipe shall be supported or held in place in such a manner as to permit flow of the concrete backfill material around the pipe .
the drainage slot shall be protected during installation by a removable wood strip heavy duty tape or other suitable material adequately performing the intended function affixed to the slot to prevent infiltration of material into the pipe .
after finishing the surface the protective covering shall be removed .
under no circumstances shall any portion of the slot extend above the paving material or curb and gutter section .
joints for corrugated steel slotted drain pipe shall be made using approved connecting bands meeting the requirements of subarticle numd .
num method of measurement .
the accepted length of slotted drain laid as ordered will be measured in linear feet along the bottom flowline or invert of the slotted drain complete in place .
connections to other structures i.e .
elbows pipe joints etc .
will not be measured for payment unless shown otherwise on the plans .
excavation and backfill will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
slotted drain measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid complete in place which shall be full compensation for fabricating furnishing and installing a slotted drain meeting the requirements noted herein and the details shown on the plans this includes a variable height grate or special design drain when required for furnishing and installing connections to other structures when required for all excavation backfill satisfactory disposal of surplus materials and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm slotted drain pipe per linear foot meter specify corrugated steel concrete specify the special design etc .
only if applicable .
specify with variable height grate etc .
if applicable .
section num storm sewers num section num storm sewers num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and constructing storm sewers of the kind strength and size pipe provided in the proposal in accordance with the requirements of these specifications and installing such sewers at the locations shown on the plans or designated and in conformity with established lines and grades .
these items shall also include the furnishing and construction of such joints necessary cutting and connections to other pipe catch basins endwalls etc .
as may be required to complete the work shown on the plans or directed .
num materials .
a general .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate provisions of division num materials with specific reference made to section num. b abbreviations concrete pipe p.c .
for plain concrete r.c .
for reinforced concrete corrugated metal c.m .
for any acceptable corrugated metal pipe covered by these specifications protective coating c. for any protective coating of metal pipe allowed by these specifications paved invert p.i .
corrugated steel c.s .
for plain corrugated steel c.c.s .
for coated corrugated steel c.c.s.p.i .
for coated c.s .
paved invert corrugated aluminum c.a .
for plain corrugated aluminum c.c.a .
for coated c.a .
c.c.a.p.i .
for coated c.a .
paved invert smooth lined s.l .
for smooth lined c.s.l.c.m .
for coated smooth lined corrugated metal c.s.l.c.s .
for coated smooth lined corrugated steel c.s.l.c.a .
for coated smooth lined corrugated aluminum smooth flow s.f .
for smooth flow c.s.f.c.m .
for coated smooth flow corrugated metal c.s.f.c.s .
for coated smooth flow corrugated steel c.s.f.c.a .
for coated smooth flow corrugated aluminum concrete lined c.l .
c.c.l.c.s .
for coated c.l .
corrugated steel vitrified clay v.c .
for vitrified clay high density polyethylene hdpe for high density polyethylene high performance polypropylene pp for high performance polypropylene c optional types of pipes provided a specific type of pipe is not specified by the plans or proposal the contractor will be permitted to install any of the optional types of pipe herein .
substitutions will only be allowed with hydraulically equivalent pipes .
the hydraulic equivalence of optional types of pipes will be shown on the plans .
optional types of pipe shall meet the following criteria diameters less than or equal to num inches num mm p.c .
v.c .
class num c.s.l.c.m .
num gage num mm c.s.f.c.m .
num gage num mm c.c.l.c.s .
p.v.c .
or hdpe .
diameters greater thannum inches num mm class num r.c .
class num c.s.l.c.m .
num gage num mm c.s.f.c.m .
num gage num mm c.c.l.c.s .
p.v.c .
or hdpe or pp hdpe and pp up to num inches num mm diameter with a minimum of num inches num mm of cover and a maximum of num feet num m fill height .
any storm sewer pipe to be placed under a section num storm sewers num roadway or subject to continuous traffic shall be not less than a class num r.c .
or equivalent strength c.s.l.c.m .
c.s.f.c.m .
or c.c.l.c.s .
pipe .
the fill height charts on the plans for roadway pipe shall be used to determine strengths or equivalent strengths for storm sewer pipe .
all smooth flow pipe num inches num mm or larger in diameter shall be shop elongated .
the contractor may furnish a higher grade pipe than those specified above or with written approval a cast iron or ductile iron pipe meeting the appropriate requirements of section num provided no additional cost is incurred by the department for such substitution .
any installation once started shall be completed using the same type of pipe unless specifically designated otherwise by plan details or requested and approved in writing .
num construction requirements .
a general methods .
pipe shall not be laid except in the presence of the engineer or inspector and shall not be covered until approved .
any sewer line placed under a roadway or subject to continuous traffic shall be placed in accordance with the appropriate provisions of article num. b excavation and foundation .
num .
excavation .
the trench shall be excavated beginning at the outlet end and proceeding upgrade true to the established line and grade .
tunneling will not be permitted unless authorized in writing .
the removal of trees or other obstructions encountered necessary for the construction of the work shall be done by the contractor without extra compensation .
trenches shall be properly sheeted and braced wherever needed .
unless otherwise directed the trench shall be of the size within the limits provided by subarticle numa .
num .
foundation .
if deemed necessary foundation backfill as provided by article num shall be used .
the foundation in the trench shall be so formed and treated as to prevent subsequent settlement .
if the foundation is in rock foundation backfill consisting of a num inch num mm cushion of well compacted sand fine gravel slag broken stone or other approved material shall be placed upon the rock .
if the excavation has been made deeper than necessary proper bearing shall be secured by means of a layer of fine gravel or other suitable material .
in all cases recesses shall be formed to receive the bell or hub so that the full length of the pipe barrel will rest on the trench bottom .
c laying pipe .
num .
general .
the laying of pipes in finished trenches shall be started at the outlet end and proceed upgrade so that the spigot or groove ends point in the direction of flow .
all pipes shall be laid with ends abutting and with not more than num inch num mm variation from established alignment at the vertical centerline or from grade at the flow line .
the bottom of the trench shall be shaped accurately to the outside surface of the pipe for a depth at least num times the outside diameter .
pipes shall be fitted and matched so that when laid in the work they will form a sewer with a smooth uniform invert .
hubs or bells shall be carefully cleaned before pipes are lowered into the trenches .
pipe shall be so lowered as to avoid damage and unnecessary handling in the trench .
num .
sealing joints .
unless otherwise directed all joints shall be sealed as specified in item numdnum for the entire circumference of the pipe .
trenches shall be kept free from water until mortar in the joints and masonry has hardened .
walking or working on or over the completed pipe line except such as is necessary for tamping or backfilling will not be permitted until at least num feet num m of backfill is in place over the pipe .
section num storm sewers num d backfilling .
num .
material .
all trenches and excavations shall be backfilled with approved natural soil or if directed or provided by the plans with foundation backfill material after the sewer pipe is laid therein unless otherwise specified .
num .
methods .
backfilling shall not begin until mortar joints have cured or until backfilling is authorized by the engineer .
the material shall be carefully deposited simultaneously on both sides of the pipe in uniform layers not to exceed num inches num mm in compacted thickness solidly tamped or rammed with proper tools so as not to injure or disturb the pipe .
if stone gravel or slag is provided or specified as backfilling the sewer pipe shall be covered with clean gravel or broken stone or slag placed around and above it to a height of not less than num inches num mm above the upper surface of the pipe .
the remainder of the trench shall then be backfilled with the excavated material .
the contractor shall restore all roadways or crossings which are disturbed by the placing of sewers to their original condition and shall replace all surface material and all paving macadam sidewalk sod or other surface disturbed furnishing all the new material necessary without extra compensation except as herein provided .
whenever excavation is made for installing sewer pipe across private property the topsoil disturbed by excavation operations shall be replaced as nearly as possible in its original position .
bedding placing and backfilling of storm sewers within roadway limits shall be as provided in section num using the type and strength of pipe specified on the plans .
num .
compaction and density .
compaction and density requirements shall meet that specified by article num .
ramming of material over around and to within num foot num mm above the top of the sewer shall be done by careful use of approved mechanical tampers .
num .
clean up .
after completing the backfill the contractor shall immediately remove all surplus material dirt rubbish and all tools and other equipment or material leaving the entire site and the whole area involved in the construction operations in a neat and presentable condition .
all pipe lines shall be thoroughly cleaned out prior to final acceptance .
e testing for excessive deformation in p.v.c .
hdpe and pp pipe .
p.v.c .
hdpe and pp pipe shall be tested for excessive deformation .
the test shall be performed by the contractor in the presence of the engineer .
testing shall be conducted no fewer than num days after the completion of the compaction of all fill over the pipe .
the contractor shall conduct the test by pulling a nine point mandrel through the entire length of the pipe by hand .
the mandrel shall meet the following requirements it shall be made of steel or aluminum it shall have an effective diameter of num of the nominal inside diameter of the pipe it shall be at least as long as the diameter of the pipe it shall be fitted with pulling rings at each end it shall be stamped or engraved on some segment other than a runner with the pipe size and mandrel outside diameter .
prior to testing the contractor shall provide the engineer with a proving ring to verify the mandrel size .
the deformation is unacceptably excessive if the mandrel can not be pulled through the pipe by hand without damaging the pipe .
if the deformation is unacceptably excessive the pipe shall be replaced without extra compensation .
there will be no direct payment for testing .
num method of measurement .
storm sewer pipe excavation and foundation backfill will each be measured in the same manner as specified in article num .
section num cleaning existing drainage structures num num basis of payment .
a general .
the accepted length of a storm sewer pipe measured as specified above will be paid for at the respective contract unit price for the sizes and types of pipe provided in the proposal complete in place which shall be payment in full for all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work except that excavation and backfill will be paid for as provided in section num. b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm storm sewer pipe per linear foot meter numb ___ inch mm span ___ inch mm rise storm sewer pipe per linear foot meter show specific type if required .
example p.c .
or v.c .
or class ____ r.c .
or class ____ c.s.l.c.s .
or class ____ c.s.l.c.a .
c.s.f.c.s .
c.s.f.c.a .
or c.c.l.c.s .
section num cleaning existing drainage structures num description .
this section shall cover the work of cleaning existing drainage structures including all types of pipes reinforced box culverts underdrain outlets and other drainage structures shown on the plans .
num materials .
there will be no material requirements other than the hardware cloth for the rodent screens on underdrain outlets shown on the plans .
num construction requirements .
pipes box culverts catch basins manholes drop inlets pipe underdrain outlets and other drainage structures shown on the plans shall be cleaned of all dirt leaves limbs roots grass sludge grease trash and other debris .
obstructions within a num foot distance outside of the inlet and outlet ends of the drainage structures shall also be removed as a part of cleaning the structures .
all materials removed during cleaning shall be disposed off of the rightofway in accordance with the requirements for disposal given in section num .
the contractor shall implement the best management practices bmps noted in section num for the control of sediment that will be removed during the cleaning .
the contractor shall perform the work so that there is always adequate drainage of the roadway at all times .
the contractor shall repair all damage to drainage structures that result from cleaning methods and procedures that are used without consideration for the protection of the drainage system .
the engineer will not allow the use of any cleaning method or equipment that may result in damage to the structure or damage to the areas adjacent to the structure .
rodent screens shall be fabricated and installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the cleaning of existing pipes box culverts catch basins manholes drop inlets pipe underdrain outlets and other drainage structures will be measured per each drainage structure or per foot along the length of the drainage structure .
measurement will be made only once for each item cleaned unless severe conditions result in the need for repeated cleaning and the repeated cleaning is not caused by the activities of the contractor .
all recleaning due to the activities of the contractor shall be done at no additional cost to the department .
pipes culverts and other drainage structures measured for cleaning along the length of the structure will be classified for payment based on the horizontal opening of the drainage structure .
section num side drain pipe num the diameter of round pipe and the span of span and rise pipe will be shown as a horizontal opening classification for payment .
each pipe will be measured separately for payment regardless of the number of pipes adjacent to each other at one location .
the horizontal opening of a culvert will also be shown as a classification for payment .
the horizontal opening of a culvert shall be the horizontal opening in a single barrel culvert or the sum of the horizontal openings in a multiple barrel culvert .
two classifications of horizontal opening will be given for the purpose of measurement for payment .
the first classification of horizontal opening shall be structures with an opening less than or equal to num inches .
the second classification of horizontal opening shall be structures with an opening greater than num inches .
if separate pay items are not shown on the plans for cleaning catch basins manholes and other appurtenances to the structures measured by linear feet pipes and culverts the cleaning of these appurtanancies will be measured for payment by including the length through the appurtenances in the total number of linear feet of the attached drainage structure .
the length through an appurtenance will be added to the length of the largest structure connected to the appurtenance .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract unit price for cleaning existing drainage structures shall be full compensation for all materials tools and labor required for cleaning the structures disposing of all materials that are removed from the structure and installing new rodent screens .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa cleaning pipe underdrain outlets per each numb cleaning existing catch basin per each numc cleaning existing manhole per each numd cleaning existing drop inlet per each nume cleaning existing less than or equal to num horizontal opening per linear foot numf cleaning existing greater than num horizontal opening per linear foot pipe culvert etc .
section num side drain pipe num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing side drain pipe in conformity with these specifications .
the word pipe in this section shall include both round and arch pipe .
it shall cover only those pipes specifically designated on the plans as side drain it shall not apply to other pipes laid parallel to the roadway .
the kind type and size of each side drain pipe will be shown on the plans or in the proposal .
the location of each will be shown on the plans or designated .
this section shall include furnishing and constructing such joints and necessary cutting to provide connections to other drainage facilities and other incidentals necessary for completion of the work .
num materials .
a general materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials with specific reference made to sections num num and num .
section num side drain pipe num b abbreviations side drain sd concrete pc for plain concrete pipe rc for reinforced concrete pipe vitrified clay vc corrugated metal cm for plain corrugated metal ccm for coated corrugated metal corrugated aluminum ca for plain cca for coated corrugated steel cs for plain ccs for coated plastic abs for acrylonitrile butadiene styrene hdpe for high density polyethylene pp for high performance polypropylene pvc for polyvinyl chloride c optional types of pipes .
provided a specific type of pipe is not specified by the plans or proposal the contractor will be permitted to install any of the optional types of pipe herein .
substitutions will only be allowed with hydraulically equivalent pipes .
the hydraulic equivalence of optional types of pipes will be shown on the plans .
optional types of pipe shall meet the following criteria diameters less than or equal to num inches num mm p.c .
v.c .
num gage num mm c.m .
with greater than or equal to num inches num mm of cover num gage num mm cm with less than num inches num mm cover or p.v.c .
a.b.s .
or hdpe or pp pipe hdpe and pp up to num inches num mm diameter with minimum of num inches num mm of cover and maximum of num feet num m fill height .
diameters greater than num inches num mm class num r.c .
v.c .
num gage num mm c.m .
p.v.c .
or hdpe and pphdpe and pp up to num inch num mm diameter with a minimum of num inches num mm of cover and a maximum of num feet num m fill height .
higher strength andor coated finish cm pipe when required will be noted in the pay item .
the contractor may at his option substitute a higher grade pipe than specified or with written approval a cast iron or ductile iron pipe meeting the appropriate requirements of section num provided no additional cost is incurred by the department for such substitution .
any installation once started shall be completed using the same type of pipe unless specifically designated otherwise by plan details or requested and approved in writing .
num construction requirements .
a general .
construction details for installing side drain pipe shall be as specified in section num except as modified in this section .
the requirements of subarticle numb for partial construction of fills in advance of trenching will not apply .
trenches shall be excavated as specified in section num .
no separate measurement or direct payment will be made for excavation and backfill of trenches for side drain pipes .
special bedding will not be required however the pipe shall be bedded with ordinary care in the loosened soil foundation of the trench .
should the material at the elevation of the bottom of the pipe be ledge rock or other unsuitable bedding it shall be excavated without additional compensation .
the pipe shall be installed so that it will not vary at any point more than num inch num mm from established line and grade .
the pipe shall be backfilled in thoroughly compacted layers not more than num inches num mm in thickness using pneumatic tamps unless otherwise directed but there will be no specific density requirements .
backfill shall be ordinary excavation material .
section num relaid pipe num b testing for excessive deformation in pvc hdpe and pp pipe .
pvc hdpe and pp pipe shall be tested for excessive deformation .
the test shall be performed by the contractor in the presence of the engineer .
testing shall be conducted no fewer than num days after the completion of the compaction of all fill over the pipe .
the contractor shall conduct the test by pulling a nine point mandrel through the entire length of the pipe by hand .
the mandrel shall meet the following requirements it shall be made of steel or aluminum it shall have an effective diameter of num of the nominal inside diameter of the pipe it shall be at least as long as the diameter of the pipe it shall be fitted with pulling rings at each end it shall be stamped or engraved on some segment other than a runner with the pipe size and mandrel outside diameter .
prior to testing the contractor shall provide the engineer with a proving ring to verify the mandrel size .
the deformation is unacceptably excessive if the mandrel can not be pulled through the pipe by hand without damaging the pipe .
if the deformation is unacceptably excessive the pipe shall be replaced without extra compensation .
there will be no direct payment for testing .
num method of measurement .
side drain pipe will be measured in the same manner as specified in article num .
excavation and foundation backfill for side drain pipe will not be measured separately for payment but the cost thereof shall be included in the contract unit price bid for the side drain pipe .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
accepted side drain pipe measured as specified above will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot meter for the respective items which shall be payment in full for furnishing pipe excavating trenches placing pipe backfilling trenches and for all tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm side drain pipe per linear foot meter numb ___ inch mm span ___ inch mm rise side drain pipe per linear foot meter show specific type class or wall thickness if required .
example v.c .
or p.c .
or class ____ r.c .
or ___ gage mm c.a .
or ___ gage mm c.s .
or ___ gage mm c.c.s .
or ___ gage mm c.c.a .
section num relaid pipe num description .
this section shall cover the work of relaying pipe regardless of size in accordance with the requirements of these specifications at the locations shown on the plans or designated and in accordance with established lines and grades .
the item shall include furnishing and construction of such joints necessary cutting and connections to other pipes the removal and preservation of that portion of pipe culverts in place which are to be replaced by new or relaid pipe it shall also include furnishing and construction of such joints necessary cutting and connections to other pipes catch basins endwalls etc .
as may be required to complete the work shown on the plans or directed .
num materials .
a salvaged pipe .
pipe to be relaid shall be selected salvaged pipe which is approved for relaying .
b joint material .
an applicable type of joint sealer required by article num shall be used .
section num roadway pipe rehabilitation num num construction requirements .
a removing pipe in place .
removal of pipe shall be in accordance with the provisions of article num. b laying pipe .
pipe shall be handled so that there will be no loss or damage before relaying .
pieces or sections of pipe found satisfactory by the engineer shall be relaid in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate sections governing culvert pipe .
special reference is made to construction details of section num which are applicable to side drain pipe relaid .
num method of measurement .
relaid pipe will be measured in the same manner as specified in article num .
excavation and foundation backfill for relaid pipe will not be measured separately for payment but the cost thereof shall be included in the contract unit price bid for the relaid pipe .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
the accepted length of relaid culvert pipe measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for either roadway pipe relaid or side drain pipe relaid regardless of size or type of pipe .
said unit costs shall be full compensation for the salvaging of the pipe in conditions for reuse and the reinstallation of the pipe in accordance with the provision for roadway pipe as covered by section num and section num for side drain pipe including all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
no payment will be made for the removal of existing pipe lines replaced by new or relaid pipe except for that portion of the old pipe removed outside the limits of excavation provided by subarticle numa .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa roadway pipe relaid per linear foot meter numb side drain pipe relaid per linear foot meter section num roadway pipe rehabilitation num description .
this section shall cover the work of rehabilitating roadway pipe using a curedinplace liner polyethylene pe liner pipe or a liner shown on the plans at the locations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num materials .
a curedinplace liner .
curedinplace liner material shall be insituform cureline inliner master liner ultraliner pvc alloy pipeliner trolining gmbh kaiserstrabe num or other curedinplace lining system proposed by the contractor and accepted by the engineer .
all curedinplace lining products shall comply with astm fnum rehabilitation of existing pipelines and conduits by the inversion and curing of a resinimpregnated tube astm fnum rehabilitation of existing pipelines and conduits by pulledinplace installation of curedinplace thermosetting resin pipe cipp or astm fnum rehabilitation of existing pipelines and conduits by the pulled in place installation of glass reinforced plastic grp curedinplace thermosetting resin pipe cipp including appendices .
the liner shall be a flexible tube fabricated to a size that when installed shall fit the internal circumference of the existing roadway pipe .
allowance shall be made for circumferential stretching during insertion so that the final cured product is snug against the wall of the host pipe .
the material shall be able to stretch to fit irregular pipe sections and negotiate bends .
any compounds process water or condensate used during the installation or curing operation shall be contained removed from the site and disposed of in a manner approved by the engineer .
section num roadway pipe rehabilitation num b pe liner pipe .
polyethylene liner pipe fittings and couplings shall meet the requirements given in of aashto m num polyethylene pe liner pipe num to num mm diameter based on controlled outside diameter .
c liner shown on the plans .
any liner shown on the plans may be used as an alternate to curedinplace liner or pe liner pipe .
the material requirements for alternate liners will be shown on the plans .
d minimum length of liner .
the minimum length of liner material shall span the distance from the inlet to the outlet of the pipe unless required otherwise by the engineer or shown otherwise on the plans .
num construction requirements .
a submittals .
the contractor shall submit eight copies of the product data and installation procedures of the curedinplace liner or pe liner pipe for review and distribution .
the product data for pe liner pipe shall include actual certified test reports meeting aashto m num .
the submittal of the product data and installation procedures shall be complete to the point that the physical properties of all required materials are identified and all installation procedures and containment and disposal measures are thoroughly described .
an incomplete submittal will be returned to the contractor for completion .
polyethylene liner pipe shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in astm f num insertion of flexible polyethylene pipe into existing sewers .
the contractor shall submit these procedures and the proposed nominal pipe size as specified in aashto m num and the standard dimension ratio sdr of pipe required as specified in astm f num .
the annular space between the pe liner pipe and the original pipe shall be shown on the submittal as being filled with a low density grout or concrete .
the proposed mix design for the low density grout or concrete shall be shown on the submittal .
the submittal shall be delivered to the project engineer .
the project engineer will review the submittal for completeness and then forward the submittal to the aldot construction engineer .
the construction engineer will forward the submittal to the aldot design engineer .
work shall not begin until the submittal has been returned to the project engineer for distribution to aldot field personnel for inspection of the work .
b inspection of pipe prior to rehabilitation .
inspection of the pipeline shall be performed by experienced personnel trained in locating breaks obstacles connections and junctions by closed circuit television .
the interior of the pipeline shall be carefully inspected to determine the location of any conditions which may prevent proper installation of the liner into the pipe .
prior to installation of pe liner pipe the contractor shall follow the inspection requirements given in astm f num .
a video tape and suitable log shall be submitted to the engineer for review prior to the installation of the liner .
the installation of the liner shall not begin until the engineer informs the contractor that the review of the inspection tape and log has been completed .
c cleaning and repairing pipe .
the contractor shall clean the pipeline of all obstructions that will prevent the insertion of the liner .
prior to installation of pe liner pipe the contractor shall follow the cleaning requirements in astm f num .
the contractor shall perform minor repairs to the pipe patching spalls sealing holes etc ..
if the extent of obstruction and damage is severe the engineer may require the contractor to uncover the pipe remove the obstructions and repair the pipe .
excavation and repair work will be paid for as extra work .
the contractor shall not install the liner in roadway pipe sections having dropped joints or line swags without prior approval from the engineer .
d water .
the contractor shall provide for the flow of water around the section or sections of pipe designated to be rehabilitated .
any diversion of water shall be approved by the engineer prior to diversion .
section num roadway pipe rehabilitation num the contractor shall notify the local fire department and water board and obtain approval and water meter if required before using fire hydrants .
e delivery storage and handling of materials .
the contractor shall be responsible for delivery storage and handling of products .
products shall be kept safe from damage .
damaged products shall be removed from the job site promptly and shall be replaced with undamaged products .
f installation procedure .
the contractor shall install the pipe liner in accordance with the installation procedures that have been distributed by the engineer after being submitted by the contractor .
the contractor shall install the pe liner pipe in accordance with the installation procedures given in astm f num .
the annular space between the existing pipe and the pe liner pipe shall be filled with a low density grout or concrete .
a full protocol for time rate of travel of the ultraviolet assembly pressures and amount of lamps in operation shall be maintained and submitted as documentation for the correct ultraviolet light curing of the fabric tube .
the protocol shall be recorded automatically from the beginning of inflation of the liner until the end of the curing .
it shall also show the basic information in a header such as project name address section and date to clearly identify the renovated section .
g sealing pipe at junction box inlet or headwall .
if there is not a tight seal in a junction box inlet or headwall the contractor shall apply a sealant at that point by pressure injection or other means to ensure a watertight seal .
the repair shall be rechecked after num hours to ensure that the seal is holding .
if the seal does not hold the contractor shall continue to apply sealant until a seal is made and there are no leaks .
the contractor shall seal the pipe without additional compensation .
h inspection of pipe after rehabilitation .
inspection of the pipeline shall again be performed by experienced personnel trained in the use of closed circuit television for the inspection of pipes .
the interior of the pipeline shall be carefully inspected to determine if there are areas where the liner does not adhere to the pipe wall or if there are ruptures in the lining .
a video tape and suitable log shall be submitted to the engineer for review after the installation of the liner .
all repairs shall be made without additional compensation .
i clean up .
after the installation work and inspection has been completed and the work found acceptable the contractor shall clean up the work area .
all excess material and debris not incorporated into the permanent installation shall be disposed of by the contractor .
the work area shall be left in a condition equal to or better than prior condition .
j warranty .
all pipe rehabilitation work shall be warranted to be free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of five years from the date of rehabilitation .
the contractor shall obtain a written warranty from the supplier of the curedinplace liner system or pe liner pipe and submit it to the engineer after the initial inspection and before installation begins .
the warranty should include the statement that any defect that occurs during a five year period that is attributable to the liner installation or materials will be repaired by the supplier at no cost to the aldot .
it should be noted in the warranty that the five year period shall begin upon final acceptance of the rehabilitated pipe .
num method of measurement .
roadway pipe rehabilitation will be measured in linear feet meters along the flowline of the rehabilitated pipe .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
roadway pipe rehabilitation measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for submittals furnishing and installing the pipe lining cleaning and minor repair of the pipe the warranty and for all equipment tools labor and section num trench drains num incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the contract price shall also include television inspection before and after liner installation .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa inch mm roadway pipe rehabilitation per linear foot meter numb inch mm span inch mm rise roadway pipe rehabilitation per linear foot meter section num trench drains num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing trench drains .
the drains shall be of castinplace concrete drains or prefabricated drainage channels encased in castinplace concrete .
the drains shall be constructed to form a channel for the collection and flow of stormwater .
grates shall be installed to allow water to pass into the channel and to allow vehicular traffic to move over the drains .
num materials .
a drain channel .
the minimum width and depth of the drain channel below the drain grate will be shown on the plans .
the drain channel shall have a rounded bottom .
connections to structures shall not restrict the hydraulic flow of the drain channel .
b drain channel roughness coefficient .
the drain channel shall have a smooth interior face .
the roughness coefficient for the interior face of a prefabricated drain channel shall not be greater than num .
the interior face of a cast inplace drainage channel shall have a class num surface finish in accordance with the requirements given in section num. c concrete .
the concrete shall be class a concrete in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the minimum amount of concretearound the drain channel will be shown on the plans .
concrete shall be placed in a monolithic pour between inlet structures .
construction joints will only be allowed if approved by the engineer .
if joints are allowed they shall be constructed with a waterstop and a concrete lug or keyway approved by the engineer .
d grates and frames .
the grates and the frames for supporting the grates shall be made from ductile iron conforming to astm a num grade num or cast iron conforming to astm a num class numb .
the opening in the grate shall be a minimum of num of the open area at the top of the drain except where ada regulations apply as shown on the plans .
the contractor shall submit results from an independent laboratory verifying that the grates meet the requirements given in aashto m num for proof load testing .
grate retaining devices shall not obstruct the flow of water into the channel or through the channel .
a grate shall fit into the frame without rocking .
it shall be held in place by stainless steel tamper resistant locking devices .
the contractor shall submit results from an independent laboratory verifying that the grates will withstand a minimum repetitive pullout resistance of num pounds per foot num kn per meter after the completion of num hours of salt spray in conformance with astm b num .
the grate retaining device shall withstand without maintenance cyclic vertical loads of num pounds num kn .
frames shall be independent of the channel and shall be anchored into the surrounding concrete by metal extensions attached to the frame at all four corners .
rails that are cast into the concrete shall be astm a num structural steel post fabrication galvanized per astm a num .
section num trench drains num e prefabricated drain channel .
prefabricated drain channels shall be made from components that are anchored by the placement of concrete to encase the anchoring lugs that are integral to the channel components .
the physical properties of the prefabricated drain channel shall be compatible with the physical properties of the concrete .
the thermal coefficient of expansion shall be similar to that of the concrete so that separation does not occur between the prefabricated drain channel and the encasement concrete .
prefabricated drain channels shall interlock with adjoining channels .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the contractor shall submit the trench drain manufacturers recommendations for installation to the engineer prior to beginning installation .
this submittal shall include a quantity listing of all materials required for the construction of the trench drain .
the submittal shall be delivered to the engineer at least ten calendar days prior to beginning the construction of the trench drain .
the contractor shall resubmit the trench drain data if the submittal is determined to be inadequate .
construction shall not begin until the submittal is complete .
a representative of the trench drain manufacturer shall be present to advise the engineer of the adequacy of the first trench drain units that are installed .
the installation of the trench drain units shall not begin until the manufacturers representative is present at the site of installation .
connection to an existing structure may require the use of a transitional fitting andor sections of pipe to provide a suitable connection without damage to the grate drain and structure .
connections to structures shall be approved by the engineer prior to construction .
when the trench drain begins or terminates without a connection to other pipes or drainage structures the trench drain end shall be sealed or plugged with a suitable cap as shown on the plans .
the seal shall provide a waterproof connection .
b trench excavation .
excavation shall be kept as nearly as possible to the minimum width depth and length shown on the plans .
c drain placement and protection .
precast drains shall be installed to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the trench slot shall be protected during installation by a removable wood strip heavy duty tape or other suitable material affixed to the slot to prevent infiltration of material into the drain .
after finishing the surface the protective covering shall be removed and any debris that entered the trench shall be removed .
c concrete placement .
the furnishing and placement of the concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the prefabricated trench drain components shall be supported or held in place in such a manner as to permit flow of the concrete backfill material around the drain .
the concrete encasement adjacent and beneath the drain channel shall be a minimum thickness of num inches num mm .
drain channels shall be positioned in the excavated trench so that when finished the surrounding concrete backfill will encase the channel .
concrete backfill shall be placed in the trench against undisturbed material at the sides and bottom of the trench and in a manner that will prevent floating or shifting of the trench drain components and voids in or segregation of the concrete .
where necessary earth plugs shall be constructed and compacted at the ends of the planned concrete backfill to contain the concrete within the trench .
concrete shall be finished flush with adjacent surfacing .
the surface of the concrete shall be textured with a broom or burlap drag to produce a durable skidresistant surface .
under no circumstances shall any portion of the trench drain slot extend above the paving material or curb and gutter section .
section num micropiles num num method of measurement .
the trench drain will be measured in linear feet meters along the top of the drain .
connections to other structures i.e .
elbows pipe joints etc .
will not be measured for payment unless shown otherwise on the plans .
excavation and backfill will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
trench drain will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for fabricating furnishing and installing the trench drain components .
it shall also be full compensation for furnishing and installing connections to other structures for all concrete excavation backfill satisfactory disposal of surplus materials and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm trench drain per linear foot meter section num micropiles num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing furnishing and installing micropiles as shown on the contract plans approved working drawings and as specified herein .
the contractor shall be responsible for furnishing all design materials products accessories tools equipment services transportation labor and supervision and manufacturing techniques required for design installation and testing of micropiles and top attachments .
the contractor shall select micropile type size micropile top attachment and construction methods .
the contractor shall estimate the ground to grout bond value and determine the required bond length .
the contractor shall install a system that will provide the load capacities shown in the working drawings .
num materials .
a general .
handling storage and control of materials shall comply with appropriate portions of section num .
all materials shall conform to the requirements set forth in division num materials .
specific reference is made to applicable portions of the specifications section num fine aggregate article num water b cement .
cement shall be type i type ii or type iii and shall meet the requirements of section num. c steel reinforcement .
reinforcing steel shall be grade num and shall meet the requirements given in aashto mnum and section num .
bars shall be threaded a minimum of six inches or continuous spiral deformed bars designed for coupling .
bar couplers if required shall develop the ultimate tensile strength of the bars without any evidence of failure .
d pipecasings .
permanent steel castingpipe shall meet the tensile requirements of american petroleum institute api nnum as used in the design submittal having the diameter and minimum wall thickness shown in the working drawings .
micropile casing shall be smooth noncorrugated clean watertight steel and threaded to develop the required design strength of the casing section .
welded splices will not be allowed .
casings shall be new the use of used casings will not be allowed .
the contractor shall provide documentation stating the origin in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numa pipe description and quantity of pipecasing delivered to the project .
additionally the contractor shall submit a minimum of two representative coupon tests from an independent testing laboratory or mill certifications for each load of pipecasing delivered for use on the project .
section num micropiles num e plates and shapes .
structural steel plates and shapes for micropile top attachments shall conform to astm anum or astm anum grade num and section num. f centralizers .
centralizers shall be installed to align the reinforcing bars in the micropile .
centralizers shall be manufactured from schedule num pvc pipe steel or other material that will not be detrimental to the performance of the micropile .
the use of wood centralizers will not be allowed .
centralizers shall have a means for being securely attached to the reinforcing bar .
the centralizers shall be sized to position the reinforcing bar within num inch of the center of the micropile to allow tremie pipe insertion to the bottom of the micropile and to allow free flow of grout .
g grout .
the grout shall be a neat cement or sandcement grout .
the contractor shall submit the proposed grout mix design to the materials and tests engineer for approval no later than num calendar days prior to production .
the contractor shall make arrangements for an aldot approved testing laboratory to test the proposed grout mix design .
the mix design shall include the following num .
a list of all the materials used in the design of the mix with the source and vendor code indicated .
num .
compressive strength test results verifying that the proposed mix design will have a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days and a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days .
compressive strength shall be tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num compressive strength of hydraulic cement mortar using num mm or num inch specimens .
test results for the proposed grout mix that have been completed within one year of the start of work and that have been performed by an aldot approved testing laboratory may be submitted for verification of the mix design .
num micropile design and submittals a contractor qualifications .
the micropile contractor shall be experienced in the design construction and load testing of micropiles and have at least five years of experience and constructed at least three projects of similar size and capacity to those required by this project .
the contractor shall have previous micropile drilling and grouting experience in soilrock similar to project conditions .
the contractor shall submit construction details structural details and load test results for at least three previous successful micropile load tests from different projects of similar scope to this project .
the contractor shall assign a supervising project manager with experience on at least three projects of similar scope to this project completed over the past five years to supervise the work performed .
the contractor shall not use consultants or manufacturers representatives to satisfy the supervising manager requirements of this section .
the onsite foremen and drill rig operators shall also have experience on at least three projects over the past five years installing micropilesprebored pile retaining wall structures .
b micropile design .
the micropiles shall be designed in accordance with the guidelines given in fhwa nhinum micropile design and construction reference manual by a professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama with experience in the design of at least three successfully completed micropile projects over the past five years .
the overall length of a micropile will be selected such that the required capacity is developed by skin friction between grout and rock socket over a suitable c o n t i n u o u s length in competent rock .
a factor of safety of num shall be used when calculating the allowable geotechnical capacity of the bond zone .
the micropile top attachment shall effectively distribute the design load to the concrete footing such that the concrete bearing stress does not exceed a m e r i c a n c o n c r e t e i n s t i t u t e a c i building code and the bending stress in the steel plates does not exceed american institute of steel construction aisc allowable stresses for steel members .
section num micropiles num the geotechnical capacity shall not rely on bond from clay soils or fractured weathered rock layers intermittent rock layers with clay seams rock underlain by voids or boulders above the competent rock .
the contractor may independently conduct any geotechnical investigation necessary to provide a proper design and installation of the system .
any additional investigation needed during construction to define foundation conditions will be at no additional cost to the department .
if a manmade obstruction is encountered during installation of a micropile that prevents the advancing of the micropile the micropile shall be abandoned and filled with grout .
the contractor and aldot shall determine an acceptable alternative plan .
contractor shall be paid for abandoned holes that are due to no fault of the contractor .
c submittal of micropile design details and installation plan num .
completed project reference and personnel lists at least num calendar days before the planned start of micropile construction the contractor shall submit num copies of the completed project reference list and a personnel list .
the project reference list shall include a brief project description with the owners name and current phone number and load test reports .
the personnel list shall identify the micropile system design engineer if applicable supervising project engineer drill rig operators and onsite foremen to be assigned to the project .
the personnel list shall contain a summary of each individuals experience and be complete enough for the engineer to determine whether each individual satisfies the required qualifications .
the engineer will approve or reject the contractors qualifications within num calendar days after receipt of a complete submission .
additional time required due to incomplete or unacceptable submittals will not be cause for time extension or impact or delay claims .
all costs associated with incomplete or unacceptable submittals shall be borne by the contractor .
work shall not be started nor materials ordered until the engineers written approval of the contractors experience qualifications is given .
the engineer may suspend the work if the contractor uses nonapproved personnel .
if work is suspended the contractor shall be fully liable for all resulting costs and no adjustment in contract time will result from the suspension .
num .
working drawings the contractor shall submit working drawings and relevant structural design calculations for the micropile system to the bridge engineer for review prior to the start of any work .
a registered professional engineer in the state of alabama shall stamp the submittal .
the following information shall be included with the working drawings and design calculations submittals a written summary report which describes the overall micropile design .
micropile details for each micropile type load showing o micropile design load .
o elevation view showing type and size of permanent casing and reinforcing steel o minimum total bond length o total micropile length .
o micropile top attachment .
micropile numbering system for records .
grouting plan and grout mix designs including o procedure for placing the grout and methods for accurately monitoring and recording the grout depth and grout volume .
o the contractor shall clearly identify the minimum specified grout compressive strength at which load tests shall be performed .
o estimated curing time for grout to achieve specified strength .
o procedure and equipment for contractors monitoring of grout quality and volume installed .
detailed stepbystep description of the construction procedure and sequence including personnel and a quality control plan .
this stepbystep section num micropiles num procedure shall be shown on the working drawings in sufficient detail to allow monitoring of the construction and quality of the micropiles .
information on headroom and space requirements for installation equipment that verify that the proposed equipment can perform at the site .
details for plumb hole drilling .
details for centralizers .
pipe and reinforcement splice type and locations .
details of the load testing apparatus for verification and proof loading tests .
calibration documentation of the hydraulic jacks to be used for load testing .
details for exploratory drilling of micropiles with rock sockets the engineer will review the design calculations working drawings and material requirements and construction procedure for conformance to the plans and specifications .
the engineer will not approve these parts of the submittal but will review them to ensure that they are sufficiently complete to allow the construction of the micropiles .
the engineer will return the submittal for corrections distribute the submittal for construction inspection or contact the contractor to establish a mutually agreeable date and time for a meeting to discuss the submittal .
the contractor will be notified of changes in the submittal deemed necessary within seven days after the meeting .
micropile construction shall not begin until the submittal has been distributed for construction inspection and the engineer informs the contractor in writing that the proposed working drawings design calculations material requirements and micropile construction procedure are complete .
distribution of the submittal for construction inspection shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to satisfactorily complete the work as detailed on the plans and in the specifications .
any proposed modification of the construction procedure during construction shall be submitted to the bridge engineer for review and distribution .
d construction site survey .
the contractor shall review the available subsurface information and visit the site to assess the site conditions equipment access conditions and location of the existing structures and above ground facilities .
the contractor is responsible for field locating and verifying the location of all utilities shown on the plans prior to beginning any work .
the contractor shall not interrupt any existing utility services unless authorized in writing .
the contractor shall notify the appropriate parties of any utility locations different from those on the provided plans that may require modification to the micropile locations or design modifications .
e preconstruction meeting .
a preconstruction meeting will be scheduled by the engineer and held prior to the start of micropile construction .
the engineer geotechnical engineer area materials engineer bridge engineer construction engineer prime contractor micropile specialty contractor micropile design engineer excavation contractor and geotechnical instrumentation specialist if applicable shall attend the meeting .
attendance is mandatory .
the preconstruction meeting will be conducted to clarify the construction requirements for the work to coordinate the construction schedule and activities and to identify contractual relationships and delineation of responsibilities amongst the prime contractor and the various subcontractorsspecifically those pertaining to excavation for micropile structures anticipated subsurface conditions micropile installation and testing micropile structure survey control and site drainage control .
num construction requirements .
a installation .
the contractor shall install the micropile using core drilling rotary drilling percussion drilling auger drilling driven casing or other acceptable means unless otherwise directed .
micropiles can be installed in the drilled hole after drilling or can be advanced by the drill .
num .
exploratory drilling of micropiles with rock sockets when the micropiles design capacity is developed from a rock socket the contractor shall perform exploratory drilling or probing to determine the location extent and quality of section num micropiles num the rock in which the socket will be constructed .
a minimum of num of the micropile locations in each footing shall be drilled or probed .
the drillingprobing locations shall be selected such that three num subsurface profiles are generated transverse to the long dimension of the footing and two num subsurface profiles are generated transverse to the short dimension of the footing .
the drilling or probing shall extend into competent rock a minimum of num times the length of the proposed micropile design rock socket .
production micropile drilling and installation for a given footing shall not begin until the results of this exploration are submitted and approved by the engineer .
this submittal shall include the following a plan view showing all micropiles in the footing with corresponding micropile numbers and locations of exploratory borings .
drill logs indicating the existing ground elevation at the time of drilling micropile number bottom of footing elevation elevations of soil and rock layers estimate of rock quality and proposed micropile tip elevations .
subsurface information contained in the contract plans may be used in lieu of exploratory drilling for individual micropiles with prior approval of the materials and tests engineer .
num .
drilling and grouting all foreign material dislodged or drawn into the hole during construction of the micropiles shall be removed .
centralizers shall be used when installing central bar reinforcement .
the contractor shall allow free flow of the grout and provide a positive means of support for maintaining the position of the casing and reinforcement until the grout has set .
reinforcement shall be lowered in the stabilized hole .
reinforcement shall not be forced or driven into the hole .
the contractor shall dispose of cuttings construction debris and spilled or wasted grout in accordance with the plans and federal state and local laws .
the grout shall be mixed to produce a uniform mixture free of lumps and undispersed cement .
the grout pump shall be equipped with a pressure gauge to monitor grout pressures .
provide a pressure gauge capable of measuring pressure of at least num psi or twice the actual grout pressures used whichever is greater .
use grouting equipment capable of pumping the grout in one continuous operation .
continuously agitate the mixed grout during pumping operations .
the grout shall be injected from the lowest point of the drilled borehole and filled without voids to the top of the micropile .
the grout may be pumped through grout tubes casing hollowstemaugers or drill rods .
the quantity of the grout and the grout pressures shall be recorded .
the contractor shall control the grout pressures to prevent excessive heave but shall fill the entire micropile with grout .
grout test specimens shall be made on production grout to ensure that the grout meets the requirements of subarticle numg .
the grout test specimens shall be molded and tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num .
the contractors testing technicians shall clearly label each grout cube test specimen and identify the micropiles associatedrepresented by each set of specimens .
a set of tests specimens is comprised of three grout cubes .
the requirements for grout testing are as follows a. batch grouting if small batch grouting operations are used a minimum of three sets of grout test specimens shall be created for each batch of micropile grout produced .
one set of test specimens shall be designated for threeday compressive strength testing and one set shall be designated for numday compressive strength testing .
one set of test specimens shall be given to the engineer for transport to the department laboratory for verification testing .
b .
continuous grouting if continuous grouting operations are used a minimum of three sets of grout test specimens shall be created for every num cubic yards or portion thereof of mircopile grout produced one set of test specimens shall be designated for threeday compressive strength testing and one set shall be designated for numday compressive strength testing .
one set of test specimens shall be given to the engineer for transport to the department laboratory for verification testing .
the department will perform random verification testing for numday compressive strength on a frequency of one test for every num batches for batch grouting operations or one test for every num cubic yards or fraction thereof for continuous grouting operations .
section num micropiles num the test verification sample will be selected as outlined in aldotnum selecting samples by the random numbers method .
the department will test the remaining four samples in the event of a low break .
b installation and post construction records .
the contractor shall maintain an independent record of all field installation activities .
an aldot representative shall also maintain an independent record of all field installation activities .
at the end of each day the contractor and the aldot representative shall reconcile and agree upon the quantities installed .
a log for each micropile shall be created and signed by a representative of the contractor and aldot .
the micropile records shall be submitted to the project manager within num hours after installation is completed for each micropile .
the records shall include the following information micropile drilling duration .
final tip elevation .
total micropile length .
description of unusual installation behavior or conditions .
grout quantities pumped .
grout test specimen compressive strength results .
micropile materials and dimensions .
post construction records shall be submitted to the project manager within num calendar days after completion of work and shall include the following asbuilt drawing showing locations of the micropiles and length .
detailed drilling records .
grouting records indicating the cement type and quantity injected .
c performance and testing .
the contractor shall perform both load capacity verification testing prior to the installation of production micropiles and proof load testing of designated production micropiles .
proof load tests shall be performed on production micropiles at locations selected by the project manager .
no load tests shall be performed before the grout has reached the minimum specified compressive strength .
all load tests shall be performed with a jack calibrated in accordance with aldotnum and subitem numgnumd .
num .
verification testing of test pile .
the contractor shall install a minimum of one num nonproduction test pile for performance verification load testing outside of the proposed footing at the location shown on the plans or as designated by the engineer .
the test pile shall not be a production pile .
the test pile shall be loaded to num percent the design load and evaluate the ultimate pile capacity to insure compliance with job performance requirements .
the contractor shall notify the engineer one week before installing test micropile groups that are to be performance tested .
no micropile test pile or production piles shall be load tested until three days after grouting operations are complete .
load tests shall be performed in accordance with astm dnum standard test methods for deep foundations under static axial compressive load using procedure a quick test .
the axial compressive load shall be applied with a calibrated hydraulic jack .
apply the test load in increments of num of the anticipated failure load to maximum of a num percent of the foundation load shown on the bridge layout .
add load increments until reaching a failure load but do not exceed the maximum testing load num of the foundation load .
during each load interval maintain load increments for num min and record test readings taken at num num num and num min after completing the application of each load increment .
use the same time interval for all loading increments through the test .
creep tests shall be performed at the test interval equal to num percent of the design load .
remove the load in six approximately equal increments .
keep the load constant for num min using the same time intervals for all unloading decrements .
record test readings taken at num and num min after completing each load decrements .
take and record readings at num num num and num min after removing all loads .
refer to a constant elevation benchmark for readings of settlements and rebounds .
record them to num in .
for each increment or decrement of load .
test piles will be considered acceptable if results meet the following criteria no failure occurs .
section num micropiles num the ultimate pile capacity from the load test is not less than num percent of its design load .
the measured total pile head movement for the required load hold at num percent of the design load does not exceed num inches between one and five minutes the micropile shall be considered acceptable with respect to creep .
for verification load tests where the measured total movement exceeds this criteria the load shall be held for an additional num minutes .
if the measured total movement over this additional time period does not exceed num inches between six and num minutes the micropile shall be considered acceptable with respect to creep .
if the test pile fails the contractor shall modify the design andor the construction procedure and install and test another pile at no additional expense to the department .
any design modifications that require changes to the micropile type or to the structure shall be submitted in writing to the bridge engineer for review and acceptance .
any micropile production price increases due to design modifications andor changes in the construction procedure shall be incurred by the contractor .
num .
proof load testing of production micropiles .
load capacity proof load testing shall be performed on production micropiles to ensure that the contractors construction procedure has remained constant and that the micropiles have not been placed in a soil zone not represented by the test pile verification testing .
proof load testing shall be performed on a minimum of five percent num in num of the production micropiles with a minimum of one proof load test per footing .
the engineer will randomly select the micropile locations for testing as outlined in aldotnum .
proof load test shall be performed as described in item numcnum .
except that micropiles shall be tested to a maximum load of num percent of the design load and the test shall be performed in accordance with the requirements given in astm dnum standard test methods for deep foundations under static axial tensile load using procedure a quick test .
a test pile that acceptably passes the verification test shall not be considered equivalent to a proof load test micropile and shall not be used in determining the number required proof load tests .
proof load tests shall be considered acceptable if results meet the following criteria no pull out failure occurs at or before the maximum load .
pullout failure is defined as the load at which attempts to further increase the test load result in continued pullout movement of the micropile .
the measured total pile head movement for the required load hold at num percent of the design load does not exceed num inches between one and five minutes the micropile shall be considered acceptable with respect to creep .
for verification load tests where the measured total movement exceeds this criteria the load shall be held for an additional num minutes .
if the measured total movement over this additional time period does not exceed num inches between six and sixty minutes the micropile shall be considered acceptable with respect to creep .
if a proof load test on a production pile fails the contractor will be directed to proof test another nearby micropile .
the failed micropile test will not be considered for the minimum five percent requirement for proof load testing of production micropiles .
for failed micropiles and further construction of other micropiles the contractor shall modify the design the construction procedure or both .
modifications may include installing replacement micropiles incorporating additional micropiles of reduced load capacities modifying installation methods increasing the bond length or changing the micropile type .
any design modifications that require changes the micropile type or to the structure shall be submitted in writing to the bridge engineer for review and acceptance .
any micropile production price increases due to design modifications andor changes in the construction procedure shall be incurred by the contractor .
num .
allowable tolerances .
centerline of piling shall not be more than two inches from the indicated plan position .
section num soil nail retaining wall num micropile alignment shall be within two percent of design alignment .
top elevation of micropile shall be within two inches of the design elevation .
centerline of reinforcing steel shall not be more than num inches from the indicated horizontal location .
the length of micropilesdepth of the socket shall not exceed num percent of the design length without written approval from the engineer .
failure to obtain written approval may result in the rejection of the micropile .
num method of measurement .
a micropiles .
measurement will be made as follows for the quantity as specified or directed by the engineer micropiles will be measured in linear feet installed and accepted .
the accepted length of micropiles will be no more than num percent of the design length without written approval from the engineer .
b verification load test pile .
the verification test micropile installed as directed by the plans and these specifications will be measured complete and in place .
the verification test micropile will not be included in the measurement of the linear feet of production piles .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for test pile cutoffs .
verification test micropiles will be measured per each .
c proof load testing .
micropile proof load tests will be measured per each .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract unit price paid for micropile includes full compensation for designing and furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in constructing micropiles including casings grout reinforcement cutting tips drill bits pile anchorage and disposing of materials resulting from pile installation complete in place as shown on the plans as specified in this specification and as directed by the engineer .
no payment will be made for micropiles that are damaged either during installation or after the micropiles are complete in place .
no payment will be made for additional excavation backfill concrete reinforcement nor other costs incurred from footing enlargement resulting from replacing rejected micropiles .
no payment will be made for micropile lengths longer than the accepted micropile length unless written approval is obtained prior to the installation of the micropile .
the contract unit price paid for micropile verification load test shall be full compensation for all labor materials equipment devices submittals and incidentals necessary to perform the required tests and submit the test results and shall be full compensation for site restoration after the test .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa micropiles per linear foot numb micropile verification load test pile per each numc micropile proof load test per each section num soil nail retaining wall num description .
this work shall consist of designing and constructing soil nail retaining walls at the locations shown on the plans .
the work shall include excavating in staged lifts in accordance with the approved contractors plan drilling and installation of the soil nails to the diameter and length required to develop the specified capacity grouting the nails providing and installing the specified drainage features providing and installing bearing plates washers nuts and other required miscellaneous materials and constructing the temporary shotcrete face if required and constructing the final structural facing .
the contractor shall select the excavation drilling and grouting methods and the section num soil nail retaining wall num diameter of the drill holes to meet the performance requirements specified herein or as shown on the plans .
soil nail walls used for temporary shoring and which will have a service life less than num months may be designed with the less design stringent criteria outlined in section num below .
the requirements for the construction of shotcrete facing for the wall are given in section num .
num materials .
a steel bars for soil nails .
the steel bars shall be straight solid or hollow core and continuous without splices .
the bars shall conform to the requirements given in aashto m num for grade num or num or the requirements given in astm a num for grade num .
the bars shall be either deformed bars deformations for the anchorage coupling reinforcing bars that are threaded at the end for the anchorage coupling or continuous spiral deformed bars .
bars shall be threaded a minimum of num inches at the wall anchorage to allow proper attachment of a bearing plate and nut .
the threading for the anchorage may also be the continuous spiral deformed ribbing of bar deformations designed for coupling or threads that are cut into a reinforcing bar .
if threads are cut into a reinforcing bar the threaded portion of the bar shall be num inches long and the contractor shall install the next larger sized bar above the size of the required bar .
larger bars shall be furnished without extra compensation .
b coating and encapsulation of steel bars for soil nails .
num .
coating .
if epoxy coating is shown to be required on the plans the bars shall be coated by fusion bonded electrostatically applied epoxy coating in accordance with the requirements given in astm a num with the exception that the minimum thickness of coating shall be num inches .
bend tests will not be required .
all other test results shall be furnished to the engineer before the engineer will allow the installation of the bars .
coating will not be required over the threaded end at the wall anchorage .
the contractor shall handle and store epoxy coated bars in a way that will prevent them from being damaged beyond what is permitted by astm d num .
the contractor shall repair damaged epoxy coating in accordance with the requirements given in astm a num and the coaters recommendations using an epoxy field repair kit recommended by the epoxy manufacturer .
all repaired areas shall have a minimum num inch coating thickness .
num .
encapsulation .
the steel bars shall be encapsulated if this is shown to be required on the plans .
the encapsulation shall be a sheath that is composed of grout injected into a tube surrounding the bar .
the tube shall be corrugated hdpe tube conforming to the requirements given in aashto m num for type c or shall be corrugated pvc tube conforming to astm d num class numb .
the wall of the plastic tube shall be a minimum num inches thick .
a minimum of num inches of grout cover shall be placed over the epoxy coated bar within the plastic tube .
encapsulated bars shall not be moved or transported until the encapsulation grout has reached a compressive strength of at least num psi but not before num hours .
the contractor shall replace damaged encapsulated bars .
num .
sampling of bars .
the contractor shall arrange for the engineer to select a sample of one bar of each diameter bar for testing after epoxy coating or after encapsulation if encapsulation is required .
c sacrificial steel loss .
if epoxy coating andor encapsulation are not shown as required in the plans the soil nail bars shall be designed for sacrificial steel loss .
the following procedure shall be used to calculate the effective bar properties for design num .
obtain the values of cross sectional area ac nominal average inner diameter di nominal yield strength fy and nominal ultimate strength fu from the manufacturers data .
num .
calculate the outer diameter do as do numac dinum num num .
reduce the value of do by the num inches .
call this the effective diameter deff .
section num soil nail retaining wall num num .
calculate the effective area aceff by using deff instead of do as aceff num deffnum dinum num .
calculate the effective section modulus seff and the effective moment of inertia ieff for the num. reduced section as follows seff num deffnum dinumdeff ieff num deffnum dinum num .
calculate the effective nominal yield strength fyeff and effective nominal ultimate strength fueff as follows fyeff fy aceffac fueff fu aceffac the reduction in steel thickness shall also be taken into account for the couplers and nuts .
d bearing plates welded shear stud connectors nuts and washers for anchorage of soil nails .
bearing plates nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements given in section num .
bearing plates shall be galvanized according to the requirements given in aashto m num for grade num .
nuts and washers shall be galvanized according to the requirements given in aashto m num for class c. welded shear stud connectors shall be one of those shown in list iinum of the aldot manual materials sources and other devices with special acceptance requirements .
studs shall be attached in accordance with the requirements given in ansiaashtoaws dnumdnumm num bridge welding code and article num .
welded shear studs shall be galvanized according to the requirements given in aashto m num for grade num. e welded wire steel reinforcement for the shotcrete wall face .
the welded wire reinforcement shall be the dimensions and wire thickness as shown in the contractor final design drawings and in conformance with the requirements given in article num .
the welded wire mesh shall be galvanized according to the requirements given in aashto m num for grade num. f centralizers for alignment of soil nail .
centralizers shall be installed to align the soil nail in the hole drilled in the soil .
centralizers shall be manufactured from schedule num pvc pipe steel or other material that will not be detrimental to the performance of the soil nail wood shall not be used .
centralizers shall have a means for being securely attached to the soil nail .
the centralizers shall be sized to position the nail bar within num inch of the center of the drill hole to allow tremie pipe insertion to the bottom of the drill hole and to allow grout to freely flow up the drill hole .
g grout .
the grout shall be a neat cement or sandcement grout .
the contractor shall submit the proposed grout mix design to the materials and tests engineer for approval no later than num calendar days prior to production .
the contractor shall make arrangements for an aldot approved testing laboratory to test the proposed grout mix design .
the mix design shall include the following num .
a list of all the materials used in the design of the mix with the source and vendor code indicated .
num .
compressive strength test results verifying that the proposed mix design will have a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days and a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days .
compressive strength shall be tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num compressive strength of hydraulic cement mortar using num mm or num inch specimens .
test results for the proposed grout mix that have been completed within one year of the start of work and that have been performed by an aldot approved testing laboratory may be submitted for verification of the mix design .
h shotcrete .
shotcrete shall meet the requirements given in section num. i cement .
cement shall be meet the requirements given in section num and shall be either type i or iii .
j film protection for overnight exposure .
sheet materials for overnight exposure protection shall be waterproof material andor polyethylene film conforming to the requirements given in aashto m num .
section num soil nail retaining wall num k drainage materials .
num .
geocomposite sheet drain .
geocomposite sheet drain shall be manufactured with a drainage core and a drainage geotextile encapsulating the core such as mirafi gnumn sitedrain sheet num or an approved equal .
the drainage core shall be manufactured from long chain synthetic polymers composed of at least num by weight of polypropylenes polyester polyamine polyvinyl chloride polyolefin or polystyrene and shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi when tested in accordance with astm d num procedure a .
the geotextile shall have a minimum flow rate of .num gallons per second per foot of width when tested in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num .
the test conditions shall be an applied load of num psi at a gradient of num after a num hour seating period .
the contractor shall furnish manufacturers certified test reports for the geocomposite sheet drain .
the test results shall include quantity of material represented by the tests .
the material tested shall be taken from the actual production run of material that is furnished for installation .
the lot size shall be equivalent to the total amount of drainage mat required for each retaining wall on the project .
num .
underdrain outlet pipe .
underdrain and drainage outlet pipe shall meet the requirements given in section num .
num soil nail wall design requirements .
the soil nail walls shall be designed using the service load design sld procedures contained in the federal highway administration fhwa publication geotechnical engineering circular no .
num soil nail walls report no .
fhwanhinum .
the required partial safety factors allowable strength factors and minimum global stability soil factors of safety shall be in accordance with the guidelines given in the fhwa manual unless specified otherwise by the engineer .
soil nail corrosion protection requirements known utility locations easements and right of way will be as shown in the plans .
structural design of any individual wall elements not covered in the fhwa manual shall be by the service load or load factor design methods in conformance with combinations of loads and other appropriate articles of the numth edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges including current interim specifications .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for all assumptions made about the strength of the soil and rock and all implications that the properties of the soil and rock have on the design constructability and stability of the wall .
in accordance with fhwa geotechnical engineering circular no .
num for design with permanent applications no more than num of the nails yield capacity less any calculated sacrificial steel loss shall be used .
num soil nail wall design and drawing submittal .
a initial submittal of design calculations and construction drawings .
the contractor shall submit num sets of design calculations and wall construction drawings to the materials and tests engineer as an initial submittal .
the initial submittal shall also identify the soil nail contractor the onsite supervisors and the drill operators and include the experience requirements given in article num and item numhnum .
changes in personnel will not be permitted without a written request by the contractor .
this submittal shall be made within num calendar days after the date of the notice to proceed .
if clarifications are required one set will be returned to the contractor with comments for clarification .
the initial submittal will be returned to the contractor for clarification within num calendar days after the receipt of the initial submittal .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days for each clarification of the initial submittal and the materials and tests engineer will be allowed num calendar days to determine if further clarification is necessary .
the materials and tests engineer will not approve the submittal of design calculations and wall construction drawings but will review the submittal for completeness .
the initial submittal of the design calculations and wall construction drawings shall be sealed by a licensed professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama .
section num soil nail retaining wall num b final submittal of design calculations and wall construction drawings .
when the materials and tests engineer informs the contractor that the design calculations and wall construction drawings are complete the contractor shall submit num sets of calculations and drawings a mylar sepia set of the drawings and an electronic file in adobe acrobat format of the drawings as a final submittal .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days to make the final submittal .
the contractor shall not begin wall construction or incorporate materials into the work until the materials and tests engineer returns one set of the completed design calculations and wall construction drawings to the contractor .
the final submittal of the design calculations and wall construction drawings shall be sealed by a licensed professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama .
c minimum requirements for the submittal of design calculations .
num .
configuration of the design submittal .
the design calculation sheets shall have the project number wall location initials of preparer and page number at the top of each page .
an index page shall be provided to provide a list of the pages of the design calculations .
the design calculations shall include an explanation of all symbols on the calculations and a description of computer programs used in the design .
num .
description of design methodology .
the design calculations shall contain a summary of the overall soil nail wall design methodology including references to the applicable design code requirements .
num .
diagrams of the critical cross sections .
the design calculations shall include diagrams of the critical design cross section geometry including soil and rock strata and the location magnitude and direction of the design slope external surcharge loads and piezometric levels .
the design cross sections shall also include the critical slip surface shown where it will result in the minimum factor of safety the required nail lengths and the strengths of the soil nails nail bar sizes and grades for each nail row .
num .
physical properties of the rock and soil .
the soil and rock shear strengths friction angle and cohesion unit weights and ground grout pullout resistances and nail drill hole diameter assumptions shall be shown for each soil and rock strata .
geotechnical data is provided in the contact documents .
supplementary geotechnical data may be available and may be obtained from the materials and tests engineer .
num .
factors of safety and load combinations .
partial safety factors and strength factors for service load design sld or load and resistance factors for load and resistance factor design lrfd shall be shown for the global stability pullout resistance nail bar tensile strength surcharges soil and rock unit weights nail head strengths and steel shotcrete and concrete materials .
load combinations and design loads used shall be given for a num year service life design for each wall on the project .
num .
wall facing and soil nail anchorage .
the design calculation submittal shall also include design calculations for the wall facing and nail anchorage including an analysis of the facing flexural strength punching shear strength tensile strength of the headed studs if used and the upper cantilever and minimum reinforcement ratio .
d minimum requirements for the submittal of wall construction drawings .
num .
plan view of the wall .
a drawing of the plan view of the wall shall be submitted .
the following details shall be shown on the plan view a reference baseline and elevation datum the offset from the construction centerline or baseline to the face of the wall at its base at all changes in horizontal alignment beginning and end of wall stations section num soil nail retaining wall num rightofway and permanent or temporary construction easements limits location of all known active and abandoned existing utilities adjacent structures and other potential interferences .
the centerline of any drainage structure or drainage pipe behind passing through or passing under the wall limit of longest nail .
num .
elevation view of the wall .
a drawing of the elevation view of the wall shall be submitted .
the following details shall be shown on the elevation view the elevation at the top of the wall at all horizontal and vertical break points and at least every num feet along the wall elevations at the wall base and the top of leveling pads for any cast in place facing beginning and end of wall stations the distance along the face of the wall to all steps in the wall base vertical and horizontal nail spacing with identification number assigned for each nail the location of wall drainage elements expansioncontraction joints in the facing if applicable existing and finish grade profiles both behind and in front of the wall a listing of the quantities for each partial view of the wall .
num .
plan notes and miscellaneous details .
plan notes shall be placed on the wall construction drawings to provide the information required to identify the design process and to serve as the requirements for the construction of the wall .
this information shall be a description of the design parameters with references to the applicable design codes general notes for constructing the wall including construction sequencing horizontal and vertical curve data affecting the wall and wall control points match lines and other details to tie the wall stationing to the centerline stationing a listing of the total summary of quantities showing the square yards of wall face areas length of nails amount of grout and other items of work nail wall typical sections including staged excavation lift elevations the batter of the wall and excavation face and nail size spacing and inclination and the details of corrosion protection drilling methods and equipment including the drill hole diameter and any variation of the required diameters along the wall alignment grouting placement procedures and equipment provisions for drain holes behind the wall typical details of production nails and test nails defining the nail length minimum drill hole diameter inclination and test nail bonded and unbonded test lengths details dimensions and schedules for all nails reinforcing steel wire mesh bearing plates headed studs andor attachment devices for shotcrete castinplace or prefabricated facings dimensions and schedules of all reinforcing steel including reinforcing bar bending details details and dimensions of all wall appurtenances such as barriers coping drainage gutters and fences details for constructing walls around drainage facilities details for terminating walls and adjacent slope construction details and procedures for performing the soil nail load capacity verification tests typical details of instrumentation installation along the verification nails including the list of proposed instruments complete and detailed installation procedures a wiring diagram detailing the wiring of the instruments to the central readout panels shop drawings and specifications for ancillary equipment such as readout panels protective covers conduit and enclosures details and procedures for performing the soil nail proof load tests section num soil nail retaining wall num examples of forms used for documentation of installation and testing .
num approved list of soil nail wall specialty contractors .
the following soil nail wall designbuild specialty contractors are approved richard goettle inc. num hamilton ave. cincinnati oh num rick slack phone num hayward baker inc. num nine north court alpharetta ga num john wolosick p.e .
phone num schnabel foundation co. num lower roswell road marietta ga num stephen dimino phone num f w construction po box num ozark al num phone num geostabilization international num north avenue grand junction co num reid bailey phone num www.geostabilization.com russo corporation num mims avenue sw birmingham al num phone num www.russocorp.com other soil nail wall specialty contractors will be given consideration for approval .
consideration for approval will be given to specialty contractors that can provide documentation that they have successfully designed and constructed at least num projects in the last num years where the construction of permanent soil nail retaining walls totals at least num square yards of wall face area and at least num permanent soil nails .
num construction requirements .
a site drainage control .
the contractor shall control all surface water that will affect construction of the soil nail retaining wall .
the contractor shall maintain all pipes or conduits used to control surface water during construction .
damage caused by surface water shall be repaired without extra compensation .
upon substantial completion of the wall surface water control pipes or conduits shall be removed from the site as directed by the engineer .
alternatively with the approval of the engineer pipes or conduits that are left in place may be fully grouted and abandoned or left in a way that protects the structure and all adjacent facilities from the migration of fines through the pipe or conduit creating potential ground loss .
localized areas of perched water seepage may be encountered during excavation at the interface of geologic units or from localized groundwater seepage areas .
the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer if unanticipated existing subsurface drainage structures are discovered during excavation .
the work shall be suspended in these areas until remedial measures meeting the engineers approval are implemented .
the cost of remedial measures required to capture and dispose of water resulting from encountering unanticipated subsurface drainage structures will be paid for as extra work .
all surface water runoff flows and flows from existing subsurface drainage structures shall be captured and directed separately from the wall drainage network .
these flows shall be conveyed to an outfall structure or storm sewer as directed by the engineer .
b excavation .
num .
safety during excavation and compliance with wall construction drawings .
the contractor shall carefully monitor the excavation work to make sure that the soil nail wall is safely constructed .
the wall construction and excavation sequence shall be performed in accordance with the requirements shown on the submitted wall construction drawings as distributed by engineer .
excavations that are steeper or deeper than those shown on the wall construction drawings shall not be made without written approval of the engineer .
num .
excavation and wall alignment survey control the contractor shall provide all the necessary survey and alignment controls for all excavation work .
the contractor shall locate and drill each drill hole within the allowable tolerances .
the excavation shall be performed in a manner which will allow the construction of the shotcrete construction facing to the required minimum thickness and to the required lines and grades .
section num soil nail retaining wall num where the asbuilt location of the front face of the shotcrete exceeds the allowable tolerance from the wall control line shown on the wall construction drawings the contractor shall be responsible for determining and bearing the cost of remedial measures necessary to provide proper attachment of nail head bearing plate connections and satisfactory placement of the final wall facing .
num .
coordination of general roadway excavation with wall excavation .
the contractor shall complete the clearing grubbing grading and excavation above and behind the wall before beginning the wall excavation .
the initial excavation shall not extend beyond the original ground elevation behind the wall or at the ends of the wall or beyond the limits shown on the soil nail wall construction drawings .
due to the close coordination that is required between the work of the soil nail wall designbuild specialty contractor and the forces performing the excavation work the excavation shall be performed as directed by the engineer .
the engineer will be advised by the soil nail wall specialty contractor of the need for setting the limits of excavation to allow the construction of the wall as proposed by the specialty contractor .
for any required rock blasting within num feet of the soil nail wall the contractor shall submit a plan for the blasting using controlled blasting techniques .
the plan shall be designed by a qualified blasting consultant deemed qualified for this work by the engineer .
blasting shall not begin until the engineer informs the contractor that the blasting plan is adequate to describe the blasting and the contractor accepts complete responsibility for the results of the blasting .
blasting shall not damage completed soil nail work or disrupt the areas where soil nails are required to be installed and shotcrete placed for the wall .
the contractor shall repair any damaged areas without compensation .
general roadway excavation shall be done in coordination with the soil nailing work .
num .
soil nail wall structure excavation .
the contractor shall perform the excavation to the final wall face using procedures that prevent over excavation prevent ground loss swelling air slaking or loosening prevent loss of support for completed portions of the wall prevent loss of soil moisture at the face and prevent ground freezing .
there will be no extra payment for costs associated with additional thickness of shotcrete or concrete or other remedial measures required due to irregularities in the cut face excavation overbreak or inadvertent over excavation .
the exposed unsupported final excavation face cut height shall not exceed the vertical nail spacing plus the required reinforcing lap or the shortterm standup height of the ground whichever is less .
the contractor shall complete excavation to the final wall excavation line and complete the application of the shotcrete in the same work shift unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
application of shotcrete may be delayed up to num hours if the contractor can show that the delay will not adversely affect the stability of the excavation face of the wall .
placement of a polyethylene film over the face of the excavation may be required by the engineer to reduce degradation of the cut face caused by changes in moisture .
damage to existing structures or completed portions of the wall structure shall be repaired without extra compensation where approval is given by the engineer for the extended face exposure period .
at the contractors option during each excavation lift nails may be drilled and installed through a temporary stabilizing berm if this is shown on the wall construction drawings .
the purpose of the stabilizing berm is to prevent or minimize instability or sloughing of the final excavation face due to ground conditions and drilling action .
the stabilizing berm geometry shall be such that the top of berm extending horizontally out from the bottom front face of the overlying shotcrete a distance of num foot and cut down from that point to the base grade for that excavation lift at the slope not steeper than numhnumv .
the contractor may use different berm geometry upon satisfactory demonstration that the different geometry provides satisfactory performance .
following the installation of nails in that lift the contractor shall excavate the temporary stabilizing berm to the final wall face excavation line and clean the final excavation face of all loose materials mud and other foreign matter which could prevent or section num soil nail retaining wall num reduce shotcrete bond .
the contractor shall ensure that installed nails and corrosion protection are not damaged during excavation of the stabilizing berm .
the contractor shall repair or replace nails or corrosion protection that are damaged or disturbed during excavation of the stabilizing berm as directed by the engineer without extra compensation .
the contractor shall not excavate the stabilizing berm until the nail grout has achieved a compressive strength of num psi but not before num hours .
hardened nail grout protruding from the final wall excavation line more than num inches shall be removed in a manner that prevents the fracturing of the grout at the nail head .
sledge hammer removal of grout is not allowed .
the use of hand held rock chippers is acceptable provided their use does not damage or disturb the remaining grout at the nail head the nail bar or corrosion protection .
alternate excavation and soil nail installation methods that meet these objectives may be submitted to the engineer for consideration by the engineer .
excavation to the next lift shall not proceed until nail installation reinforced shotcrete placement attachment of bearing plates and nuts and nail testing has been completed and accepted in the current lift .
nail grout and shotcrete shall have cured for at least num hours and shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi before the excavation of the next underlying lift .
the contractor shall notify the engineer immediately if raveling or local instability of the final wall face excavation occurs .
unstable areas shall be temporarily stabilized by means of buttressing the exposed face with an earth berm or other methods .
the contractor shall suspend work in unstable areas until remedial measures are developed .
num .
wall discontinuities .
where the contractors excavation and installation methods result in a discontinuous wall along any nail row the ends of the constructed wall section shall extend beyond the ends of the next lower excavation lift by at least num feet .
slopes at these discontinuities shall be constructed to prevent sloughing or failure of the temporary slopes .
if sections of the wall are to be constructed at different times prevent sloughing or failure of the temporary slopes at the end of each wall section .
num .
excavation face protrusion voids or obstructions .
the contractor shall remove all or portions of cobbles boulders rubble or other subsurface obstructions encountered at the wall final excavation face which will protrude into the design shotcrete facing .
the contractor shall be responsible for determining the method of removal of face protrusions including the method required to safely secure remnant pieces left behind the excavation face and for promptly backfilling voids resulting from removal of protrusions .
the contractor shall notify the engineer of the proposed method for removal of face protrusions at least num hours prior to beginning removal .
voids overbreak and excessive excavation beyond the wall excavation line shall be backfilled with shotcrete .
removal of face protrusions and backfilling of voids and areas of excessive excavation shall be incidental to the work of constructing the wall .
c shotcrete .
shotcrete shall be placed in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
where shotcrete is used to complete the top ungrouted zone of the nail drill hole near the face the nozzle shall be placed in the mouth of the drill hole to completely fill the void .
the contractor shall attach a bearing plate and nut to each nail head as shown on the wall construction drawings .
while the shotcrete is still plastic the bearing plate shall be uniformly seated on the shotcrete by hand wrench tightening of the nut .
if uniform contact is not achieved between the plate and shotcrete the nut shall be tightened by hand wrench tightening after the shotcrete has achieved initial set at num psi .
initial set of the shotcrete is defined in section num .
the plate shall be set in a bed of grout where uniform contact between the plate and shotcrete can not be provided .
the nut shall be tightened by hand wrench tightening after the grout has achieved num psi but not before num hours .
if headed studs are required on the anchor plates they shall be located within the tolerances shown on the wall construction drawings .
d nail installation .
num .
contractors responsibility for soil nail configuration .
the contractor shall determine the required drill hole diameters soil nail orientation drilling method grout composition and installation method necessary to achieve the nail pullout resistances shown in the wall construction drawings .
section num soil nail retaining wall num num .
load verification testing .
drilling and installation of production nails will not be permitted in any soil or rock strata unit until successful load verification testing of nails is complete in that unit and the results are acceptable to the engineer .
if requested in writing the contractor may begin installation of production soil nails before verification testing is complete if approved in writing by the engineer .
if verification testing results in a change to the original soil nail design then the contractor will be responsible at no additional cost to the department for the installation of any additional soil nails required to meet the new soil nail design requirements .
load verification test nails shall be installed using the same equipment methods nail inclination and drill hole diameter as planned for the production nails .
the number and location of the verification test nails shall be as shown on the wall construction drawings .
verification test nails may be installed through the existing slope face prior to start of wall excavation drill platform work bench stabilization berm or into slot cuts made for the particular lift in which the verification test nails are located .
slot cuts shall only be large enough to safely accommodate the drill and test nail reaction set up .
if approved by the engineer verification test nails may also be installed at angle orientations other than perpendicular to the wall face or at different locations than required as long as the contractor can demonstrate that the test nails will be bonded into the ground which is representative of the ground at the verification test nail locations designated on the wall construction drawings .
num .
allowable placement of facing before installation of soil nails .
at the request of the contractor and with the engineers approval the shotcrete facing may be placed before drilling and installing the nails .
a blockout shall be provided through the shotcrete facing at drill hole locations using pvc pipe or other suitable material to prevent damage to the facing during drilling .
as part of the required design submittals the contractor shall provide the engineer with acceptable structural design calculations demonstrating that the facing structural capacity will not be reduced and that the bearing plates are adequate to span the nail drill hole blockout through the construction facing .
if the presence of a blockout requires larger size bearing plates or additional reinforcement beyond that shown on the wall construction drawings there will be no extra compensation for this work .
num .
optional sealing layer for protection of face of excavation .
where necessary for stability of the excavation face the contractor shall have the option of placing a sealing layer flashcoat of unreinforced shotcrete or steel fiber reinforced shotcrete or of drilling and grouting of nails through a temporary stabilizing berm of native soil to protect and stabilize the face of the excavation .
there will be no extra compensation for a sealing layer .
num .
adjustments to number and location of soil nails .
the engineer may add eliminate or relocate nails to accommodate actual field conditions .
cost adjustments associated with these modifications shall be made as extra work .
there will be no extra compensation for the cost of any redesign additional material or installation modifications resulting from actions of the contractor .
num .
orientation and size of drilled holes for the soil nails .
the drill holes for the soil nails shall be made at the locations orientations and lengths shown on the wall construction drawings as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall select the drilling equipment and methods suitable for the physical properties of the ground where the nails will be installed .
the contractor shall set the diameter of the drill hole that will result in the required load capacity of the nail and to also provide a minimum of num inch grout cover over the soil nail bars .
num .
removal of drill cuttings .
drilling muds such as bentonite slurry shall not be used to assist in drill cutting removal .
compressed air may be used for cutting removal .
the contractor may be allowed to use water neat cement grout or foam flushing upon successful demonstration to the engineer that the installation method provides adequate nail pullout resistance .
section num soil nail retaining wall num if caving ground is encountered the contractor shall use cased drilling methods or other suitable means to support the sides of the drill holes .
num .
drilling through hard materials .
where hard drilling conditions such as rock cobbles boulders or obstructions are expected or encountered during drilling percussion or other suitable drilling equipment capable of drilling and maintaining stable drill holes through these materials shall be used .
if percussion drilling is used the drilling operations shall be immediately suspended or modified if ground subsidence is observed if the soil nail wall is adversely affected or if adjacent structures are damaged .
the contractor shall immediately stabilize the excavation wall and adjacent structures if adverse conditions occur .
this stabilization shall be done without extra compensation .
num .
placement of soil nail bars in drilled holes .
centralizers shall be spaced along each soil nail so that the maximum spacing does not exceed num feet between the centers of the centralizers .
centralizers shall also be located num feet from the top and bottom of the drill hole .
centralizers shall be securely attached to the bar so they will not shift during handling or insertion into the drill hole .
centralizers shall be oriented to allow grout tremie pipe insertion to the bottom of drill hole and allow the grout to flow freely up the hole .
each soil nail bar shall be inspected before installation and shall be repaired or replaced if the encapsulation is damaged .
uncased drill holes shall be checked for cleanliness prior to insertion of the soil nail bar .
the contractor shall provide a light source capable of adequately illuminating the bottom of each soilnail drill hole .
the light source shall be provided for the exclusive use of the engineer .
soil nail bars shall be inserted without forcing the insertion in a way that may damage the drill hole or the soil nail bar .
partially inserted soil nail bars shall not be driven into the drill hole .
soil nails which can not be fully inserted to the required depth shall be removed and the drill hole shall be cleaned to allow unobstructed installation .
when using cased or hollow stem auger drilling equipment which does not allow for the centralizers to pass through the casing or auger stem the contractor may delete the centralizers if the grout pumped through the casing is placed using grout pressures greater than num psi or if the grout placed through the stem of the auger has a consistency of less than num when tested in accordance with the requirements given in astm c num standard specification for packaged dry hydrauliccement grout nonshrink .
num .
soil nail installation tolerances .
soil nails shall not extend beyond the rightofway or easement limits shown on the plans .
the allowable deviation of the soil nail head location shall be a maximum of num inches in any direction .
the allowable deviation in the soil nail inclination shall be a maximum of num degrees .
location tolerances are applicable to only one nail and are not accumulative over large wall areas .
the soil nail bars shall be centered within num inch of the center of the drill hole .
soil nails that are not installed within the allowable tolerances due to the contractors installation methods shall be replaced without extra compensation .
num .
abandoned drill holes .
drill holes where unanticipated obstructions are encountered during drilling shall be relocated as directed by the engineer .
the cost of drilling and backfilling drill holes abandoned due to unanticipated obstructions will be paid as extra work .
there will be no extra compensation for the cost of drilling and backfilling drill holes abandoned due to errors made by the contractor .
e grouting .
num .
testing of grout placed for anchorage .
grout placed for the anchorage of the soil nails shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days and a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days when tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num .
the contractor shall make arrangements for an aldot approved testing laboratory to make specimens and test the grout each day that grout is being placed .
three cubes num inch section num soil nail retaining wall num xnum inch for each test age shall be produced at a frequency of at least once per every num cubic yards or fraction thereof of grout placed .
cubes shall be molded and cured in accordance with the requirements of aashto tp num sampling and fabrication of nummm numin .
cube specimens using grout nonshrink or mortar and tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num .
test reports shall be delivered to the engineer within num hours from testing .
num .
grouting equipment .
grout equipment shall produce a uniformly mixed grout free of lumps and shall be capable of continuously agitating the mix .
a positive displacement grout pump shall be used .
the grout pump shall be equipped with a pressure gauge which can measure at least twice but not more than three times the intended grout pressure .
the grouting equipment shall be sized to enable the entire nail to be grouted in one continuous operation .
num .
time of placing grout .
grout shall be placed within num minutes after mixing .
grout not placed in the allowed time limit will be rejected .
num .
grouting methods .
each drill hole shall be grouted during drilling or within num hours of completion of drilling unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
grout shall be injected through a tremie casing hollowstem auger or drill rods at the lowest point of each drill hole .
the outlet end of the conduit delivering the grout shall be kept below the surface of the grout as the conduit is withdrawn to prevent the creation of voids .
the drill holes shall be filled in one continuous operation .
cold joints in the grout column are not allowed except at the top of the test bond length of proof load tested production nails .
at the contractors option the tremie may remain in the hole provided it is filled with grout .
grouting before insertion of the nail is allowed provided the nail bar is immediately inserted through the grout to the specified length without difficulty .
during casing removal for drill holes advanced by either cased or hollowstem auger methods a sufficient level of grout shall be maintained within the casing to offset the external groundwater and soil pressure and prevent hole caving .
the grout head or grout pressures shall be maintained to ensure that the drill hole will be completely filled with grout and to prevent unstable soil or groundwater from contaminating or diluting the grout .
the grout pressures shall be recorded for soil nails installed using pressure grouting techniques .
grout pressures shall be controlled to prevent excessive ground heave or fracturing .
the grout pressure gauge shall be capable of measuring at least twice but not more than three times the intended grout pressure .
the grout and soil nail shall be removed if grouting is suspended for more than num minutes or grouting is not in compliance with the general requirements for grouting .
fresh grout and an undamaged soil nail bar shall be placed without extra compensation if the grouting is unacceptable .
f wall drainage network .
the contractor shall install and secure all elements of the wall drainage network as shown on the wall construction drawings or as required by the engineer to suit the site conditions .
the drainage network shall consist of installing geocomposite drain strips connection pipes and wall footing drains as shown on the wall construction drawings or as directed by the engineer .
exclusive of the wall footing drains all elements of the drainage network shall be installed prior to shotcreting .
unanticipated subsurface drainage features exposed in the excavation cut face shall be captured independently of the wall drainage network and shall be mitigated prior to shotcrete application .
costs due to the required mitigation will be paid for as extra work .
geocomposite drain strips shall be installed with the drain strips centered between the columns of nails as shown on the wall construction drawings .
the drain strips shall be at least num inches wide and shall be placed with the geotextile side against the ground .
the contractor shall secure the strips to the excavation face and prevent shotcrete from contaminating the ground side of the geotextile .
drain strips shall be vertically continuous .
splices shall be made with a num inch minimum overlap so that the flow of water will not be impeded .
the contractor shall repair any damage to the geocomposite drain strip which may interrupt the flow of water .
section num soil nail retaining wall num the contractor shall install footing drains at the bottom of each wall shown on the wall construction drawings .
the drainage geotextile shall envelope the footing drain aggregate and pipe and shall conform to the dimensions of the trench .
the drainage geotextile shall overlap the top of the drainage aggregate as shown on the wall construction drawings .
the contactor shall repair or replace damaged or defective drainage geotextile without extra compensation .
connection pipes as shown on the wall construction drawings shall direct water from the geocomposite drain strips into the footing drain or to the exposed face of the wall .
the connection pipes shall be connected to the drain strips using either prefabricated drain grates as shown on the wall construction drawings or the alternate method of connection .
the drain grate shall be installed per the manufacturers recommendations .
the joint between the drain grate and the drain strip and the discharge end of the connector pipe shall be sealed to prevent shotcrete intrusion .
an alternative method for connecting the connector pipe to the drain strip shall be cutting a hole slightly larger than the diameter of the pipe into the strip plastic core but not through the geotextile .
the contractor shall wrap both ends of the connection pipe in the geotextile in a manner that prevents migration of fines through the pipe .
the connector pipe inlet end where it penetrates the drain strip and the discharge end shall be taped or sealed in a manner that prevents penetration of shotcrete into the drain strip or pipe .
to assure passage of groundwater from the drain strip into the connector pipe the contractor shall slot the inlet end of the connector pipe at every num degrees around the perimeter of the pipe to a depth of num inches .
weepholes shall be provided through the construction facing to drain water from behind the facing .
weepholes shall be installed as shown on the wall construction drawings .
drainage outlet pipe shall be used to form the weephole through the shotcrete .
the end of the pipe contacting the soil with the drainage geotextile shall be covered .
intrusion shall be prevented into the discharge end of the pipe .
g load testing of soil nails .
the contractor shall perform both load capacity verification testing prior to the installation of production nails and proof load testing of designated production test nails .
load capacity verification tests shall be performed on sacrificial test nails at the locations shown on the wall construction drawings .
proof load tests shall be performed on production nails at locations selected by the engineer .
the required load test data will be recorded by the engineer .
h verification testing of sacrificial test nails .
num .
purpose and extent of load capacity verification tests .
load capacity verification testing shall be performed prior to installation of production nails as a means to validate the theoretical nail pullout resistance .
it shall also be a demonstration of the contractors installation methods .
a minimum of num verification tests shall be performed in each different soil or rock strata and for each different drilling or grouting method proposed to be used .
tension loads shall be applied to a sacrificial test nail in increasing increments .
the movement of the nail due to the increasing load will be monitored .
the load in the nail and the corresponding movement of the nail will be used in evaluating the proposed construction methods and details .
excessive movement of the nail due to the loading is evidence that the details of the soil nail are inadequate to carry the load of the wall .
verification test nails shall be sacrificial and shall not be incorporated as production nails .
the bars installed for testing shall be epoxy coated and encapsulated if epoxy coating andor encapsulation is required in the same manner as the production bars .
num .
submittal of details of load capacity verification tests .
the contractor shall submit the details of the verification testing arrangement including the method of distributing test load pressures to the excavation surface reaction frame test nail bar size grouted drill hole diameter and reaction frame dimensioning .
testing equipment shall include dial gauges dial gauge support a jack and pressure gauge an electronic load cell strain gauges and readout panels .
the load cell is required for the creep test portion of the verification test .
where temporary casing of the unbonded length of test nails is proposed the details shall be submitted to show how the casing will be prevented from reacting with the grouted bond length of the nail and the testing apparatus .
section num soil nail retaining wall num the engineer will review the submittal for completeness .
the requirement for this submittal is given with the requirements for the submittal of the details of the wall .
the testing shall not begin until the engineer informs the contractor that the submittal is complete .
num .
instrumentation details of load capacity verification tests .
the contractor shall instrument the verification test nails to obtain direct measurements of axial strains and evaluate the load transfer along the length of the nails .
the instrumentation shall be installed within both the bonded and unbonded portions of the verification nails .
the gauges shall be installed either along the length of the nail or in the case of hollow bar soil nails within the hollow portion of the bar after final grouting .
the contractor shall develop an instrumentation plan which shall be submitted with the wall construction drawings .
the instrumentation shall be installed by a qualified geotechnical instrumentation specialist having experience in the design and installation of instrumentation systems on at least num similar projects .
the contractor shall submit the experience records of the individuals responsible for instrument installation and testing .
the requirement for this submittal is given with the requirements for the submittal of the details of the wall design and drawings .
at the completion of each verification nail test the contractor shall supply the engineer with a plot of the load versus depth along the length of the nail along with calculations of bond stresses along the bond zone of the tested nail .
the engineer will verify that the load transfer values used in the design are valid based on the verification test results .
num .
load capacity verification test equipment .
the reaction frame shall be sufficiently rigid and of adequate dimensions so that excessive deformation of the testing equipment does not occur .
if the reaction frame will bear directly on the shotcrete facing it shall be designed to prevent cracking of the shotcrete .
the reaction frame shall be supported independently of the soil nail and shall be configured to allow the placement of the jack over the nail bar so that the bar does not carry the weight of the testing equipment .
the configuration of the testing apparatus shall be designed so that the jack bearing plates and stressing anchorage will not need to be repositioned during a test .
the load shall be applied with a hydraulic jack and measured with a pressure gauge .
the pressure gauge shall be graduated in num psi increments or less .
the jack and pressure gauge shall have a load range not exceeding twice the anticipated maximum test pressure .
jack ram travel shall be sufficient to allow the test to be done without resetting the equipment .
all jacks pressure gauges pumps and load cells shall have been calibrated with each other within the last num months by an independent aashto accredited laboratory or by a department laboratory .
calibrated jacks gages pumps and load cells shall have identifiable serial numbers to insure traceability to calibration tests .
the nail head movement shall be measured with a dial gauge capable of measuring the movement to an accuracy of num inch .
the dial gauge shall have a travel sufficient to allow the test to be done without having to reset the gauge .
the dial gage shall be designed to be aligned parallel with the axis of the nail .
the dial gage shall be supported independently from the jack wall and reaction frame .
two gages will be required when the load reaction is placed on the face of a soil cut .
num .
installation of sacrificial test nail for load verification tests the contractor shall install the sacrificial test nails using the same equipment installation methods nail inclination and drill hole diameter that is proposed for the production nails .
changes in the drilling or installation method will result in the requirement for additional verification testing as determined by the engineer .
additional verification testing shall be performed by the contractor without extra compensation .
payment for additional verification tests required due to differing site conditions if determined by the engineer will be made at the contract unit price for this work .
num .
required strength of nail grout and shotcrete prior to load testing .
verification load testing shall not be performed until the nail grout and shotcrete facing have cured for at least num hours and have attained the required compressive strength of num psi .
section num soil nail retaining wall num load testing in less than num hours may be allowed if the contractor submits compressive strength test results showing that the compressive strength of the grout and shotcrete is num psi but no load test shall be performed before num hours regardless of the strength of the grout and shotcrete .
the contractor shall make arrangements for an aldot approved testing laboratory to test the grout .
num .
bonded and unbonded lengths of sacrificial test nails .
load verification test nails shall have both bonded and unbonded lengths .
the bonded length of the nail shall be grouted prior to testing .
the bonded length shall be determined based on the nail bar grade and size and the theoretical pullout resistance of the nail .
the bonded length shall not be less than num feet .
the unbonded length shall not be less than num feet .
num .
allowable load on bar of sacrificial test nail .
a test load shall be determined based on the theoretical pullout resistance of the soil or rock that a production nail will be embedded in .
this test load shall not be greater than the allowable tensile stress of the bar .
the allowable tensile stress during testing shall not be greater than num of the yield strength for grade num and grade num bars or num of the ultimate strength for grade num bars .
loads larger than the load capacity of the production bars may be required to safely test the theoretical pullout resistance where the minimum numfoot bonded length is required .
the contractor shall provide larger verification test bar sizes if a larger bar is required to safely apply the load required for the measurement of the movement of the test nail under load .
num .
determination of the maximum bonded length of a sacrificial test nail .
a maximum bonded length shall be constructed for the verification test of a sacrificial test nail .
the maximum bonded length shall first be calculated based on the strength of the production soil nail bar and the pullout resistance of the soil or rock .
the required test load shall then be calculated based on the bonded length of the test nail and the pullout resistance .
if the maximum bonded length from the initial calculation is less than num feet the required maximum bond length shall be num feet .
the required test load shall then be calculated based on the bonded length of the test nail and the pullout resistance of the num foot bonded length .
the load carrying capacity of the nail bar shall then be checked .
a larger size bar shall be furnished if this is required to carry the test load .
the following equation shall be used for determining the verification test nail maximum bonded length lbv c fy asnum qd or num inches whichever is greater lbv maximum verification test nail bonded length inches c num for grade num and num bars and num for grade num bars fy bar yield or ultimate stress pounds per square inch note fy num psi num psi and num psi respectively for grade num num and num bars as bar steel area square inches num pullout resistance safety factor qd allowable pullout resistance pounds per inch of grouted nail .
num .
determination of the verification test load .
the following equation shall be used for determining the verification test load vtl vtl lbv x qd vtl verification test load pounds .
num .
verification loading of a sacrificial test nail .
verification test nails shall be incrementally loaded to a maximum load of num of the verification test load vtl in accordance with the following loading schedule .
the soil nail movements shall be recorded at the end of each load increment .
section num soil nail retaining wall num verification test loading schedule load hold time al num vtl max .
num minute num vtl num minutes num vtl num minutes num vtl num minutes num vtl num minutes num vtl num minutes num vtl creep test num minutes num vtl num minutes num vtl max .
test load num minutes the alignment load al shall be applied to align the testing apparatus and shall not exceed num of the verification test load vtl .
dial gauges for measuring the movement of the test nail shall be set to zero after the alignment load has been applied .
each load increment after the alignment load shall be held for at least num minutes except for the creep test load increment .
the verification test nail shall be monitored for creep for a minimum of num minutes at the num vtl load increment .
nail movement shall be recorded during the creep portion of the test at num minute num num num num num num num num num and num minutes .
the load during the creep test shall be maintained within num of the required load by use of the load cell .
i proof load testing of production soil nails .
num .
purpose and extent of proof load testing .
load capacity proof load testing shall be performed on production nails to make sure that the actual installation of these nails is adequate to support the soil nail wall structure .
proof load testing shall be performed on at least num num in num of the production nails in each nail row or a minimum of num nail per row .
prior to soil nail installation on each row the testing locations will be selected with the random number method outlined in aldotnum .
the contractor shall proof load the soil nails selected by the engineer .
a verification test nail that acceptably passes the verification test shall not be considered equivalent to a proof load test nail and shall not be used in determining the number required proof load tests .
tension loads shall be applied to a proof load test nail in increasing increments .
the movement of the nail due to the increasing load will be monitored .
the load in the nail and the corresponding movement of the nail will be used in evaluating the acceptability of the soil nails that are represented by the proof load test nail .
excessive movement of the nail due to the loading is evidence that the installed soil nails are inadequate to carry the load of the wall .
num .
submittal of details for proof load testing .
the contractor shall submit the details of the proof load testing apparatus .
the engineer will review the submittal for completeness .
the requirement for this submittal is given with the requirements for the submittal of the details of the wall .
the testing shall not begin until the engineer informs the contractor that the submittal is complete .
most of the testing equipment should be the same or be very similar to the equipment required for the load capacity verification tests .
num .
required strength of nail grout and shotcrete prior to proof load testing .
proof load testing shall not be performed until the nail grout and shotcrete have reached the strengths required for the grout and shotcrete when performing a load capacity verification test .
num .
bonded and temporary unbonded lengths of proof load test nails .
proof load test nails shall have both bonded and temporary unbonded lengths .
the bonded length of the nail shall be grouted prior to testing .
the bonded length shall be determined based on the production nail bar grade and size and the theoretical pullout resistance of the nail .
the bonded length shall not be less than num feet for soil nails that are num feet long and longer .
the bonded length may be less than num feet for soil nails that are shorter than num feet section num soil nail retaining wall num long .
the temporary unbonded length shall not be less than num feet unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num .
allowable load on bar of proof test nail .
the allowable tensile stress during testing shall not be greater than num of the yield strength for grade num and grade num bars or num of the ultimate strength for grade num bars .
num .
determination of the maximum bonded length of a proof load test nail .
a maximum bonded length shall be constructed for the proof load test of a production soil nail .
the maximum bonded length shall first be calculated based on the strength of the production soil nail bar and the pullout resistance of the soil or rock .
the required test load shall then be calculated based on the bonded length of the test nail and the pullout resistance .
if the maximum bonded length from the initial calculation is less than num feet and the bar is num feet long or longer the required maximum bond length shall be num feet .
if the maximum bonded length from the initial calculation is less than num feet and the bar is shorter than num feet long the required maximum bond length shall be the length determined from the calculation .
the required test load shall then be calculated based on the bonded length of the test nail and the pullout resistance of the bonded length .
the following equation shall be used for determining the proof test nail maximum bonded length lbp c fy as num qd or num inches if the bar is num feet long or longer lbp maximum proof load test nail bonded length inches c num for grade num and num bars and num for grade num bars fy bar yield or ultimate stress pounds per square inch note fy num psi num psi and num psi respectively for grade num num and num bars as bar steel area square inches num pullout resistance safety factor qd allowable pullout resistance pounds per inch of grouted nail .
num .
determination of the proof test load .
the following equation shall be used for determining the verification test load vtl ptl lbv x qd ptl proof test load pounds .
num .
proof loading of a test nail .
proof tests shall be performed by incrementally loading the proof load test nail to a maximum test load of num percent of the proof test load ptl in accordance with the following loading schedule .
the nail movement shall be recorded at the end of each load increment .
at load increments other than the maximum load the load shall be held long enough to obtain a stable reading .
proof test loading schedule load hold time al num ptl max .
until stable num ptl until stable num ptl until stable num ptl until stable num ptl until stable num ptl until stable num ptl max .
test load see below creep test the alignment load al should be the minimum load required to align the testing apparatus and should not exceed num percent of the proof test load ptl .
dial gauges for measuring the movement of the test nail shall be set to zero after the alignment load has been applied .
all load increments shall be maintained within num percent of the intended load .
depending on performance either num minute or num minute loading duration creep tests shall be performed at the maximum test load num ptl .
the creep test period shall start as soon section num soil nail retaining wall num as the maximum test load is applied and the nail movement shall be measured and recorded at num minutes num num num num and num minutes .
where the nail movement between num minute and num minutes exceeds num inches the maximum test load shall be maintained an additional num minutes and movements shall be recorded at num minutes num num and num minutes .
j acceptance criteria for verification and proof load testing .
num .
verification test acceptance criteria for creep test .
the test is acceptable when the total creep movement is less than num inches per log cycle of time between the num and num minute readings measured during creep testing and the creep rate is linear or decreasing throughout the creep test load hold period .
num .
proof load test acceptance criteria for creep test .
the test is acceptable when a total creep movement of less than num inches is measured between the num and num minute readings or a total creep movement of less than num inches is measured between the num and num minute readings and the creep rate is linear or decreasing throughout the creep test load hold period .
num .
verification and proof load test acceptance criteria for elongation .
the test is acceptable when the total measured movement at the maximum test load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the test nail unbonded length .
num .
verification and proof load test failure due to pullout .
the test is acceptable when a pullout failure does not occur at the maximum test load .
pullout failure shall be defined as the load at which attempts to further increase the test load simply result in continued pullout movement of the test nail .
the pullout failure load shall be recorded as part of the test data .
k criteria for incorporating proof load tested nails as production nails .
proof loaded test nails that meet the acceptance criteria may be incorporated as production nails if the unbonded length of the test nail drill hole has not collapsed during testing the minimum required drill hole diameter has been maintained the specified corrosion protection is provided and the test nail length is equal to or greater than the scheduled production nail length .
proof loaded test nails meeting these requirements shall be completed by satisfactorily grouting up the unbonded test length .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the temporary unbonded test length for subsequent grouting .
if the unbonded test length of production proof load test nails can not be satisfactorily grouted subsequent to testing the proof test nail shall become sacrificial and shall be replaced with an additional production nail installed without extra compensation .
l work required to address the failure of a load verification test .
the engineer will evaluate the results of each verification test .
propose installation methods which do not result in acceptable load verification tests will be rejected .
the contractor shall proposed alternative methods and shall install replacement verification test nails .
replacement test nails shall be installed and tested without compensation .
m required work after failure of a proof load test .
the engineer may require the contractor to replace some or all of the installed production nails between a failed proof load test nail and the adjacent passing proof test nail .
alternatively the engineer may require the installation and testing of additional proof test nails to verify that adjacent previously installed production nails have sufficient load carrying capacity .
contractor modifications may include but are not limited to the installation of additional proof test nails increasing the drill hole diameter to provide increased capacity modifying the installation or grouting methods reducing the production nail spacing from that shown on the plans and installing more production nails at a reduced capacity or installing longer production nails if sufficient rightofway is available and the pullout capacity behind the failure surface controls the allowable nail design capacity .
the nails may not be lengthened beyond the temporary construction easement or the permanent rightofway shown on the plans .
installation and testing of additional proof load test nails or installation of additional or modified nails as a result of proof load test nail failures shall be done without compensation .
section num soil nail retaining wall num n records of soil nail wall construction .
records documenting the soil nail wall construction including records of the installation and testing of soil nails shall be produced and maintained in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with copies of these records at the times designated by the engineer .
num asbuilt drawings and revised design calculations .
the contractor shall revise the wall construction drawings when plan dimensions are revised due to field conditions or for other reasons .
within num calendar days after completion of the work the contractor shall submit asbuilt drawings to the engineer .
the contractor shall also provide revised design calculations signed by the licensed professional engineer that sealed the submittal of the design of the wall .
num workmanship warranty .
the soil nail contractor will warrant the stability and workmanship of the slope following the techniques specified in this special provision .
the warranty shall be for a period of num years from date of acceptance of the work .
the warranty shall not reduce or affect any separate warranty on materials or products as stated in this special provision .
the warranty applies to all perils which may affect the work any area that becomes unstable i.e .
a failure within the modeled cross sections and potential failure planes and the work of any subcontractor or vendor of the soil nail contractor .
if an unstable condition occurs then the soil nail contractor shall repair all failures within num days of receipt of verbal or written notification by aldot .
this warranty excludes acts of god and except as stated above work of a third party that causes an unstable condition or damages the work performed by the soil nail contractor .
num temporary soil nail walls .
temporary soil nail walls are those walls used for excavation shoring and which have a service life less than num months .
temporary soil nail walls shall be designed and constructed as required herein with the following exceptions soil nail walls for temporary applications in nonaggressive environments can be designed with no corrosion protection except grout encapsulation of the bars .
centralizers on the bars at minimum num feet spacing are required .
an asshot or roughscreeded finish is satisfactory .
the minimum shotcrete thickness shall be at least the design thickness less num inches .
minimum reinforcing cover shall be num inches .
no contraction joints or special construction joints are required .
except for protection from freezing no special protection or curing of the shotcrete is required .
num method of measurement .
the soil nail wall will be measured in units of square yards of the shotcrete face of the wall .
measurement will not be made outside of the limits vertical and horizontal of the shotcrete face of the wall shown on the plans or designated by the engineer .
excavation for construction of soil nail wall will be measured as the theoretical volume in cubic yards within the structure excavation limits shown on the plans .
this will be the excavation volume within the zone measured from the top of the shotcrete wall facing to the bottom of the wall .
there will be no measurement of the excavation beyond the limits of excavation shown on the plans .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the soil nail wall will be paid for at the contract unit price .
this payment shall be full compensation for all submittals labor equipment tools materials material tests field tests and incidentals necessary to acceptably fabricate and test the wall components and construct the wall .
this shall also be full compensation for furnishing and placing the reinforcing steel for the wall facing .
the contract unit price for excavation for soil nail wall shall be full compensation for all equipment tools and labor required for the excavation and disposal of the excavated materials .
section num shotcrete num b payment will be made under item no .
numa soil nail wall per square yard numb excavation for soil nail wall per cubic yard numc temporary soil nail wall per square yard section num shotcrete num description .
this work shall consist of furnishing and placing one or more courses of shotcrete and reinforcing steel on a prepared surface .
the shotcrete shall be a concrete mixture that is pneumatically projected at high velocity onto the surface .
num materials .
a general .
materials shall conform to the requirements given in division num materials .
specific reference is made to applicable portions of the following sections section num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregates section num mineral admixtures section num water section num air entraining admixtures section num chemical admixtures for concrete section num cement section num steel reinforcement section num underdrain pipe materials b aggregates .
when coarse aggregates are used the coarse and fine aggregate shall be weighed separately to avoid segregation .
oversize pieces of aggregate shall be removed by screening .
the combined aggregates shall meet one of the following gradations gradations for combined aggregates for shotcrete sieve size percent by weight passing individual seives gradation no .
num gradation no .
num num inch num inch num num inch num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num c shotcrete mix design .
the contractor shall design the shotcrete mix and shall verify the performance of the design of the mix by trial mixes and laboratory tests .
the contractor shall submit the proposed mix design and test results to the materials and tests engineer .
the placement of the shotcrete shall not begin until the mix design is approved through field placement tests and compressive strength testing described in article num .
type i or type iii cement shall be used .
the type and dosage of mineral and chemical admixture if proposed for use shall be included in the mix design verification mixes and production mix .
the design verification and production of shotcrete mixes shall result in the shotcrete having the following properties section num shotcrete num physical properties of shotcrete type of shotcrete placement process minimum cementitous material content pounds per cubic yard maximum water cementitous material ratio wc num air content range eanum minimum compressive strength at num daysnum psi wet num num na num dry num num na num wet wtacnum num num num to num num notes num wc watercementitious ratio by weight .
num tac total air content num as per aashto t num d mineral admixtures .
fly ash may be used as part of the cementitious material in the shotcrete mix .
class f or class c fly ashes may be substituted for cement up to a maximum substitution rate of num of the total weight of the cementitious materials .
ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs may be used as part of the cementitious material in the shotcrete mix .
ggbfs may be substituted for cement up to a maximum substitution rate of num of the total weight of the cementitious materials .
microsilica may be used as part of the cementitious material in the shotcrete mix .
microsilica may be added up to a maximum addition rate of num of the total weight of the cementitious materials .
e chemical admixtures .
air entraining admixtures and water reducing admixtures may be used for wetmix shotcrete only .
type f admixtures may be used for wetmix shotcrete only to promote workability without exceeding the maximum allowable watercementitious ratio .
admixture addition rates dispensing and mixing of the admixture shall be in accordance with the admixture manufacturers recommendations .
num construction .
a anchorage and reinforcement .
the details of the anchorage and reinforcement of the shotcrete will either be shown on the plans or will be given elsewhere in the specifications when the shotcrete is required as a part of other items of work .
b batching mixing and placing shotcrete .
the requirements for batching mixing and placing shotcrete shall be as described in aci numr guide to shotcrete .
metal wires shall be used to control the thickness and surface of the shotcrete .
the temperature of the shotcrete mix shall be maintained between num  f and num  f. c equipment .
num .
submittal of description of equipment .
the contractor shall submit a written description of the proposed equipment for mixing and applying shotcrete .
the submittal shall include the equipment manufacturers instructions recommendations literature performance and test data .
this submittal shall be delivered to the engineer .
the placement testing of the shotcrete shall not begin until the engineer informs the contractor that the submittal is complete and the proposed mix design or designs have been evaluated for completeness by the materials and tests engineer .
the contractor may use the information given in aci numr for identifying the equipment required for mixing and applying shotcrete .
num .
water supply system for the dry mix process .
section num shotcrete num for the drymix process the contractor shall provide a water storage tank at the job site .
the contractor shall also provide a positive displacement pump with a regulating valve that is accurately controlled to provide water at the required pressure and volume .
num .
mixing and placing equipment .
the contractor shall use equipment capable of handling and applying shotcrete containing the proposed maximum size aggregate and admixtures .
num .
air hose and blowpipe .
an air hose and blow pipe shall be provided by the contractor to clear dust and rebound during shotcrete application .
num .
air supply system .
an air supply system shall be provided by the contractor .
the air supply system shall be capable of supplying the delivery machine and hose with air at the pressures and volumes recommended by the machine manufacturer .
air supply systems that deliver oilcontaminated air or are incapable of maintaining constant pressure shall not be used .
d testing of materials and placement process prior to construction .
num .
requirement for field testing .
the contractor shall perform a field test at least num calendar days before starting shotcrete production .
the proposed mix design or designs shall be tested using the same equipment and personnel that will be used in production .
the contractor shall make arrangements for the engineer to be present at the placement of the shotcrete for testing and at all of the subsequent testing of the samples of the shotcrete .
num .
test panels from field tests .
application of shotcrete on test panels shall be done in the same manner that will be used for the production placement of the shotcrete .
test panels shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements given in astm c num standard practice for preparing and testing specimens from shotcrete test panel as may be modified by the requirements given in this section .
the proposed mix shall be tested on two panels at least num feet by num feet in size .
the thickness of the test panels shall be the same thickness as is required for the production placement .
one panel shall be reinforced exactly like the production shotcrete will be reinforced .
test panels shall be cured in the same manner that the production shotcrete will be cured .
num .
coring test panels .
six cores shall be obtained from each test panel for testing .
each core shall be num inches in diameter and the full thickness of the test panel .
the cores shall be taken from each test panel in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num .
cores shall be extracted no more than num hours before testing .
num .
testing of cores from test panels .
three cores from the unreinforced panel shall be tested for compressive strength at an age of num days .
three cores from the unreinforced panel shall be tested for compressive strength at an age of num days .
compressive strength tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num obtaining and testing drilled cores and sawed beams of concrete .
six cores shall be extracted from the reinforced panel at an age of num days for visual evaluation and nozzle operator qualification .
these cores shall be delivered to the materials and tests engineer for evaluation .
the cores will be graded according to the requirements given in aci num specification for shotcrete .
e submittal of material test data and proposed placement process .
the materials and tests engineer will approve or reject the proposed mix design and placement process based on the results of the field testing and laboratory tests .
any changes to a previously accepted mix or the proposal of a new mix design will require field testing and laboratory testing before approval .
the contractor shall submit three copies of the test data and proposed placement process data to the engineer for evaluation by the materials and tests engineer .
this data shall be section num shotcrete num submitted within num calendar days after the completion of the compressive strength tests that are performed on the cores at num days of age .
the following data shall be submitted sample identification including mix design and test panels represented .
date and time of sample preparation including curing conditions .
date and time of testing .
sample dimensions .
complete test results including load sketches or pictures of samples before and after testing and any unusual occurrences observed .
name of laboratory and technician performing the tests .
nozzle operators experience and training .
if more than one nozzle operator is used each operator shall perform a set of test panels for each mix design proposed .
only nozzlemen with a test panel mean core grade less than or equal to num as determined from the requirements given in aci num will be allowed to place shotcrete .
the engineer will inform the contractor of the approval of the mix design and proposed placement equipment and procedures after an evaluation of the submittal that is made to the materials and tests engineer .
f weather .
the placement of the shotcrete shall be stopped if the wind is detrimental to the placement of the shotcrete the air temperature is below num f or above num f rain or lightning are present .
g time limit for placing shotcrete .
the placement of drymix shotcrete shall begin within num minutes of the beginning of the mix production .
a new batch of shotcrete shall be produced if placement does not begin within num minutes or if placement is not continuous .
the placement of wetmix shotcrete shall begin within num minutes after batching .
a new batch of shotcrete shall be produced if placement does not begin within num minutes or if placement is not continuous .
h thickness of layers and time between placements of layers .
shotcrete shall be placed in one continuous lift thickness up to a maximum lift thickness of num inches .
for shotcrete layer thicknesses greater than num inches shotcrete shall be placed in lift thicknesses equal to one half the required thickness but no more than num inches per lift .
if more than one lift is required there shall be a delay of time between the placement of each lift .
the delay shall be until the initial set of the shotcrete .
the initial set shall be defined as the point in time when the shotcrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi .
the determination of initial set will be done by the engineer using a penetrometer in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num time of setting of concrete mixtures by penetration resistance .
the contractor shall furnish a penetrometer that is determined by the engineer to be adequate for measuring the compressive strength .
the engineer shall have exclusive possession and use of the penetrometer beginning at least num calendar days before the start of shotcrete placement .
the penetrometer will be returned to the contractor when shotcrete placement is completed .
at the point in time when the initial set is achieved the surface shall be lightly broomed to remove laitance to provide an adequate bond with the next application of shotcrete .
the engineer will also determine when the shotcrete has taken a final set and remedial actions shall be taken by the contractor to insure a bonding of subsequent layers of shotcrete .
i construction joints .
boards or other solid materials shall be installed to provide the construction joints .
the solid joint materials shall be removed and the joints shall be thoroughly cleaned before additional shotcrete is placed at the joint .
j curing .
two methods will be allowed for curing .
the first method of curing is by keeping the surface of the shotcrete continually moist for at least num days by burlap that is kept wet .
the second section num shotcrete num method of curing is by using an impervious membrane curing compound meeting the requirements given in section num. k surface finish .
num .
retaining walls .
the final surface of the shotcrete shall be finished to an even plane .
the surface shall be finished to within num inch in num feet as measured by placing a straightedge anywhere on the surface of the shotcrete .
all metal construction materials such as guide wires and tie wires that protrude through the surface shall be removed from the surface by breaking back the protrusion and patching the flaw with cement mortar as directed by the engineer .
the shotcrete wall shall be finished with a slight chamfer at the exterior edges of the wall .
any additional surface finishing requirements will be shown on the plans .
num .
rock face protection .
the shotcrete surface shall be left in the natural shotcrete gun finish .
l drainage if draining of water from behind the shotcrete is required the details of the drainage system will be shown on the plans .
m cleaning excessive shotcrete .
the excessive placement of shotcrete shall be continuously removed to protect the adjacent areas and keep the prior placement of shotcrete clean .
rebound shotcrete shall be promptly removed from the work area .
n defective work .
areas of defective work shall be replaced .
the contractor shall submit a written replacement procedure to the engineer for review prior to making the repair .
all repair work shall be performed without additional compensation .
o shotcrete production report .
the contractor shall submit a written report of the shotcrete production and application to the engineer within num hours of the completion of shotcrete application .
the following shall be included in the report quantity and location of shotcrete applied including sketches of areas where shotcrete was placed observations of success or problems of equipment operation application final condition and any other relevant issues encountered during production and application the batch number of the shotcrete name of nozzleman name and signature of the contractors supervisor performing the observation .
p test panels coring and testing during production placement .
the contractor shall produce a test panel in accordance with the requirements given in astm c num for each work day or every num cubic yards of shotcrete placed whichever is less .
test panels shall be kept moist at all times .
the panels shall be kept between num  f to num  f for the first num to num hours before they are moved to the testing laboratory for standard curing .
five cores for compressive strength test specimens shall be obtained from each panel and shall be tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num .
two samples shall be tested at num days and three at num days .
test reports shall be forwarded to the engineer within num hours after testing .
cores for testing shall be obtained from the panels no more than num hours before testing .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to retain a testing laboratory approved by the department to perform these tests .
num method of measurement .
shotcrete may be measured as a part of other items of work .
a separate quantity of shotcrete will not be given when it is included in other items of work .
when direct payment is made for shotcrete it will be measured in units of square yards at the surface of the shotcrete placement .
the square yardage will be limited to the actual number of square section num soldier pile retaining wall num yards placed within lines shown on the plans or designated by the engineer that define the plan limits of the required shotcrete placement .
all portions of shotcrete placed outside the limits of measurement will be considered incidental to the placement of the shotcrete .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract unit price for shotcrete shall be full compensation for all materials equipment tools labor testing and incidentals required to complete this item of work .
the contract unit price includes preparation of the surface to be treated furnishing and installation of wire reinforcement and anchor bolts and the furnishing and installing the materials required for drainage and final surface finishing .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa shotcrete inches thick per square yard section num soldier pile retaining wall num description .
the work of this section shall cover designing and constructing a soldier pile retaining wall with permanent ground anchors consisting of steel piles and lagging .
the soil and rock behind the wall shall be retained by lagging set in the pile flanges .
num materials .
a steel piles .
steel piles shall meet the requirements given in section num. b structural and reinforcing steel .
structural steel shall meet the requirements given in section num .
reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements given in section num. c concrete for anchoring piles in drilled holes .
concrete for anchoring piles in drilled holes shall meet the requirements given in section num for class a concrete .
d grout num .
low strength cement mortar for stabilizing drilled holes .
low strength cement mortar shall meet the requirements given in section num for cement mortar flowable backfill mix num .
num .
grout for ground anchors .
the grout shall be a neat cement or sandcement grout .
the contractor shall submit the proposed grout mix design to the materials and tests engineer for approval no later than num calendar days prior to production .
the contractor shall make arrangements for an aldot approved testing laboratory to test the proposed grout mix design .
the mix design shall include the following a list of all the materials used in the design of the mix with the source and vendor code indicated .
compressive strength test results verifying that the proposed mix design will have a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days and a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days .
compressive strength shall be tested in accordance with the requirements given in aashto t num compressive strength of hydraulic cement mortar using num mm or num inch specimens .
test results for the proposed grout mix that have been completed within one year of the start of work and that have been performed by an aldot approved testing laboratory may be submitted for verification of the mix design .
section num soldier pile retaining wall num e lagging .
all lagging for the wall facing shall meet the requirements given in section num and section num for timber and steel piles respectively .
timber lagging shall be a minimum of num inches thick .
steel piling size shall be as designated on the plans .
f ground anchors .
num .
ground anchors shall conform to the following requirements all materials for ground anchors shall comply with the current recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors from the posttensioning institute pti .
tie back tendons shall be fabricated from prestressing steel meeting the requirements given in section num .
the contractor shall provide class num corrosion protection double corrosion protection for all ground anchors in accordance with the recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors from the posttensioning institute .
num .
corrosion protection for the tieback tendons shall be fabricated from the following corrosioninhibiting grease shall conform to the requirements of section num of the pti specification for unbonded single strand tendons .
the bondbreaker for strand tendon unbonded length shall be a polyethylene tube pulled or pushed over a strand .
the polyethylene shall be type ii iii or iv as defined by astm dnum or approved equal .
the tubing shall have a minimum wall thickness of num mils num mils or a hotmelt extruded polypropylene tube applied over a corrosion inhibiting grease coated strand .
the polypropylene shall be cell classification pp num bnum as defined by astm dnum or approved equal .
the tubing shall have a minimum wall thickness of num mils num mils or a hotmelt extruded polyethylene tube applied over a corrosion inhibiting grease coated strand .
the polyethylene shall be high density type iii as defined by astm d num and astm dnum or approved equal .
the tubing shall have a minimum wall thickness of num mils num mils .
num .
the bondbreaker for bar anchor unbonded length shall be a low density polyethylene tubing polypropylene tubing or polyvinyl chloride tubing with a minimum wall thickness of num mils num mils .
num .
corrugated tubes shall be a .
high density corrugated polyethylene tubing conforming to the requirement of aashto m num with a minimum wall thickness of num mils or b .
corrugated polyvinyl chloride tubes manufactured from rigid pvc compounds conforming to astm dnum class num or c. deformed steel tubing or pipes with a minimum wall thickness of num mils .
num .
fusion bonded epoxy coating shall be in accordance with aashto mnum except that it shall have a film thickness of num mils .
num .
heatshrink tubing shall be an irradiated heat shrinkable polyethylene tube internally coated with a thixotropic sealant .
prior to shrinking the tube shall have a nominal wall thickness of num mils .
the adhesive sealant inside the tube shall have a nominal thickness of num mils .
num .
a trumpet shall be used to provide a transition from the anchorage to the unbonded length corrosion protection and shall be fabricated from a steel pipe or tube conforming to the requirements of astm anum for pipe or astm anum for tubing .
num .
the trumpet shall have a minimum wall thickness of num inches for diameters up to num inches and num inches for larger diameters .
g wall drainage system .
the wall drainage system shall meet the requirements given in the working drawings .
section num soldier pile retaining wall num h concrete fascia panels .
precast concrete fascia panels shall meet the requirements as given in section num .
concrete for cast in place fascia panels shall meet the requirements as given in section num for class a concrete .
num design requirements and submittals a design requirements for soldier pile wall with permanent ground anchors .
the design for the soldier pile retaining wall shall be in accordance with the plans and the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications with interims and the recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors from the posttensioning institute .
the design shall be based on the wall layout locations cross sections soil borings and ground water information as shown in the plans .
a copy of the geotechnical investigation report can be provided upon request .
the design shall consider the internal and global stability of the wall system .
the overall stability of the earth mass being retained shall be checked and shall have a minimum factor of safety of num .
the maximum allowed bond length shall not exceed num feet unless otherwise approved by the state geotechnical engineer .
the contractor shall not use consultants or manufacturers representatives in order to meet the requirements of this article .
b working drawings for soldier pile wall with permanent ground anchors .
the contractor shall submit working drawings of the solider pile and lagging system .
include details of the following details of the soldier piles and a description of their installation method details of the lagging and a description of their installation method and details of the connections and anchorage system of the tie back anchors to the soldier piles .
details for the construction of drainage facilities associated with the soldier pile and lagging retaining walls shall be clearly indicated .
the contractor shall submit working drawings of the ground anchor tendon and the corrosion protection system .
include details of the following spacers and their location centralizers and their location unbonded length corrosion protection system including the permanent rubber seal between the trumpet and the tendon unbonded length corrosion protection .
bond length corrosion protection system anchorage and trumpet anchorage corrosion protection system anchors using nonrestressable anchorage device the contractor shall submit the proposed method to be followed for the permanent ground anchor testing .
this submittal shall include all necessary drawings and details to clearly describe the method proposed .
c ground anchor construction procedure and schedule .
the contractor shall submit with the working drawings a detailed description of the construction procedure proposed for use .
a description of the tie back installation including drilling procedures grout mix design and placement method and stressing information shall be included .
the contractor shall also submit the methods and materials used in filling the annulus over the unbonded length of the anchor and a description of any temporary supports needed to support the soldier pile and lagging wall until the tie back anchors have been installed and loaded to the design load .
the contractor shall submit a ground anchor schedule giving ground anchor number ground anchor factored design load type and size of tendon minimum total bond length section num soldier pile retaining wall num minimum anchor length minimum tendon bond length minimum unbonded length .
the contractor shall also submit a profile view indicating the elevation at the top of the wall the elevation at the bottom of the wall all horizontal and vertical break points and showing tie back anchor identification number and a plan view of the wall indicating the offset from the construction centerline to the face of the wall at all changes in horizontal alignment .
d working drawings for concrete fascia panels .
the contractor shall submit working drawings for the concrete fascia panels in accordance with the requirements given in article num to the engineer for approval .
concrete fascia panels may be precast cast in place or as shown in the plans .
if castinplace concrete fascia is used the following requirements apply .
num .
where the lateral pressure from concrete placement is less than or equal to the design earth pressure the contractor may tie forms directly to the soldier piles .
num .
where the lateral pressure from concrete placement is greater than the design earth pressure the contractor shall follow one of the following procedures a .
tie the forms to strongbacks behind the lagging or use some other system that confines the pressure from concrete placement between the lagging and the form panels in addition to the ties to the soldier piles .
b .
reduce the rate of placing concrete to reduce the pressure from concrete placement to less than or equal to the design earth pressure in addition to the ties to the soldier piles .
c. follow a procedure with a combination of a. and b .
num .
the contractor shall design the forms for an appropriate rate of placing concrete so that no cold joints occur considering the wall thickness and height and volume of concrete to be placed .
precast concrete fascia when used shall be designed in accordance with current aashto lrfd bridge design specifications for retaining wall facing elements .
the contractor shall submit design calculations for panel connection and working drawings showing the proposed panel layout with construction joints underdrains and all utilities .
the working drawings shall also detail the procedures for panel connection erection and any closure pours .
the initial submittal of the design calculations and working drawings shall be sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama .
limits of the wall will be in accordance with the retaining wall layout .
slight modifications of the bottom of the wall may be allowed as necessary to accommodate precast concrete fascia design and construction .
e initial submittal of design calculations and working drawings .
the contractor shall submit the design calculations and working drawings to the materials and tests engineer as an initial submittal in accordance with the requirements given in article num for working drawings .
the initial submittal shall also identify the contractor qualifications requirements as given in article num .
changes in personnel will not be permitted without a written request by the contractor .
this submittal shall be made within num calendar days after the date of the notice to proceed .
if clarifications are required the calculations and drawings will be returned to the contractor with comments for clarification .
the initial submittal will be returned to the contractor for clarification within num calendar days after the receipt of the initial submittal .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days for each clarification of the initial submittal and the materials and tests engineer will be allowed num calendar days to determine if further clarification is necessary .
the materials and tests engineer will not approve the submittal of design calculations and working drawings but will review the submittal for completeness .
the initial submittal of the design calculations and working drawings shall be sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama .
section num soldier pile retaining wall num f final submittal of design calculations and working drawings .
when the materials and tests engineer informs the contractor that the design calculations and working drawings are complete the contractor shall make a final submittal in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days to make the final submittal .
the contractor shall not begin wall construction or incorporate materials into the work until the materials and tests engineer returns one set of the completed design calculations and wall construction drawings to the contractor .
the final submittal of the design calculations and wall construction drawings shall be sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama .
num contractor experience requirements .
the contractor or subcontractor performing this work shall have installed permanent ground anchors for a minimum of three num years .
prior to the beginning of construction the contractor shall submit a list containing at least five num projects on which the contractor has installed permanent ground anchors .
a brief description of each project and a reference shall be included for each project listed .
as a minimum the reference shall include an individuals name and current phone number .
the contractor shall assign an engineer to supervise the work with at least three num years of experience in the design and construction of permanently anchored structures .
the contractor shall not use consultants or manufacturers representatives in order to meet the requirements of this article .
drill operators and onsite supervisors shall have a minimum of num year experience installing permanent ground anchors .
the contractor shall allow up to num calendar days for the engineers review of the qualifications and staff as noted above .
work shall not be started on any anchored wall system nor materials ordered until written approval of the contractors qualifications is given .
num construction requirements .
a preconstruction conference .
a permanent ground anchor preconstruction conference to discuss construction procedures personnel and equipment to be used shall be held at least num working days prior to the contractor beginning any permanent ground anchor work at the site .
the list of materials for this item of work will also be discussed .
those attending shall include num. representing the contractor the superintendent on site supervisors and all foremen in charge of drilling the ground anchor holes placing the permanent ground anchors and grout and tensioning and testing the permanent ground anchor .
num. representing the department the project engineer key inspection personnel and representatives from materials and tests .
b installation of soldier piles .
the contractor shall either drive piles or excavate holes for the placement of the soldier piles concrete and flowable fill .
piles installed by driving shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the location and alignment of the soldier piles shall be in accordance with the working drawings .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for all costs for replacing misaligned piles and lagging that will not properly fit into the flanges of the soldier piles .
for soldier piles installed in excavated holes the contractor shall use equipment that will drill through soil rock boulders and debris that may be encountered during drilling .
blasting is not permitted to advance excavations .
blasting for rock core removal may be allowed upon written approval of the materials and tests engineer .
the contractor shall provide the means and materials necessary to keep the sides of the excavated holes from collapsing .
casing drilling mud shall be used to stabilize a hole if it is unstable .
during construction the contractor shall control drainage in the vicinity of the soldier pile wall .
the contractor shall direct run off away from the soldier pile wall and areas above and behind the wall .
a soldier pile shall be installed with a minimum clearance of num inches within the excavated hole and shall be within num inches of the horizontal location shown on the working drawings .
the installed soldier pile shall be vertical within a tolerance of num .
a soldier pile shall be installed in the drilled hole and braced against movement prior to the final placement of the concrete .
a maximum of num feet of concrete may be placed in the drilled section num soldier pile retaining wall num hole prior to the final placement of concrete to help stabilize the pile during final placement of the concrete .
the pile shall be centered in the hole so that there is uniform coverage of concrete around the pile .
concrete shall be placed through a tremie to the bottom of the hole if drilling mud is used to stabilize the excavation .
c excavation of the soil in front of the wall .
the contractor shall perform the excavation using procedures that prevent ground loss swelling and loosening of the soil that will be retained by the wall .
concrete and flowable fill placed in the holes to brace the soldier piles shall be cured a minimum of num days before beginning excavation at the face of the wall .
the contractor shall excavate in lifts not to exceed num feet in height .
if the excavation face becomes unstable at any time the contractor shall suspend soldier pile wall construction and temporarily stabilize the face by immediately placing an earth berm against the unstable face .
soldier pile wall construction may not proceed until remedial measures are proposed by the contractor and accepted by the engineer .
all drainage materials shall be installed in accordance with the working drawings .
d ground anchor fabrication .
ground anchors may be either shop or field fabricated .
ground anchors shall be fabricated as shown on the approved working drawings .
the contractor shall select the type of tendon to be used .
the tendon shall be sized so the factored design load does not exceed num percent of the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
in addition the tendon shall be sized so the maximum test load does not exceed num percent of the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
the contractor shall be responsible for determining the bond length and tendon bond length necessary to develop the factored design load indicated in the plans in accordance with item numgnum and item numgnum .
the minimum bond length shall be num feet in rock and num feet in soil .
the tendon bond length portion of the tendon shall be corrosion protected by encapsulating the tendon in a groutfilled corrugated tubes .
the tendons can be grouted inside the encapsulation prior to inserting the tendon in the drill hole or after the tendon has been placed in the drill hole .
expansive admixtures can be mixed with the encapsulation grout if the tendon is grouted inside the encapsulation while outside the drill hole .
the tendon shall be centralized within the bond length encapsulation with a minimum of num inches of grout cover .
spacers shall be used along the tendon bond length of multielement tendons to separate the elements of the tendon so the prestressing steel will bond to the encapsulation grout .
centralizers shall be used to provide a minimum of num inches of grout cover over the tendon bond length encapsulation .
centralizers shall be securely attached to the encapsulation and the centertocenter spacing shall not exceed num feet .
in addition the upper centralizer shall be located a maximum of num feet from the top of the tendon bond length and the lower centralizer shall be located a maximum of num foot from the bottom of the tendon bond length .
the centralizer shall be able to support the tendon in the drill hole and position the tendon so that a minimum of num inches of grout cover is provided and shall permit free flow of grout .
centralizers are not required on encapsulated pressureinjected ground anchor tendons if the ground anchor is installed in coarse grained soils more than num percent of the soil larger than the number num sieve using grouting pressures greater than num psi .
centralizers are not required on encapsulated hollowstemaugered ground anchor tendons if the ground anchor is grouted through and the hole is maintained full of a stiff grout numinch slump or less during extraction of the auger .
the minimum unbonded length of the tendon shall be num feet or as shown in the plans .
corrosion protection of the unbonded length shall be provided by a sheath completely filled with corrosion inhibiting grease or grout .
if grease is used under the sheath provisions shall be made to prevent the grease from escaping at the ends of the sheath .
the grease shall completely coat the tendon and fill the voids between the tendon and the sheath .
the working drawings shall show how the contractor will provide a transition between the tendon bond length and the unbonded tendon length corrosion protection .
section num soldier pile retaining wall num if the sheath is not fabricated from a smooth tube a separate bond breaker shall be provided .
the bond breaker shall prevent the tendon from bonding to the anchor grout surrounding the tendon unbonded length .
the total anchor length shall not be less than that indicated in the plans or the approved working drawings .
anchorage devices shall be capable of developing num percent of the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel tendon .
the anchorage devices shall conform to the static strength requirements of section num of the post tensioning institute specification for unbonded single strand tendons first edition num .
nonrestressable anchorage devices may be used except where indicated in the plans .
restressable anchorages shall be provided on those ground anchors that require reloading .
the posttensioning supplier shall provide a restressable anchorage compatible with the post tensioning system provided .
the bearing plates shall be sized so the bending stresses in the plate do not exceed the yield strength of the steel when a load equal to num percent of the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon is applied and the average bearing stress on the concrete does not exceed that recommended in section num of the post tensioning institute specification for unbonded single strand tendons first edition num .
the trumpet shall have an inside diameter equal to or larger than the hole in the bearing plate .
the trumpet shall be long enough to accommodate movements of the structure during testing and stressing .
for strand tendons with encapsulation over the unbonded length the trumpet shall be long enough to enable the tendon to make a transition from the diameter or the tendon in the unbonded length to the diameter of the tendon at the anchor head without damaging the encapsulation .
trumpets filled with corrosioninhibiting grease shall have a permanent rubber seal as approved by the engineer provided between the trumpet and the tendon unbonded length corrosion protection .
trumpets filled with grout shall have a temporary seal provided between the trumpet and the tendon unbonded length corrosion protection or the trumpet shall overlap the tendon unbonded length corrosion protection .
e tendon storage and handling .
tendons shall be handled and stored in such a manner as to avoid damage or corrosion .
damage to the prestressing steel as a result of abrasions cuts nicks welds and weld splatter will be cause for rejection by the engineer .
the prestressing steel shall be protected if welding is to be performed in the vicinity .
grounding of welding leads to the prestressing steel is forbidden .
prestressing steel shall be protected from dirt rust and deleterious substances .
a light coating of rust on the steel is acceptable .
if heavy corrosion or pitting is noted the engineer will reject the affected tendons .
the contractor shall use care in handling and storing the tendons at the site .
prior to inserting a tendon in the drill hole the contractor and the engineer will examine the tendon for damage to the encapsulation and the sheathing .
if in the opinion of the engineer the encapsulation is damaged the contractor shall repair the encapsulation in accordance with the tendon suppliers recommendations and as approved by the engineer .
if in the opinion of the engineer the smooth sheathing has been damaged the contractor shall repair it with ultra high molecular weight polyethylene pe tape .
the tape shall be spiral wound around the tendon so as to completely seal the damaged area .
the pitch of the spiral shall ensure a double thickness at all points .
f installing permanent ground anchors .
the contractor shall select the drilling method the grouting procedure and the grouting pressure used for the installation of the ground anchor .
when caving conditions are encountered no further drilling will be allowed until the contractor selects a method to prevent ground movement .
the contractor may use a temporary casing .
the contractors method to prevent ground movement shall be approved by the engineer .
the casings for the anchor holes if used shall be removed .
the drill hole shall be located so the longitudinal axis of the drill hole and the longitudinal axis of the tendon are parallel .
the ground anchor shall not be drilled in a location that requires the tendon to be bent in order to enable the bearing plate to be connected to the supported structure .
at the point of entry the ground anchor shall be installed within plus or minus num degrees of the inclination from horizontal shown in the plans or the approved working drawings .
section num soldier pile retaining wall num the tendon shall be inserted into the drill hole to the desired depth .
when the tendon can not be completely inserted without difficulty the contractor shall remove the tendon from the drill hole and clean or redrill the hole to permit insertion .
partially inserted tendons shall not be driven or forced into the hole .
the grout equipment shall produce a grout free of lumps and undispersed cement .
a positive displacement grout pump shall be used .
the pump shall be equipped with a pressure gauge near the discharge end to monitor grout pressures .
the pressure gauge shall be capable of measuring pressures of at least num psi or twice the actual grout pressures used by the contractor whichever is greater .
the grouting equipment shall be sized to enable the grout to be pumped in one continuous operation .
the mixer shall be capable of continuously agitating the grout .
the grout shall be injected from the lowest point of the drill hole .
the grout may be pumped through grout tubes casing or drill rods .
the grout can be placed before or after insertion of the tendon .
the quantity of the grout and the grout pressures shall be recorded .
the grout pressures and grout takes shall be controlled to prevent excessive heave in soils or fracturing of rock formations .
after grouting the tendon shall not be loaded for a minimum of num days .
no grout shall be placed above the top of the bond length during the time the bond length grout is placed .
the grout at the top of the drill hole shall not contact the back of the structure or the bottom of the trumpet .
except as otherwise noted only nonstructural filler shall be placed above the bond length grout prior to testing and acceptance of the anchor .
the contractor may place structural grout above the bond length grout prior to testing and acceptance of the anchor subject to the following conditions num .
the anchor unbonded length shall be increased by num feet minimum .
num .
the grout in the unbonded zone shall not be placed by pressure grouting methods .
the corrosion protection surrounding the unbonded length of the tendon shall extend up beyond the bottom seal of the trumpet or num foot into the trumpet if no trumpet seal is provided .
if the protection does not extend beyond the seal or sufficiently far enough into the trumpet the contractor shall extend the corrosion protection or lengthen the trumpet .
the corrosion protection surrounding the no load zone length of the tendon shown in the plans shall not contact the bearing plate or the anchor head during testing and stressing .
if the protection is too long the contractor shall trim the corrosion protection to prevent contact .
the bearing plate and anchor head shall be placed so the axis of the tendon and the drill hole are both perpendicular to the bearing plate within plus or minus num degrees and the axis of the tendon passes through the center of the bearing plate at the intersection of the trumpet and the bearing plate when fully seated with the alignment load .
the trumpet shall be completely filled with corrosion inhibiting grease or grout .
trumpet grease can be placed anytime during construction .
trumpet grout shall be placed after the ground anchor has been tested .
the contractor shall demonstrate to the engineer that the procedure selected by the contractor for placement of either grease or grout produces a completely filled trumpet .
all anchorages permanently exposed to the atmosphere shall be covered with a corrosion inhibiting greasefilled or groutfilled cover .
the contractor shall demonstrate to the engineer that the procedures selected by the contractor for placement of either grease or grout produces a completely filled cover .
if the plans require restressable anchorages corrosion inhibiting grease shall be used to fill the anchorage cover and trumpet .
g testing and stressing .
each ground anchor shall be tested .
the test load shall be simultaneously applied to the entire tendon .
stressing of single elements of multielement tendons will not be permitted .
the engineer will record test data .
the testing equipment shall consist of a dial gauge or vernier scale capable of measuring to num inch and shall be used to measure the ground anchor movement .
the movementmeasuring device shall have a minimum travel equal to the theoretical elastic elongation of the total anchor length plus num inch .
the dial gauge or vernier scale shall be aligned so that its axis is within num degrees from the axis of the tieback .
a hydraulic jack and pump shall be used to apply the test load .
all jacks pressure gauges pumps and load cells shall have been calibrated with each other within the last num months by an independent aashto accredited laboratory or by a department section num soldier pile retaining wall num laboratory .
calibrated jacks gages pumps and load cells shall have identifiable serial numbers to insure traceability to calibration tests .
the pressure gauge shall be graduated in increments of either num psi or num percent of the maximum test load whichever is less .
the pressure gauge will be used to measure the applied load .
the pressure gauge shall be selected to place the maximum test load within the middle  of the range of the gauge .
the ram travel of the jack shall not be less than the theoretical elastic elongation of the total anchor length at the maximum test load plus num inch .
the jack shall be independently supported and centered over the tendon so that the tendon does not carry the weight of the jack .
the contractor shall have a second calibrated jack pressure gauge at the site .
calibration data shall provide a specific reference to the jack and the pressure gauge .
the loads on the ground anchors during the performance and verification tests shall be monitored to verify consistency of load where the test load is maintained within num of the specified value .
performance test loads and verification test loads when specified sustained for num minutes or less and all proof test leads shall be monitored by the jack pressure gauge alone .
performance test loads and verification test loads when specified sustained for longer than num minutes shall be monitored with the assistance of an electric or hydraulic load cell .
the contractor shall provide the load cell and a readout device .
the load cell shall be mounted between the jack and the anchor plate .
the load cell shall be selected to place the maximum test load within the middle  of the range of the load cell .
the stressing equipment shall be placed over the ground anchor tendon in such a manner that the jack bearing plates load cell and stressing anchorage are in alignment .
the permanent ground anchor load monitoring procedure for performance test loads and verification test loads sustained for longer than num minutes shall be as follows step num for each increment of load attainment of the load shall be initially established and confirmed by the reading taken from the jack gauge .
step num once the permanent ground anchor load has been stabilized based on the jack gauge reading the load cell readout device shall immediately be read and recorded to establish the load cell reading to be used at this load .
the load cell reading is intended only as a confirmation of a stable permanent ground anchor load and shall not be taken as the actual load on the permanent ground anchor .
step num during the time period that the load on the permanent ground anchor is held at this load increment the contractor shall monitor the load cell reading .
the contractor shall adjust the jack pressure as necessary to maintain the initial load cell reading .
jack pressure adjustment for any other reason will not be allowed .
step num permanent ground anchor elongation measurements shall be taken at each load increment as specified in item numgnum .
step num steps num through num shall be repeated at each increment of load in accordance with the load sequence specified in item numgnum .
num .
performance testing .
performance tests shall be done in accordance with the following procedures .
five percent of the ground anchors and at any other locations as determined by the engineer shall be performance tested .
the engineer will select the ground anchors to be performance tested .
the initial three production anchors shall be performance tested .
the performance test shall be made by incrementally loading and unloading the ground anchor in accordance with the following schedule consistent with the contractor design .
the load shall be raised from one increment to another immediately after a deflection reading .
section num soldier pile retaining wall num performance test schedule the maximum test load in a performance test shall be held for num minutes .
the loadhold period shall start as soon as the maximum test load is applied and the anchor movement with respect to a fixed reference shall be measured and recorded at num num num num num num and num minutes .
if the anchor movement between num and num minutes exceeds num inches the maximum test load shall be held for an additional num minutes .
if the loadhold is extended the anchor movement shall be recorded at num num num num and num minutes .
if an anchor fails in creep retesting will not be allowed .
all anchors not performance tested shall be proof tested .
num .
proof testing .
proof tests shall be performed by incrementally loading the ground anchor in accordance with the following schedule consistent with the contractors design .
the load shall be raised from one increment to another immediately after a deflection reading .
the anchor movement shall be measured and recorded to the nearest num inches with respect to an independent fixed reference point at the alignment load and at each increment of load .
the load shall be monitored with a pressure gauge .
at load increments other than the maximum test load the load shall be held just long enough to obtain the movement reading .
proof test schedule load al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl al jack to lockoff load where al is the alignment load dl is the design load increment load increment load num al num al num numdl num numdl num al num numdl num numdl num numdl num numdl num numdl num al num numdl num numdl num al num numdl num numdl num numdl num numdl num al num numdl num numdl num numdl num numdl num numdl num num dl num numdl num numdl num reduce to lockoff load where al is the alignment load dl is the tie back anchor design load section num soldier pile retaining wall num the maximum test load in a proof test shall be held for num minutes .
the loadhold period shall start as soon as the maximum test load is applied and the anchor movement with respect to a fixed reference shall be measured and recorded at num num num num num num and num minutes .
if the anchor movement between num and num minutes exceeds num inches the maximum test load shall be held of an additional num minutes .
if the loadhold is extended the anchor movements shall be recorded at num num num num and num minutes .
if an anchor fails in creep retesting will not be allowed .
h permanent ground anchor acceptance criteria .
a performance or proof tested ground anchor with a numminute load hold is acceptable if the num .
ground anchor carries the maximum test load with less than num inches of movement between num and num minutes and num .
total movement at the maximum test load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the tendon unbonded length .
a verification performance or proof tested ground anchor with a numminute load hold is acceptable if the num .
ground anchor carries the maximum test load with a creep rate that does not exceed num incheslog cycle of time and is a linear or decreasing creep rate .
num .
total movement at the maximum test load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the tendon unbonded length .
if the total movement of the ground anchors at the maximum test load does not exceed num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the tendon unbonded length the contractor shall replace the ground anchor at no additional cost to the department .
retesting of a ground anchor will not be allowed .
ground anchors that have a creep rate greater than num incheslog cycle of time can be incorporated in the finished work at a load equal to  its failure load .
the failure load is the load carried by the anchor after the load has been allowed to stabilize for num minutes .
when a ground anchor fails the contractor shall modify the design the construction procedures or both .
these modifications may include but are not limited to installing replacement ground anchors modifying the installation methods increasing the bond length or changing the ground anchor type .
any modification that requires changes to the structure shall have prior approval of the engineer .
any modifications of design or construction procedures shall be at the contractors expense .
upon completion of the test the load shall be adjusted to the lockoff load indicated in the plans and transferred to the anchorage device .
the ground anchor may be completely unloaded prior to lockoff .
after transferring the load and prior to removing the jack a liftoff reading shall be made .
the liftoff reading shall be within num percent of the specified lockoff load .
num method of measurement .
the soldier pile retaining wall will be measured in units of square yards or square feet of the exposed face of the wall as designated in the plans .
measurement will not be made outside of the limits vertical and horizontal of the face of the wall shown on the working drawings or designated by the engineer .
the soldier pile retaining wall with permanent ground anchors will be measured in units of square yards or square feet of the exposed face of the wall as designated in the plans .
measurement will not be made outside of the limits vertical and horizontal of the face of the wall shown on the working drawings or designated by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the soldier pile retaining wall will be paid for at the contract unit price .
this payment shall be full compensation for all labor equipment tools materials concrete flowable backfill reinforcing steel piling structural steel drainage etc .
and incidentals necessary to completely construct and remove the wall .
the soldier pile retaining wall with permanent ground anchors will be paid for at the contract unit price .
this payment shall be full compensation for all submittals labor equipment section num aggregate foundations num tools materials concrete flowable backfill reinforcing steel piling structural steel drainage etc .
material tests field tests and incidentals necessary to acceptably fabricate and test the wall components and construct the wall .
this payment shall also be full compensation for furnishing and placing the reinforcing steel for the wall facing .
excavation will be covered under other items of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa soldier pile retaining wall per square yard numb soldier pile retaining wall per square feet temporary permanent or with permanent ground anchors wall identification if required .
i.e .
number num number num etc .
section num aggregate foundations num description .
this work shall consist of designing and constructing aggregate foundations at the locations shown on the plans .
the aggregate foundations are also referred to as either stone column foundations or compacted aggregate foundations .
num materials .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer the aggregate for aggregate foundations shall be number num coarse aggregate meeting the requirements given in section num .
num design requirements for aggregate foundations .
the contractor shall be responsible for insuring that the size pattern and spacing of the aggregate foundations are adequate to provide the required bearing capacity settlement control and global slope stability .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for all assumptions made about the strength of the soil and rock and all implications that the properties of the soil and rock have on the design constructability and stability .
the design of the aggregate foundations shall meet the requirements given in the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
these requirements shall include the following num .
a minimum factor of safety of num against global slope stability failure as outlined in fhwa manual fhwasanumr num .
a minimum factor of safety of num against sliding failure num .
the theoretical settlement shall not exceed two inches as measured from the retaining wall bearing elevation num .
a minimum factor of safety of num against bearing capacity failure .
num submittal of designs details and construction procedures .
a initial submittal .
the contractor shall submit num sets of design calculations foundations details and construction procedures to the engineer as an initial submittal .
this submittal shall be made within num calendar days after the date of the notice to proceed .
if clarifications are required one set will be returned to the contractor with comments for clarification .
the initial submittal will be returned to the contractor for clarification within num calendar days after the receipt of the initial submittal .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days for each clarification of the initial submittal and the engineer will be allowed num calendar days to determine if further clarification is necessary .
the engineer will not approve the submittal of the design calculations foundations details and construction procedures but will review the submittal for completeness .
the initial submittal of the design calculations foundations details and construction procedures shall be sealed by a licensed professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama .
b final submittal .
when the engineer informs the contractor that the design calculations foundations details and construction procedures are complete the contractor shall submit num sets of calculations and section num aggregate foundations num drawings and a mylar sepia set of the drawings as a final submittal .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days to make the final submittal .
the contractor shall not begin foundation construction or incorporate materials into the work until the engineer returns one set of the completed design calculations foundations details and construction procedures to the contractor .
this final submittal shall be sealed by a licensed professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama .
c minimum requirements for the submittal of design calculations .
num .
configuration of the design submittal .
the design calculation sheets shall have the project number foundation locations initials of preparer and page number at the top of each page .
an index page shall be included to provide a list of the pages of the design calculations .
the design calculations shall include an explanation of all symbols on the calculations a description of computer programs used in the design and at least one hand calculation documenting the computer program results .
the design calculations shall indicate the target minimum replacement ratio at each section .
num .
diagrams of the critical cross sections .
the design calculations shall include diagrams of the critical design cross section geometry including soil and rock strata and the location size and depth of the foundations .
the design cross sections shall also include the critical slip surface shown where it will result in the minimum factor of safety .
num .
physical properties of the rock and soil .
the soil and rock shear strengths friction angle and cohesion and unit weights shall be shown for each soil and rock strata .
geotechnical data is provided in the contract documents .
supplementary geotechnical data may be available and may be obtained from the materials and tests engineer .
any additional subsurface information needed to design the aggregate foundations shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num .
factors of safety .
the comparison of the calculated factors of safety and the minimum required factors of safety shall be shown for the design .
d minimum requirements for the submittal of foundation details .
num .
plan view of the foundations .
a drawing of the plan view of the aggregate foundations shall be submitted .
the following details shall be shown on the plan view a reference baseline the offset from the construction centerline or baseline to the foundations size and alignment of the foundations rightofway and permanent or temporary construction easements limits location of all known active and abandoned existing utilities adjacent structures and other potential interferences .
the centerline of any drainage structure or drainage pipe behind passing through or passing under the foundations num .
elevation view of the foundations .
a drawing of the elevation view of the aggregate foundations shall be submitted .
the following details shall be shown on the elevation view the elevation at the top and bottom of the foundations size and alignment of the foundations schematic and elevations of the structures supported by the foundations the centerline of any drainage structure or drainage pipe behind passing through or passing under the foundations .
e minimum requirements for the submittal of construction procedures .
construction procedures shall be submitted to identify all of the processes equipment tools and materials required for the construction and testing of the aggregate foundations .
a quality control plan and examples of forms proposed for the documentation of construction daily progress reports and testing shall be submitted with the construction procedures .
section num aggregate foundations num num approved list of aggregate foundation specialty contractors .
the following aggregate foundation designbuild specialty contractors are approved to perform the work geopier rammed aggregate piers geopier foundation company num fairview road suite num mooresville north carolina num vibropier hayward baker corporation num nine north court alpharetta ga num .
other aggregate foundation specialty contractors will be given consideration for approval .
consideration for approval will be given to specialty contractors that can provide documentation that they have successfully designed and constructed at least num projects in the last num years where the construction of permanent aggregate foundation totals at least num foundations .
num construction requirements .
a compliance with the submittal of details and construction procedures .
the foundation excavation construction and testing shall be performed in accordance with the requirements shown on the submittal of foundations details and construction procedures distributed by the engineer .
b daily progress reports .
the contractor shall furnish a complete and accurate record of aggregate foundation installation to the engineer .
the record shall indicate the foundation location length drilled diameter average lift thickness and final elevations of the base and top of the foundations .
the record shall also indicate the type and size of the densification equipment used .
the contractor shall immediately report any unusual conditions encountered during installation to the engineer .
c excavation sheeting and shoring .
excavation shall be extended if the engineer determines that further excavation is necessary for the removal of soft or yielding areas that may be uncovered .
sheeting and shoring may be required to protect the site of the excavation .
excavation will be paid for under other items of work section num .
sheeting and shoring will also be paid for under other items of work section num. d construction tolerances .
aggregate foundations shall be installed so that each completed foundation column will be continuous throughout its length .
the center of the completed foundation column shall be within num inches from the required horizontal location .
the vertical alignment tolerance shall be a maximum of num inches horizontal for every num feet vertical of depth .
the completed aggregate foundation diameter shall not be less than num percent smaller than the required diameter .
the top of the ground improvement provided by the aggregate foundations shall be within num inches of the required elevation .
aggregate foundations shall be installed in a sequence that will minimize ground heave .
any heaving shall be recompacted or excavated as directed by the engineer prior to wall or embankment construction and be considered incidental to aggregate foundation construction .
e modulus test .
a modulus test shall be performed to verify the performance values selected for design .
a telltale shall be installed at the bottom of a test foundation so that the deflection at the bottom of the column can be measured .
the modulus test shall be conducted at a location where the bottom of the column terminates in soil .
acceptable performance is when the deflection of the bottom of the foundation is no more than num of the deflection at the top of the foundation at the design stress level .
astm dnum general test procedures shall be used to establish load increments load increment duration and load decrements .
with the exception of the load increment representing approximately num of the design maximum foundation stress all load increments shall be held for a minimum of num minutes a maximum of num hour and until the rate of deflection reduces to num inches per hour or less .
the load increment that represents approximately num of the design maximum stress on the foundation shall be held for a minimum of num minutes a maximum of num hours and until the rate of deflection reduces to num inches per hour or less .
section num aggregate foundations num a seating load equal to num of the total load shall be applied to the loaded steel plate prior to application of load increments and prior to measurement of deflections to compensate for uneven surface conditions .
the location of the modulus test will be determined by the engineer .
f bottom stabilization verification test .
after completion of the construction of the bottom of the foundation or at any time during the process of constructing the foundation a bottom stabilization verification test may be performed as required by the engineer .
these tests shall be performed when a new soil formation is encountered at the beginning of a project to provide quantitative information on foundation stabilization and on num of production foundations .
bottom stabilization tests shall be performed by placing a reference bar over the excavated cavity marking the tamper shaft applying energy to the tamper for an additional num seconds and observing the downward deflection of the tamper shaft by observing the deflection of the mark on the tamper shaft .
acceptable performance is indicated if the movement of the shaft is less than num of the vertical movement measured at the bottom of the foundation during the modulus test .
if the measured vertical movement exceeds num of the value measured during the modulus test added energy shall be applied to further compact the aggregate .
the procedure for measuring the movement shall then be repeated .
if there is still movement greater than num of that achieved during the modulus test and the movement is greater than num inches a lift of loose aggregate may be placed on top of the compacted aggregate and the verification test may be performed on this next lift after it is densified .
if there is excessive movement on this lift another lift may be placed and tested .
movement must be limited to below num of the movement determined from the modulus test before completion of num of the depth of the foundation .
num method of measurement .
the aggregate foundations will be measured in units of cubic yards .
the pay quantity for aggregate foundations shall be the volume calculated by multiplying the plan area of improvement by the average depth of the aggregate foundations installed during construction .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the aggregate foundations will be paid for at the contract unit price .
this payment shall be full compensation for all submittals labor equipment tools materials material tests field tests and incidentals necessary to acceptably construct the foundations .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa aggregate foundations per cubic yard section num mobilization num division num incidentals section num mobilization num description .
this section shall cover the preparatory work and operations including but not limited to those necessary for the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site for the establishment of all offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the project and for all other work and operations which must be performed or costs incurred prior to beginning work on the various items on the project site .
the lump sum bid for mobilization shall be so distributed among the various pay items of the contract that an overrun of a particular pay item will not adversely affect the unit price of that item .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction details .
not applicable .
num method of measurement .
a partial payment .
measurement of the item of mobilization will be on a unit basis for each project or combination of projects included in a single contract .
when more than one project is included in one contract the amount of payment to be made will be based on the percent complete and amount of the entire contract not the percent complete and amount of each individual project .
once the amount of payment is determined based on the entire contract this amount will then be prepared for payment on each individual project based on the percentage of the total contract of which the project is a part .
partial payments for mobilization are based on the amount bid for mobilization and the total original contract amount for all items of work .
payments will be made at the time and in the amounts shown in the following schedules .
schedule of partial payments for mobilization when the contract bid price for mobilization is less than or equal to num of the original contract amount partial payments are a of the contract amount for mobilization time of payment amount of payment accumulated payment first estimate num of the bid price for mobilization num of the bid price for mobilization after the first estimate and upon completion of num of the original contract amount excluding prior payment for mobilization num of the bid price for mobilization num of the bid price for mobilization after the first estimate and upon completion of num of the original contract amount including prior payment for mobilization num of the bid price for mobilization num of the bid price for mobilization section num field laboratories num schedule of partial payments for mobilization when the contract bid price for mobilization is greater than num of the original contract amount partial payments are a of the original contract amount except the final payment time of payment amount of payment accumulated payment first estimate num of the original contract amount num of total contract amount after the first estimate and upon completion of num of the original contract amount excluding prior payment for mobilization num of the original contract amount num of total contract amount after the first estimate and upon completion of num of the original contract amount including prior payment for mobilization num of the original contract amount num of total contract amount at acceptance for maintenance per item numcnum .
remainder of contract amount for mobilization num of contract amount for mobilization the total sum of all payments shall not exceed the original contract amount bid for the item of mobilization regardless of the fact that the contractor may have for any reason shut down his work on the project or moved equipment away from the project and then back again .
b when no separate payment is shown in the proposal .
when the proposal does not include a separate item for mobilization all work and incidental costs specified as being covered under this section shall be included for payment under the several scheduled items of the overall contract and no separate payment will be made therefor .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the item of mobilization measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid .
said lump sum price bid shall be full compensation for organizing and moving all labor tools equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site and for disbanding disorganizing and removing all labor tools equipment supplies and incidentals from the project site regardless of number of times such moves are made including all preconstruction costs exclusive of bidding costs .
b partial payment .
partial payments may be made in accordance with schedule noted in article num. c payment will be made under item no .
numa mobilization per lump sum section num field laboratories num description .
this section shall cover furnishing for the duration of the contract base soil and structure laboratories and asphalt and concrete plant laboratories as specified on the plans and in these specifications .
num materials .
laboratories and equipment furnished shall be in satisfactory usable condition and shall be maintained in that condition throughout the contract .
num equipment .
a base soil and structure laboratories .
laboratories for testing soil type bases soils structures and similar work shall comply in all details with the requirements of article num .
section num field laboratories num b asphalt and concrete plant laboratories .
asphalt and concrete plant laboratories for testing bituminous plant mixes or portland cement concrete and similar work shall comply in all respects with the requirements of article num .
num number of laboratories required .
the number of base soil and structure laboratories specified in the contract is approximate only .
the number actually required will depend on the scope of the contractors operations and may be expected to vary from the specified number .
only the number of base soil and structure laboratories actually furnished as directed in writing will be paid for at the contract unit price and no claim will be allowed for extra compensation on account of overrun or underrun in these items .
each asphalt and concrete plant furnishing materials to the project must have a laboratory meeting the requirements of article num for use by the department however no direct compensation will be made for these laboratories .
num method of measurement .
measurement will be by the unit for each base soil and structure laboratory furnished as directed in writing .
no measurement for payment will be made for asphalt and concrete plant laboratories .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
base soil and structure laboratories .
the number of laboratories furnished as specified above will be paid for at the contract unit price per each which shall be payment in full for use of the laboratory and equipment for locating relocating on the same contract if desired maintaining and removing same for furnishing utilities water electricity and heat and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the unit price covers the use or rental of the laboratory and equipment for the duration of the contract .
laboratories ordered by the engineer shall be furnished promptly within the time limit designated by the engineer failure to provide the facility when required shall be cause for the engineer to order the work stopped until such time as the facility is furnished .
should working conditions on the project be such that a previously ordered laboratory is not needed temporarily or permanently in certain cases the contractor may be allowed to remove a laboratory from the project with the written permission of the engineer .
however it shall be expressly understood that temporary removal is for the contractors convenience and when work progresses to the stage that the laboratory is needed the engineer will give written notice to return or replace the facility .
the contractor will be given num hours to comply with this order failure to comply shall be cause for the engineer to order the work stopped .
in addition any time a laboratory is away from the job site without authorization shall be deducted from the contractors estimate in an amount per day equal to the unit price bid per unit divided by the number of working days or calendar days provided by the contract .
cost of the removal and return to a facility shall be classified as incidental to furnishing the laboratory and no extra compensation for such will be allowed laboratory and equipment remains the property of the contractor and shall be removed by him upon completion of the work .
num .
asphalt and concrete plant laboratories .
the contractor will be responsible for providing a satisfactory laboratory meeting the requirements of article num for each asphalt or concrete plant supplying materials to the project .
the cost of providing these laboratories shall be included in the contract items for which asphalt or concrete materials are being furnished and no direct compensation will be made .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa furnishing base soil and structure laboratories per each section num right of way and land survey markers num section num right of way and land survey markers num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing markers for marking designated points on the right of way and land surveying reference points .
num materials .
markers shall meet the requirements given in section num for precast concrete products .
concrete for the markers shall be class a concrete in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements given in section num .
the type of brass and aluminum and steel for the marker caps shall be suitable for providing a permanent marker .
each marker cap shall be a single one piece casting .
num construction requirements .
all markers shall be set in accordance with the requirements given in the standards of practice for surveying in the state of alabama established by the alabama state board of licensure for professional engineers and land surveyors .
markers shall also be set in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
all markers shall be set by a professional land surveyor licensed in the state of alabama .
markers shall be set plumb in stable compacted soil on a firm foundation .
the space around the marker shall be backfilled with selected approved moist material rammed in place so that the marker when completed will be rigid and secure in the required location and orientation .
any marker damaged prior to final acceptance shall be replaced by the contractor without additional compensation .
num method of measurement .
the number of markers of the type designated measured for payment will be the actual number ordered completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
accepted markers will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for each type marker ordered and placed measured as noted above .
said unit price shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials fabrication of the markers installation of the markers including excavation and backfill thereof and for all material tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa right of way markers per each numb land survey markers per each numc permanent easement markers per each section num engineers field office num description .
a general .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and maintaining or setting up a field office for the exclusive use by the engineer during the life of the contract .
the field office shall be in reasonably close conformity with the type specified by the plans in accordance with the following type classifications section num engineers field office num type approximate floor space number of offices work rooms rest rooms outside doors windows num num square feet num m num num num num num num num square feet num m num num num num num num num square feet num m num num num num num note site installation of mobile offices or trailers will require the use of tie down straps in accordance with local or state requirements for mobile homes whichever are more stringent .
for used or relocated mobile offices or trailers the contractor shall provide and install new tie down straps meeting the above requirements .
b item numa furnishing type field office .
the field office shall be available and ready for use within num days after the date of the notice to proceed and will be vacated by the engineer no later than num days after the date of final acceptance of all work on the project .
the field office shall remain the property of the contractor .
field offices provided under this item may be a building house mobile office or trailer approved by the engineer in reasonably close conformity with these specifications .
this section shall also cover the work of furnishing security of the field office as required in item numanum .
security of the field office under pay item no .
numa shall be considered a subsidiary obligation of furnishing the field office .
in lieu of this security requirement when required on the plans or in the contract the contractor shall furnish and install a security fence around the field office .
this required fence will be paid for under pay item no .
numb furnishing security fence .
c item numc furnishing type field office state retained .
the field office shall be available and ready for use within num days after the date of the notice to proceed .
the field office along with all furnishings facilities and appurtenances shall become the property of the department upon completion of the project .
field offices may be a new mobile office or trailer approved by the engineer and in reasonably close conformity with these specifications .
this section shall also cover the work of furnishing and installing a new security fence around the field office when required on the plans or in the contract .
this fence will be paid for under pay item no .
numb .
the fence shall become the property of the department upon completion of the project .
d item numd state furnished field office .
this section shall cover the work of moving and setting up a statefurnished field office .
the field office shall be available and ready for use within num days after the date of the notice to proceed .
the field office mobile office or trailer along with all furnishings facilities and appurtenances shall be relocated from its present location to a site designated by the engineer .
this section shall also cover the work of furnishing and installing a new security fence around the field office when required on the plans or in the contract .
this fence will be paid for under pay item no .
numb .
the fence shall become the property of the department upon completion of the project .
num field office requirements .
a item numa .
num .
location .
a site for the location of the field office shall be arranged for and provided by the contractor subject to the approval of the engineer .
the site shall be on or near the right of way and readily accessible by automobile over an allweather road with allweather parking facilities for at least eight vehicles adjacent to the building .
if no adequate site is available on the project right of way or the contractor selects a site off the right of way he shall assume all expenses in connection with obtaining and leasing the site .
num .
building .
the field office building shall be separate and apart from any buildings occupied by the contractor .
the building shall be weathertight and insulated suitable for yearround use with heating air conditioning electric power and indoor sanitary facilities complete with lavatory and running water .
heat shall be forced hot air from a thermostatcontrolled gas oil or electric heating unit properly vented and capable of furnishing sufficient heat to section num engineers field office num maintain an inside temperature of num f num f num c num c. the air conditioning system shall be thermostatcontrolled and capable of furnishing sufficient cooling to adequately maintain an inside air temperature num f num c cooler than the outside temperature .
electrical outlets shall be provided on at least two walls of any office or work room and sufficient ceiling light fixtures furnished to provide a minimum of num footcandles num lx of light on all working surfaces .
all windows shall be fitted with locking devices hung to open and close and fitted with screens .
outside doors shall be fitted with cylinder locks and all keys turned over to the engineer .
a closet or locker with means for locking shall be provided for storage of survey equipment .
one fire extinguisher minimum size num num kg conum shall be provided for each num square feet num m of floor space .
the size and configuration of the working space within each office and work room of the field office shall be such as to provide room for working and movement of personnel that is acceptable to the engineer .
ceiling height shall not be less than num feet num m. entrance doors to restrooms shall be equipped with door locks .
num .
office furnishings .
office furnishings shall be supplied with the field offices in accordance with the following schedule minimum furniture per office num desk num chairs per work room num plan table num work table drafting num stools num chairs num water cooler dispenser num numdrawer file cabinet num feet num m of book shelving num plan storage rack appropriate fire extinguishers furniture need not be new but must be clean sturdy in good repair and acceptable to the engineer .
num .
area security .
the contractor shall be responsible for the security of the field office and its immediate area against vandalism and entry by unauthorized persons .
such security shall be in the form of a guard service for nonwork hours or a security fence min .
num feet num m high enclosure with a num foot num m wide minimum lockable gate .
see subarticle numb for additional requirements .
b item numc .
num .
location .
unless shown otherwise by the plans the site for the location of the field office shall meet the requirements of item numanum .
above .
num .
building .
the field office building shall be separate and apart from any buildings occupied by the contractor .
the building shall be weather tight and insulated suitable for yearround use with heating air conditioning electric power and indoor sanitary facilities complete with lavatory and running water .
heat shall be forced hot air from a thermostatcontrolled heating unit properly vented capable of furnishing sufficient heat to maintain an inside temperature of num f num f num c num c. the heating unit shall be a new heat pump having heating and cooling capabilities .
the air conditioning system shall be thermostatcontrolled and capable of furnishing sufficient cooling to adequately maintain an inside air temperature num f num c cooler than the outside temperature .
electrical outlets shall be provided on at least two walls of any office or work room and sufficient ceiling light fixtures furnished to provide a minimum of num footcandles num lx of light on all working surfaces .
all windows shall be fitted with locking devices hung to open and close and fitted with screens .
outside doors shall be fitted with cylinder locks and all keys turned over to the engineer .
a closet or locker with means for locking shall be provided for storage of survey equipment .
one fire extinguisher minimum size num num kg conum shall be provided for each num m of floor space .
the size and configuration of the working space within each office and work room of the field office shall be such as to provide room for working and movement of personnel that is acceptable to the engineer .
ceiling height shall not be less than num feet num m. each office shall be furnished with an acceptable set of steps for each outside door .
a num foot by num foot num m x numm deck shall be provided at the top of each set of steps .
such steps and decks shall be safe sturdy and suitable for the intended purpose .
they shall be section num engineers field office num constructed from num inch num mm nominal size thick lumber treated with a timber preservative in accordance with section num .
all restrooms shall be vented to the outside through the use of power ventilators .
entrance doors to restrooms shall be equipped with door locks .
num .
office furnishings .
unless shown otherwise on the plans office furnishings shall be supplied with the field offices in accordance with the following schedule minimum furniture per office num desk num chairs per work room num plan table num work table drafting num stools num chairs num water cooler dispenser num numdrawer file cabinet num feet num m of book shelving num plan storage rack appropriate fire extinguishers furniture shall be new sturdy and acceptable to the engineer .
water cooler dispensers shall be ul listed shall have a rated capacity of num gallons num l minimum per hour of num f num c water and shall be connected to the office plumbing facilities .
any special requirement office furnishings shall be as shown on the plans .
num .
area security .
when required a security fence shall be installed around the office .
such security fence shall be a chain link fence meeting the requirements of section num minimum num feet num m high with a num foot num m wide minimum lockable gate .
see subarticle numc for additional requirements .
num .
project completion .
unless shown otherwise on the plans the contractor will not be required to remove the field office its appurtenances and security fence upon completion of the project .
c item numd .
num .
location .
a site for the location of the field office will be arranged for by the engineer .
num .
relocation of the field office .
the field office a mobile office or trailer along with various appurtenances i.e .
steps decks electric service pole wiring from pole to office plumbing existing security fence etc .
shall be moved from its present location shown on the plans to the location designated by the engineer .
the mobile office or trailer shall be installed with required new tie down straps and connected to utilities .
num .
decks .
if existing decks are not included with the field office to be relocated a num foot by num foot num m x num m minimum size deck shall be provided at the top of each set of steps by the contractor .
the decks shall be safe sturdy and suitable for the intended purpose constructed from num inch num mm nominal size thick lumber treated with a timber preservative in accordance with section num .
num .
area security .
if an existing security fence is included with the field office to be relocated the contractor shall remove and reinstall the fence .
the cost for the existing fence relocation and its removal if required upon completion of the project shall be included as part of item numd .
when item numb is included on the plans or in the contract .
the contractor shall install a new security fence around the office .
such new security fence shall be a chain link fence meeting the requirements of section num minimum num feet num m high with a num feet num m wide minimum lockable gate .
num .
project completion .
unless shown otherwise on the plans the contractor will not be required to remove the field office its appurtenances and relocated security fence upon completion of the project .
section num engineers field office num num utilities and services .
a item numa .
the field office shall be provided with adequate lighting heating sanitary and drinking water facilities .
all installation and monthly maintenance charges for the utilities except for the monthly telephone billing shall be paid for by the contractor .
the department will order service for and coordinate installation of the telephones and pay the monthly telephone billing .
unless more stringent local or state regulations specify otherwise sanitary facilities shall include a septic tank min .
num gallon num l and adequate field lines where connection to a sanitary sewer system is unavailable .
all utility installations shall be in accordance with applicable local or state codes ordinances rules and regulations .
the field office and its facilities shall be maintained in a satisfactory state of repair until released by the engineer .
b item numc .
the field office shall be provided with adequate lighting heating sanitary drinking water and telephone facilities .
all installation charges for the utilities shall be paid for by the contractor .
the department will pay all utility usage bills .
unless more stringent local or state regulations specify otherwise sanitary facilities shall include a septic tank min .
num gallon num l and adequate field lines where connection to a sanitary sewer system is unavailable .
all utility installations shall be in accordance with applicable local or state codes ordinances rules and regulations .
all electrical wiring shall be in accordance with applicable local or state codes ordinances rules and regulations .
the field office and its facilities shall be maintained in a satisfactory state of repair throughout the life of the project .
c item numd .
the state furnished field office will be provided with adequate electrical sanitary and telephone facilities .
all installation charges for the utilities shall be paid for by the contractor .
the department will pay all utility usage bills .
unless more stringent local or state regulations specify otherwise sanitary facilities shall include furnishing and installation of a septic tank min .
num gallon num l and adequate field lines where connection to a sanitary sewer system is unavailable .
all utility installations shall be in accordance with applicable local or state codes ordinances rules and regulations .
num method of measurement .
measurement of field offices will be in units of the type specified by the plans ordered and accepted .
measurement of the security fence will be in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num foot num m of fence including the gate ordered and accepted .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
item no .
numa .
the ordered and accepted field offices measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the type field office specified which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the office and its related facilities security and services for exclusive use of the engineer throughout the life of the contract all as noted in this section and the satisfactory disposal thereof after the offices are released .
no additional compensation will be allowed for furnishing field office units larger than the type specified in the contract .
partial payments for the field offices will be made on monthly estimates in accordance with the following schedule a .
num of the unit price bid upon satisfactory installation and acceptance of the facility .
b .
num of the unit price bid when num of the anticipated construction time has expired .
section num geotextiles in permeable asphalt treated base application num c. num of the unit price bid when the semifinal or final estimate is paid .
num .
item no .
numb .
the ordered and accepted security fence measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the security fence which shall be full compensation for the furnishing and installing the fence and gate and for the maintenance of such throughout the life of the contract .
the security fence shall become the property of the department upon completion of the project .
when required on the plans this item shall also be full compensation for removal and delivery of the fence and gates to a plan designated location .
num .
item no .
numc .
the ordered and accepted field office state retained measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the type field office specified which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the office its furnishings related facilities appurtenances and installations for the exclusive use of the engineer and for the maintenance of such throughout the life of the contract .
the office along with all furnishings facilities and appurtenances shall become the property of the department upon completion of the project .
when required on the plans this item shall also be full compensation for removal and delivery of the field office and appurtenances including security fence to a plan designated location .
no additional compensation will be allowed for furnishing field office units larger than the type specified in the contract .
partial payments for the field offices will be made on monthly estimates in accordance with the following schedule a .
num of the unit price bid upon satisfactory installation and acceptance of the facility .
b .
num of the unit price bid when num of the anticipated construction time has expired .
c. num of the unit price bid when the semifinal or final estimate is paid .
num .
item no .
numd .
the ordered and accepted state furnished field office measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the relocation of the field office specified which shall be full compensation for the breakdown moving and installation of the office its furnishings related facilities and appurtenances including existing security fence when shown on the plans .
when required on the plans this item shall also be full compensation for removal and delivery of the field office and appurtenances including relocated security fence to a plan designated location .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa furnishing type ___ field office per each numb furnishing security fence per linear foot meter numc furnishing type ___ field office state retained per each numd state furnished field office per each section num geotextiles in permeable asphalt treated base application num description .
this section shall cover the furnishing and placing of geotextiles for use as a means to prevent clogging of the permeable base layer due to the migration of fine material from the underlying roadway layer .
the geotextile shall be designed to allow passage of water while retaining untreated base or subbase course soils without clogging .
num materials .
the geotextile used in this work shall be one constructed of nonwoven synthetic fibers meeting the requirements of aashto m num for separation geotextile class num and section num of these specifications with the exception that geotextiles manufactured with polyamide will not be allowed .
section num pavement and special underdrain num the geotextile filter shall be resistant to the heat and temperature range expected during placement of the permeable asphalt treated base .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the surface area on which the geotextile fabric is to be placed shall be free of loose aggregate foreign debris and all sharp objects during placement of the fabric .
b installation .
the geotextile filter shall be installed immediately prior to placement of the permeable asphalt treated base layer and extended full width between the inside and outside edge drains according to the manufacturers specifications and as shown on the plans or in the proposal .
exposure of geotextile filter to the elements between lay down and cover shall not exceed three days .
adjacent geotextile rolls seamed or unseamed shall be overlapped in the direction of placement of the permeable asphalt treated base a minimum of num feet num mm at all longitudinal and transverse filter fabric joints .
the geotextile shall be held in place prior to permeable asphalt treated base placement by pins staples or other means as approved by the engineer .
c seams .
both factory and field sewn or sealed seams if applicable shall conform to the strength requirements of table num as outlined in aashto m num for separation applications .
all seams shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
d damage repair .
damaged geotextiles as identified by the engineer shall be repaired immediately .
any geotextile filter which is ripped or torn during the construction process shall be replaced or repaired with a patch which extends num feet num m beyond the perimeter of the tear or damage .
num method of measurement .
the geotextile will be measured by the square yard square meter computed from the width from pavement edge drain to pavement edge drain and the length as shown on the plans or established in writing by the engineer .
this excludes seam overlaps .
num basis of payment .
a general .
the accepted quantities of geotextiles will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter in place .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa separative geotextile per square yard square meter section num pavement and special underdrain num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing pavement and special underdrain .
pavement underdrain shall be drain lines in the median and at the edges of pavement and shall include collection pipes and outlets .
edge drains and median drains shall be aggregate filled underdrains .
the details of the special underdrain will be shown on the plans .
shoulder drainage plane layers shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
geotextile filter fabric shall be placed to reduce the movement of soil into the drains .
section num pavement and special underdrain num pipes shall be installed to collect and provide outlets for the drainage .
num materials .
a geotextile filter .
the geotextile filter for aggregate filled underdrain shall be a nonwoven material meeting the requirements of aashto m num for class num subsurface drainage geotextile and section num of these specifications .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
b pipe .
the required types and sizes of pipes will be shown on the plans .
the pipe may be of any of the noncorrugated pipe underdrain or smooth lined corrugated pipe underdrain noted in section num perforated or nonperforated as required .
pipe fittings shall be of the same material as the pipe or of a compatible material providing a crush strength equal to or greater than that of the type pipe being used .
c aggregate filler .
aggregate filler shall meet the requirements for coarse aggregate section num for aldot size num num or num and the additional requirement that no more that num of the aggregate passes the no .
num num m sieve .
d slope paving .
slope paving for outlet headwalls shall meet the requirements noted in section num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the installation of pavement and special underdrain shall be done in coordination with other work to prevent damage to the roadway .
materials from the excavation may be deposited outside the trench work area for reuse in the work .
excess material shall be removed and disposed of as shown on the plan details or as directed by the engineer .
b aggregate filled underdrain .
an aggregate filled underdrain shall be a trench that is lined with a geotextile filter fabric and then filled with aggregate .
pavement median drains and edge drains shall be an aggregate filled underdrain with pipes placed as shown on the plans to collect drainage and provide a connection to the outlets for the drainage .
exposure of geotextiles to the elements between laydown and cover shall be a maximum of num days to minimize the potential for damage .
the geotextile filter shall be installed in such a manner that all splice joints are provided with a minimum overlap of num feet num m. securing pins shall be installed to anchor the filter fabric if the filter fabric does not remain in place during the construction of the drains .
where seams are required in the geotextile filter in the longitudinal trench direction they shall be joined by either sewing or overlapping as outlined in article num of these specifications .
all seams shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
overlapped seams shall have a minimum overlap equal to the width of the trench and shall be anchored with securing pins as directed to insure the required overlap is maintained .
where a filter repair is required a piece of filter shall be placed over the damaged area and extend num feet num m beyond the perimeter of the tear or damage .
when an outlet pipe passes through the filter a separate piece of filter of sufficient size to be wrapped around the pipe and flared against the side of the filled drain filter shall be used .
care shall be taken during the aggregate filler placement operation as well as the pipe installation when required to prevent damage to the filter .
the aggregate filler shall be placed and compacted by methods acceptable to the engineer .
c special underdrain outlets .
outlets may be classified and paid for as types of special underdrain outlets as follows type a designated for connecting an aggregate filled or prefabricated drainage mat underdrain line to a roadway front slope and requires a slope paved headwall .
section num pavement and special underdrain num type b designated for connecting an aggregate filled or prefabricated drainage mat underdrain line to a drainage structure inlet junction box etc ..
type c designated for providing an outfall from a drainage plane layer to a front slope and requires a slope paved headwall .
other types may be added as shown on the plans .
the width of the outfall trench requiring nonperforated pipe shall be kept to a minimum .
the pipe shall be installed with ordinary care and the backfill material placed in layers and compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
for type a and c outlets the end of the outfall pipe shall be protected by a slope paved headwall .
the end of the outfall pipe shall be modified as necessary to fit the headwall .
should the outlet end of the pipe or the headwall fall within the limits of ditch paving that portion of the ditch paving within the headwall limits shall be removed to neat lines and the headwall made to blend with the ditch paving .
for a type b outlet the end of the outfall pipe shall be drained into a designated drainage structure .
the wall of the structure to which the pipe is to connect shall be modified adjusted or replaced as necessary to provide a suitable connection .
any special fitting necessary to accomplish this connection will be considered incidental to the work .
for other types of special outlets the construction requirements will be as noted by plan details .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer all special underdrain outlets shall have a rodent protection screen made of galvanized hardware .
the screens shall be as detailed on the plans however slight modifications to the configurations shown on the plans may be used if approved by the engineer .
d special underdrain .
drainage collection systems and outlets may be classified and paid for as special underdrain pipe .
the details of these collection systems and outlets will be shown on the plans .
special underdrain pipe is usually nonperforated pipe .
trench widths for the unperforated pipe shall be kept to a minimum .
the pipe shall be installed with ordinary care with bells etc .
laid upgrade and all joints sealed .
pipe connections shall be made using appropriate approved fittings .
backfilling of the pipe trench shall be made by placing the backfill material in layers and compacting each layer as directed by the engineer .
connections to drainage structures shall be as detailed on the plans or approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
a item numa .
pavement median and edge drains will be measured in linear feet meters along the center of drainage line .
b item numb .
num .
type a and b outlets .
type a and b special underdrain outlets will be measured in units of num feet num m with measurements made along the center of the outfall pipe from the center of the pavement median or edge drain to the centroid of the outfall end .
adjustments will be made for payment purposes when the length of the outfall pipe exceeds num feet num m. num .
type c outlets .
type c special underdrain outlets will be measured individually as one complete unit .
num .
other types of outlets .
the method of measurement of outlets other than the types of outlets noted above will be as noted by plan details .
c item numc .
special underdrain pipe will be measured in linear feet meters along the center of each line or lateral center to center of fittings .
section num pipe underdrain num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
item numa .
pavement median and edge drains will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for all materials equipment tools and labor required to construct the drains .
the unit price shall include excavation of the trench disposal of excess material installation of the geotextile filter placement of the aggregate installation of the perforated underdrain pipe installation of the elbow at the outlet end of the drain line any required outlet connections and for all incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
num .
item numb .
a special underdrain outlet will be paid for at the contract unit price per each which shall be full compensation for all materials equipment tools and labor required for the construction of the outlet .
the unit price shall include excavation of the trench backfill and compaction of the trench furnishing and installation of the pipe and fittings furnishing and placing concrete for headwall or connection of outfall pipe to a structure the disposal of excess material and for all incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
payment for the outfall pipe for type a and b outlets shall be adjusted as follows length of outfall pipe of unit price to be paid over num feet num m but less than num feet num m num over num feet num m but less than num feet num m num num feet num foot num m num mm num over num feet num m but less than num feet num m num over num feet num m but less than num feet num m num over num feet num m but less than num feet num m num over num feet num m but less than num feet num m num num .
item numc .
special underdrain pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for all materials equipment tools and labor required the installation of the pipe .
the unit price shall include the furnishing of all pipe fittings and miscellaneous materials excavation of the trench installation of all materials backfilling of the trench disposal of excess materials and for all incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa pavement drain per linear foot meter numb special underdrain outlet type _____ per each numc special ____ inch mm diameter underdrain pipe per linear foot meter median or edge section num pipe underdrain num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing pipe underdrain of the type and sizes provided on the plans or in the proposal in accordance with the requirements of these specifications and installing such pipe at the locations shown on the plans or designated and in substantial conformity with the established lines and grades .
the work shall include the furnishing and construction of such joints and connections to other pipes catch basins endwalls etc .
as may be required to complete the work as shown on the plans or directed together with filter material and filter fabric as shown on standard drawing punum .
designations for the various types of pipe shall be as follows section num pipe underdrain num type kind abbreviations num concrete pipe c.p .
num corrugated steel c.s .
num coated corrugated steel c.c.s .
num vitrified clay v.c .
num corrugated aluminum c.a .
num coated corrugated aluminum c.c.a .
num bituminous fiber b.f. num poly vinyl chloride p.v.c .
num acrylonitrile butadiene styrene a.b.s .
num polyethylene p.e .
unless specific types of pipe are specified by the plans or proposal the contractor may at his option use any of the approved types provided herein .
however an installation once started shall have the same type pipe unless otherwise noted in the plans or directed in writing .
num materials .
materials shall meet the requirements specified in section num underdrain pipe including filter material .
the geotextile filter for aggregate filled underdrain shall meet the requirements shown on the plans and shall be a nonwoven material meeting the requirements of aashto m num for class num subsurface drainage geotextile and section num of these specifications .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
all materials will be subject to further inspection for acceptance as to condition at the latest practicable time the engineer has the opportunity to check for compliance prior to or during incorporation of materials in the work .
num construction requirements .
a standard pipe installation .
trenches shall be excavated to the dimensions and grade required by the plans or as directed .
a minimum num inch num mm bedding layer of filter material of the size shown on the plans shall be placed in the bottom of the trench for its full width and length and compacted as directed .
exposure of geotextile to the elements between lay down and cover shall be a maximum of num days to minimize the potential for damage .
the geotextile filter shall be installed in such a manner that all splice joints are provided with a minimum overlap of num feet num meter .
securing pins shall be installed to anchor the filter fabric if the geotextile material does not remain in place during the construction of the drains .
where seams are required in the filter fabric in the longitudinal trench direction they shall be joined by either sewing or overlapping as outlined in article num of these specifications .
all seams shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
overlapped seams shall have a minimum overlap equal to the width of the trench and shall be anchored with securing pins as directed to insure the required overlap is maintained .
where a filter fabric repair is required a piece of filter fabric shall be placed over the damaged area and extend num feet num meter beyond the perimeter of the tear or damage .
when an outlet pipe passes through the filter fabric a separate piece of filter fabric of sufficient size shall be wrapped around the pipe and flared against the side of the filled drain filter .
care shall be taken during the aggregate filler placement operation as well as the pipe installation to prevent damage to the filter fabric .
the aggregate filler shall be placed and compacted by methods acceptable to the engineer .
subdrainage pipe of the type and size specified shall be embedded firmly in the bedding material .
perforated pipe shall normally be placed with the perforations down and the pipe sections shall be joined securely with the appropriate coupling fittings or bands .
nonperforated pipe shall be laid with the bell end upgrade and with open joints wrapped with acceptable material which will permit entry of water yet prevent loss of filter material .
up grade ends of all subdrainage pipe installations shall be closed with suitable plugs to prevent entry of soil materials .
section num paving geotextiles num after the pipe installation has been inspected and approved filter material meeting the requirements of article num shall be placed as specified on the plans to a minimum height of num inches num mm above the top of the pipe .
care shall be taken not to displace the pipe or the covering at open joints .
the remainder of the filter material shall then be placed and compacted to the required height .
any remaining portion of trench above the filter material shall be filled with granular or impervious material as may be directed and thoroughly compacted consistent with the location of the trench within the work .
b underdrain outlets .
trenches for underdrain outlets shall be excavated to the width and depth shown on the plans .
pipe shall be laid in the trench with all ends firmly joined by applicable methods and means .
perforated pipe shall be laid with holes up and covered with roofing paper or nonperforated pipe meeting the same requirements of the perforated pipe may be used .
after inspection and approval of the pipe installation the trench shall be backfilled with suitable soil in layers and compacted as provided for drainage pipe .
filter material will not be required for outlet trenches unless specified on the plans or ordered by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the accepted length of pipe underdrain complete in place of each specified size and type will be measured in linear feet meters along the center of each line or lateral center to center of junctions and fittings .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
the accepted quantity of each kind and size of pipe underdrain will be paid for at the contract unit price for pipe underdrain complete in place for a depth of num feet num meter and less below existing ground line to bottom of trench which shall be payment in full for all excavation and its disposal foundation preparation backfilling furnishing hauling and placing of all materials including fittings cutting for connections joint material bands geotextile filter fabric and aggregate filter material or cover and bedding layer materials .
num .
accepted quantity of pipe underdrain complete in place at depths greater than num feet num meter below the ground line shall have an adjusted unit price arrived at by increasing the contract price bid by the percentage indicated in the table below .
the unit price coverage provided in item num above shall govern for such adjusted unit price .
depth underdrain installed below existing ground line extra percentage contract unit price bid to be increased more than num feet num meter but less than num feet num meter num num feet num meter and more but less than num feet num meter num num feet num meter and more but less than num feet num meter num num feet num meter or more num num .
no separate payment will be made for excavation .
the provisions of article num are not applicable to this section .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm underdrain pipe type per linear foot meter note specific type or types of pipe if required .
see article num for approved types .
section num paving geotextiles num description .
a general .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and placing a geotextile between pavement layers for the purpose of incorporating a waterproofing and stress relieving membrane within the pavement structure .
this specification is applicable to geotextile membranes used for full section num paving geotextiles num coverage of the pavement or as strips over transverse and longitudinal pavement joints .
it is not intended to describe membrane systems specifically designed for pavement joints and localized spot repairs .
num materials .
a paving geotextiles .
the geotextiles used in this work shall be constructed of nonwoven synthetic fibers meeting the requirements of aashto m num for paving fabric class num and section num of these specifications .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
b asphalt sealant .
the material used to impregnate and seal the geotextile as well as bond it to both the base pavement and overlay shall be a paving grade asphalt recommended by the geotextile manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
cutbacks and emulsions which contain solvents shall not be used .
uncut asphalt cements or cationic and anionic emulsions may be used provided these emulsions are used as outlined in article num of these specifications .
c aggregate .
if the ambient temperature is high enough to cause a bleedthrough of the asphalt sealant washed concrete sand may be spread over asphaltsaturated geotextiles to facilitate movement of equipment during construction or to prevent tearing or delamination of the geotextile .
excess quantities shall be removed from the geotextile prior to placing the surface course .
a hot asphalt mix broadcast in front of construction vehicle tires may also be used .
num equipment .
a asphalt distributor .
the distributor shall be capable of spraying the asphalt sealant at the prescribed uniform application rate .
no streaking skipping or dripping will be permitted .
the distributor shall also be equipped with a hand spray having a single nozzle and positive shutoff valve .
b geotextile handling equipment .
mechanical or manual laydown equipment may be used provided the laydown is smooth and without wrinkles or creases .
c miscellaneous equipment .
stiff bristle brooms or squeegees shall be provided to smooth the geotextile scissors or blades for cutting same and brushes for applying asphalt sealant at the geotextile overlaps .
when the ambient temperature is so low that the normal wicking of the asphalt sealant into the geotextile does not occur a pneumatic roller may be used to ensure geotextile bond to the adjoining pavement layers especially where thin lifts or chip seals are being placed .
num construction requirements .
a weather limitations .
neither the asphalt sealant nor geotextile shall be placed when weather conditions in the opinion of the engineer are not suitable .
air and pavement temperatures shall be sufficient to allow the asphalt sealant to hold the geotextile in place .
for asphalt cements the minimum air temperature shall be num f num c and rising .
when using asphalt emulsions the minimum air temperature shall be num f num c and rising .
b surface preparation .
the surface on which the geotextile is to be placed shall be free of dirt water vegetation or other debris .
cracks exceeding num inch num mm in width shall be filled with a rubberized joint sealer meeting the requirements of astm d num for type ii sealant .
potholes shall be properly repaired as directed by the engineer .
the joint sealer shall be allowed to cure prior to geotextile placement .
c application of asphalt sealant .
the asphalt sealant shall be spray applied uniformly to the prepared dry pavement surface at the rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num lm or as recommended by the section num paving geotextiles num geotextile manufacturers and approved by the engineer .
the recommended application for asphalt cements is num gallons per square yard num lm with rough and ravelled surfaces requiring a higher application .
when using emulsions the application rate shall be increased to offset the water content of the emulsion .
application of the sealant shall be by distributor spray bar with hand spraying kept to a minimum .
temperature of the sealant shall be sufficiently high to permit a uniform spray pattern .
for asphalt cements the minimum temperature shall be num f num c. to avoid damage to the geotextile however distributor tank temperatures shall not exceed num f num c. spray patterns for asphalt emulsion can be improved by heating .
temperatures in the num to num f num to num c range are recommended .
a temperature of num f num c shall not be exceeded since higher temperatures may break the emulsion .
the target width of asphalt sealant application shall be num inches num mm wider than the geotextile width .
the sealant shall not be applied any farther in advance of geotextile placement than the distance which the contractor can maintain free of traffic .
asphalt spills shall be cleaned from the road surface to avoid flushing and geotextile movement .
when asphalt emulsions are used the emulsion shall be cured essentially no water remaining prior to placing the geotextile and final wearing surface .
d geotextile placement .
the geotextile shall be placed into the asphalt sealant with minimum wrinkling prior to the time the asphalt has cooled and lost tackiness .
as directed by the engineer wrinkles or folds in excess of num inch num mm shall be split and laid flat .
brooming andor pneumatic rolling will be required to maximize geotextile contact with the pavement surface .
overlap of geotextile joints shall be sufficient to ensure full closure of the joint but should not exceed num inches num mm .
transverse joints shall be lapped in the direction of paving to prevent edge pickup by the paver .
a second application of asphalt sealant to geotextile overlaps will be required if in the judgement of the engineer additional asphalt sealant is needed to ensure proper bonding of the double geotextile layer .
removal and replacement of damaged geotextile will be the responsibility of the contractor .
trafficking the geotextile will be permitted for emergency or construction equipment only .
e asphalt overlay .
placement of the hot mix overlay shall closely follow geotextile laydown .
the temperature of the mix shall not exceed num c num c. in the event asphalt bleeds through the geotextile causing construction problems before the overlay is placed the affected areas shall be blotted by spreading sand or hotmix .
to avoid movement or damage to the geotextile membrane turning of the paver and other vehicles shall be gradual and kept to a minimum .
f seal coats .
prior to placing a seal coat or thin overlay such as an opengraded friction course the geotextile shall be lightly sanded at a spread rate of num to num pounds per square yard num to num kgm and pneumatically rolled so as to embed the geotextile tightly into the sealant .
num method of measurement .
the paving geotextile will be measured by the square yard square meter .
asphalt sealant for the paving geotextile will be measured by the gallon liter .
num basis of payment .
a general .
the accepted quantities of paving geotextiles will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter in place .
accepted quantities of asphalt sealant for the paving geotextile will be paid for at the contract unit price per gallon liter complete in place .
b payment will be made under item no .
numd paving geotextile per square yard square meter nume asphalt sealant per gallon liter section num geotextiles in separation applications num section num geotextiles in separation applications num description .
this section shall cover the furnishing and placing of geotextiles for use as a permeable separator to prevent mixing of dissimilar materials such as subgrades and surfaced and unsurfaced pavement structures zones in embankments foundations and select fill materials .
the geotextiles shall be designed to allow passage of water while retaining in situ soil without clogging .
when used as a soil stabilizer a detailed design process shall be followed taking into consideration the separation function of the geotextile along with its filtration and reinforcement functions .
num materials .
the geotextile shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for separation applications class num and section num of these specifications .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
num construction requirements .
the installation site shall be prepared by clearing and grading the area as required .
all sharp objects and large stones shall be removed and trees and shrubs shall be cut flush with the subgrade .
the removal of top soil and vegetation is not necessary .
when appropriate soft spots and unsuitable areas shall be identified during site preparation or subsequent proof rolling .
these areas shall be excavated and backfilled with select material which is compacted to a depth such that the area provides equal stability as the adjacent area .
stabilization of these areas may be enhanced by use of a geotextile at the bottom of the excavation before backfill .
num installation .
the geotextile shall be unrolled as smoothly as possible on the prepared subgrade in the direction of the construction traffic .
adjacent geotextile rolls shall be overlapped in the direction of subbase placement using the following guide required overlaps soil strength cbr unsewn overlap inches mm sewn overlap inches mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num unless shown otherwise on the plans the required overlap shall be as shown for a cbr value of num num .
the geotextile may be held in place prior to subbase placement by pins staples or piles of fill or rock .
geotextiles may be folded or cut to conform to any curvature of the area .
a fold or overlap shall be in the direction of construction and held in place as prescribed above .
num seams .
both factory and field sewn or sealed seams shall conform to the strength requirements of table num as outlined in aashto m num for separation applications .
all seams shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
num subbase placement .
the subbase shall be placed by end dumping onto the geotextile from the edge of the geotextile or over previously placed subbase aggregate .
on subgrades having a cbr of num the subbase aggregate shall be spread simultaneously with dumping to minimize the potential of a localized subgrade failure .
direct traffic on the geotextile along with any sudden stops starts or turns on the subbase material by construction equipment shall be avoided where possible .
using whatever means the subbase material shall be spread from the back dumped pile .
except in the case of low volume roads adt num a minimum thickness of num inches num mm shall be maintained .
in the case of low volume roads this thickness shall be num inches num mm .
a smooth drum roller shall be used to achieve the specified density .
any ruts occurring during construction shall be filled with additional subbase material and section num aggregate slope protection num compacted to the specified density .
the use of vibratory compaction will not be allowed as it may cause damage to the geotextile .
num damage repair .
damaged geotextiles as identified by the engineer shall be repaired immediately .
the damaged area plus an additional num feet num m around the area shall be cleared of all fill material .
this area shall be covered with a geotextile patch extending num feet num m beyond the perimeter of the damage .
the removed subbase material shall be replaced and compacted to the specified density .
num method of measurement .
the geotextile will be measured by the square yard square meter from the payment lines shown on the plans or from the payment lines established in writing by the engineer .
this excludes seam overlaps .
excavation backfill bedding and cover material are separate pay items .
num basis of payment .
a general .
the accepted quantities of geotextiles will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter in place .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa separation geotextile per square yard square meter section num aggregate slope protection num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and constructing a slope protection layer of graded aggregate on slopes as shown on the plans or directed in accordance with these specifications .
this section shall also cover the work if shown on the plans of furnishing and installing a geotextile filter blanket on slopes which are to receive the aforementioned aggregate protection layer .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the following a geotextile filter .
num .
general .
the geotextile shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for permanent erosion control geotextile class num and section num of these specifications .
in addition the fabric shall have a minimum coefficient of friction of the wet fabric on wet aggregate of num as determined by the departments central lab .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldot num .
num .
securing pins .
securing pins for anchoring the filter shall be num of an inch num mm steel bars pointed at one end and fabricated with a head to retain a steel washer having an outside diameter of not less than num inches num mm .
the length of the pin shall not be less than num inches num mm .
b aggregate .
the aggregate shall be crushed stone meeting the requirements given in section num .
the aggregate gradation shall be section num aggregate slope protection num aggregate gradation for aggregate slope protection percent passing by weight mass sieve size minimum maximum num num mm num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num construction requirements .
a preparation of surface .
the slope to be treated shall be prepared by removing vegetation topsoil and dressing the slope to reasonable line and grade .
the surface shall then be compacted if necessary by the use of mechanical tampers to the satisfaction of the engineer before placement of the geotextile filter and aggregate blanket .
the dressing and preparation of the slope shall be considered incidental to the placement of the aggregate protection blanket and no direct payment for such will be made .
where grading has been completed under another contract and regrading is necessary to obtain the desired uniform slope such regrading shall be considered incidental to the placement of the aggregate protection blanket and no direct payment for such will be made .
b placement of geotextile filter .
the geotextile filter if required shall be placed in the manner and at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
exposure of the geotextile to the elements between lay down and cover shall be a maximum of num days to minimize damage potential .
at the time of installation filter shall be rejected if it has defects rips holes flaws deterioration or damage incurred during manufacture transportation or storage .
the filter shall be placed with the long dimension horizontal with the natural ground line unless otherwise directed by the engineer and shall be laid smooth and free of tension stress folds wrinkles or creases .
the strips shall be placed to provide a minimum width of num feet num m of overlap for each joint .
overlap joints and seams shall be measured as a single layer of cloth .
securing pins with washers shall be inserted through both strips of overlapped cloth at not greater than the following intervals along a line through the midpoint of the overlap .
pin spacing slope num feet num m steeper than num num feet num m num to num num feet num m flatter than num the filter shall be turned down and buried approximately num inches num mm at all exterior limits .
additional pins regardless of location shall be installed as necessary to prevent any slippage of the geotextile filter .
each securing pin shall be pushed through the filter until the washer bears against the filter and secures it firmly to the foundation .
the filter shall be protected at all times during construction from contamination by surface runoff and any filter so contaminated shall be removed and replaced with uncontaminated filter .
any damage to the filter during its installation or during placement of riprap shall be replaced by the contractor .
the work shall be scheduled so that num days does not expire between placement of the filter and the covering of the filter with the graded aggregate .
aggregate shall not be dropped on the filter from a height greater than num foot num mm .
greater drop heights will be permitted if the contractor provides a cushioning layer of sand on top of the filter before dumping of stone .
the combination of drop height for stone and sand cushion layer thickness to be approved shall be demonstrated to not puncture or damage the filter .
no measurement or separate payment shall be made for a sand cushion layer placed for the purpose of allowing an increased drop height of stones .
any damage to the geotextile filter during placement of aggregate shall be corrected prior to proceeding with the work .
c placement of aggregate .
the method of placement of the aggregate shall be at the option of the contractor provided it produces uniform coverage and depth without damaging the geotextile filter if present .
section num riprap num any damage to the filter shall be cause for ordering the aggregate cleaned from the damaged area and the repair of the filter by an additional layer of filter covering the damaged area overlapping at least num feet num m onto undamaged filter and securing the patch with adequate securing pins .
if uniformity of coverage is not obtained by the method of placement such shall be corrected in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
no compaction of the aggregate blanket is required .
num method of measurement .
accepted aggregate slope protection and geotextile filter for aggregate slope protection if applicable will each be measured in square yards square meters complete in place computed from actual measurements taken along the top surface of the treated area to the nearest num square yard num m .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted aggregate slope protection and geotextile filter for aggregate slope protection measured as noted above will each be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for the item complete in place and includes the furnishing of all materials the preparation of the slope excavation backfill compacting slope disposal of surplus material placement of materials and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa aggregate slope protection per square yard square meter numb geotextile filter for aggregate slope protection per square yard square meter section num riprap num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and constructing the several classes or types of riprap each of which shall consist of a protective course of stone or other approved materials on embankment slopes in channels and ditches wave protection for causeways and shoreline roadway embankments bridge piers and abutments or other work as shown on the plans or directed with or without a geotextile filter all in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades noted in the plan details .
num materials .
if a geotextile filter is required it shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for permanent erosion control geotextile class num and section num of these specifications .
all other materials shall conform to the requirements of division num materials .
specific reference is made to section num riprap materials .
the geotextile shall be selected from list iinum of the departments manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
in locations where maintaining the clear zone is a consideration a traversable tied concrete block mat may be used in lieu of riprap .
tied concrete block mat shall be selected from the departments miscellaneous approved products list or shall be a similar product that has a minimum shear stress capacity of num pounds per square foot is installed with the manufacturers recommended underlayment and is submitted for approval by the engineer prior to installation .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all slopes to be treated with riprap shall be trimmed to the lines and grades indicated by the plans or directed loose material shall be compacted by methods approved by the engineer or removed .
section num riprap num slopes which require a geotextile blanket under the riprap shall in addition to the above be prepared as noted in subarticle b below .
placement of any riprap on a filter blanket shall be by such means that will not damage or destroy the blanket .
any damage to the blanket shall be repaired without additional compensation .
unless otherwise authorized or directed by the engineer riprap protection for bridge ends shall be placed immediately following the grading operations .
the bridge contractor shall protect any slope protection material in place during the bridge construction and shall be responsible for any damage due to negligence on the part of his operations .
if directed by the engineer or shown by plan details all outer edges and the top of riprap where the riprap terminates shall be formed so that the surface of the riprap will be embedded and even with the surface of the ground andor slope .
all riprap construction shall begin at the bottom of the slope and progress upward .
b filter blanket .
num .
general .
unless otherwise specified by the plans or ordered in writing the contractor may select one of the filter blanket materials provided in article num for construction of the filter blanket except that a geotextile blanket will not be allowed for soils with num by weight mass passing the num num m sieve .
if an aggregate blanket is used the blanket shall be constructed using the designated material to a minimum thickness of num inches num mm unless otherwise shown by the plans all in accordance with the provisions noted in this subarticle and the plan details .
if a geotextile filter is used it shall conform with article num of this section .
num .
foundation preparation .
areas on which filter blankets are to be placed shall be uniformly trimmed and dressed to conform to cross sections shown by the plans within an allowable tolerance of plus or minus num inches num mm from the theoretical slope lines and grades .
num .
placement .
a .
aggregate blankets gravel or crushed stone .
filter blanket material shall be spread uniformly on the prepared base in a satisfactory manner to a thickness of not less than num of an inch num mm from that specified and to neat lines as indicated on the plans .
placing or spreading of material by methods which will tend to segregate particle sizes within the filter layer will not be permitted .
any damage to the surfaces of the filter blanket foundation during the placing of the filter blanket shall be repaired before proceeding with the work .
compaction of the filter material will not be required but shall be finished to present a reasonably even surface free from mounds depressions or windrows .
b. geotextile filter .
exposure of geotextiles to the elements between lay down and cover shall be a maximum of num days to minimize damage potential .
the geotextile shall be placed and anchored on a smooth graded surface approved by the engineer .
the geotextile shall be placed in such a manner that placement of the overlying materials will not excessively stretch or tear the filter .
anchoring of the terminal ends of the geotextile shall be accomplished through the use of key trenches or aprons at the crest and toe of the slope .
in certain applications num inch num mm long anchoring pins placed on num to num foot num to num m centers depending on the slope of the covered area should be used to expedite construction .
successive geotextile sheets shall be overlapped in such a manner that the upstream sheet is placed over the downstream sheet andor upslope over downslope .
in underwater applications the geotextile and required thickness of backfill material shall be placed the same day .
the backfill placement shall begin at the toe and proceed up the slope .
riprap and heavy stone filling shall not be dropped onto the geotextile from the height of more than num foot num mm .
slope protection and smaller sizes of stone filling shall not be dropped onto the geotextile from a height exceeding num feet num m. any section num riprap num geotextile damaged during placement shall be replaced as directed by the engineer at the contractors expense .
the geotextile shall be joined by either sewing or overlapping .
all seams shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
overlapped seams shall have a minimum overlap of num inches num mm except where placed underwater where the overlap shall be a minimum of num feet num m. a geotextile patch shall be placed over the damaged area and extend num feet num m beyond the perimeter of the tear or damage .
c stone riprap .
num .
general .
unless otherwise shown by the plan details or directed stone riprap shall not be placed on slopes steeper than the natural angle of repose of the riprap material .
placement of stones may unless otherwise noted in this subarticle be placed by methods and equipment approved by the engineer suitable for the purpose of placing the riprap in accordance with the requirements for the class riprap involved without damaging any existing facility or construction feature .
num .
class num .
class num riprap is essentially designed for hand placement and use with minimal water currents .
stones shall be laid with close broken joints and resting on the embankment slope .
the stones shall be of such shape and shall be so laid as to produce a single layer of stone of the thickness shown on the plans measured perpendicular to the slope .
the bottom course shall be laid in a trench excavated to such depth below the toe of the slope that all parts of the bottom course will be num feet num m below the toe .
trenching will not be required where the toe of the slope is below water level .
the back of the trench shall be on the same slope as the fill .
the laying of the courses shall progress upward the larger stones being placed in the lower courses .
the individual pieces of stone in each horizontal course shall be laid so that they will break joints with the stones in the course below the tops sloped to drain away from embankment .
open joints shall be filled with spalls or small stones in such manner that all stones are tightly wedged or keyed .
the finished surface shall present a reasonably uniform appearance and shall not vary more than num inches num mm from the average surface .
the finished surface at the ends of the riprap shall be flush with the adjacent earth fill surface .
num .
class num and num .
class num and num riprap is designed for use in areas with minimal to medium water currents and wave action .
the stones shall be placed in such a manner as to produce a reasonably well graded mass of rock with the minimum practical percentage of voids .
the riprap shall be constructed to the lines grades and thickness shown by the plans or directed within a tolerance of plus num inches num mm or minus num inches num mm from the designated finish surface of the riprap except that either extreme of such tolerance shall be reached as a uniform rate over an area greater than num square feet num m .
riprap shall be placed in its full course thickness in one operation and in such a manner as to avoid displacing the filter blanket material where filter blanket is required .
the larger stones shall be well distributed and the entire mass of stones in their final position shall conform to a reasonable uniform gradation .
the finished riprap shall be free from objectionable pockets of small stones and clusters of larger stones .
placing riprap by dumping into chutes or by other methods likely to cause segregation of sizes will not be permitted .
the desired distribution of the various sizes of stones throughout the mass shall be obtained by selective loading of the material at the source by controlled dumping of successive loads during final placing or by other methods of placement which will produce the specified results .
rearranging of individual stones by mechanical equipment or by hand will be required to the extent necessary to obtain a reasonably well graded distribution of stone as specified above .
num .
class num and num .
class num and num riprap is designed for use in medium to high water currents and wave actions for the protection of bridge piers and abutments and protection of channel slopes .
stones may be placed without strict gradation controls provided sufficient small sizes are included to choke the larger stones .
dumping of the stones will be allowed however section num mortar for masonry num mechanical equipment to dress the material to a reasonable uniform slope will be required .
stones deposited contrary to directions will be considered wasted and will not be paid for .
d concrete sacked riprap .
immediately following mixing as noted in article num the mixture shall be placed in the bags tied so that when laid in position they will flatten out and give a thickness of not less than num inches num mm and placed flat on the area designated .
bags shall be rammed against each other to form closed joints with tied ends of sacks all laid in the same direction .
when required to be placed under water special care shall be taken to see that bags are closely jointed to give the same tight joints as required on dry slopes .
after the riprap is placed it shall be sprinkled with water as directed and kept damp for not less than three days .
no concrete sacked riprap shall be mixed in freezing weather .
e tied concrete block mat .
tied concrete block mat shall be placed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
f maintenance .
the contractor shall maintain all riprap until the contract is accepted and shall replace without additional compensation any damaged or lost riprap .
num method of measurement .
loose riprap of the class designated by the plans or proposal will be measured in square yards square meters computed from measurements taken parallel to the surface of the riprap or in tons metric tons as specified in subarticle numlh whichever is specified by the plans or proposal .
concrete sacked riprap filter blanket and tied concrete block mat will be measured in square yards square meters computed from measurements taken parallel to the outer surface of the riprap or the filter blanket whichever is applicable .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract unit price for loose riprap concrete sacked riprap filter blanket and tied concrete block mat shall be full compensation for furnishing and hauling all materials preparation of the placement area placing materials and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete these items of work .
the preparation of the area for the placement of riprap and tied concrete block mat includes excavation dressing the placement area and surrounding area and the disposal of any excess excavated material .
payment for this preparation shall be included in the contract unit price for the riprap unless otherwise noted on the plans .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa loose riprap class ____ ____ inches mm thick per square yard square meter numb concrete sacked riprap per square yard square meter numc loose riprap class ____ per ton metric ton numd filter blanket per square yard square meter nume tied concrete block mat per square yard square meter if a specific type of blanket is required so designate aggregate or geotextile .
section num mortar for masonry num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing mortar made in accordance with these specifications for the various classes and kinds of masonry when its use is required .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the provisions of division num materials .
specific reference is made to the following masonry cement article num sand article num section num rubble masonry num water article num hydrated lime section num num construction requirements .
the mortar shall be composed of one part of cement and two parts of sand by volume on basis of dry sand and sufficient water to make a mortar of such consistency that it can be easily handled and spread with a trowel .
if directed hydrated lime not to exceed num percent of cement by weight mass shall be added except that if masonry cement is used hydrated lime will not be required .
mortar shall be mixed only in quantities required for immediate use .
unless an approved mortar mixing machine is used the sand and cement shall be mixed dry in a watertight box until the mixture assumes a uniform color after which water shall be added as the mixing continues until the mortar attains the proper consistency .
mortar which is not used within num minutes after water has been added shall be wasted .
retempering of mortar will not be permitted .
num method of measurement .
no measurement will be made for mortar for masonry .
num basis of payment .
payment for mortar for masonry shall be included in unit prices of pay items for various kinds of masonry and no direct payment will be made for mortar .
section num rubble masonry num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and constructing rubble masonry consisting of approved stones laid in mortar as a means of constructing structures or parts of structures in accordance with these specifications to the lines and dimensions shown on the plans or designated .
rubble masonry as herein specified shall include the types commonly known as coursed rubble uncoursed rubble and rustic rubble .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the provisions of division num materials .
specific reference is made to type i and type iii masonry stone subarticles numa and c respectively .
mortar shall meet the requirements of section num mortar for masonry .
num construction requirements .
a shaping stone .
num .
coursed and uncoursed masonry stone .
the stones shall be roughly squared on joints beds and faces .
all shaping or dressing of stone shall be done before the stone is laid and no dressing or hammering which will loosen the stone will be permitted after it is placed .
num .
rustic masonry stone .
only shaping required will be that to eliminate sharp points and projections .
b weather limitations .
stone masonry shall not be constructed in freezing weather or when fresh mortar may be subject to freezing .
c laying details .
num .
the masonry shall be laid to line and in courses roughly leveled .
the bottom or foundation courses shall be composed of large selected stones and all courses shall be laid with bearing beds roughly parallel to the natural bed of the material .
the stone and the layers shall decrease in thickness from bottom to top of wall .
stones of each color shall be uniformly distributed in exposed surfaces so that walls do not present a patched appearance .
selected stone roughly squared and pitched to line shall be used at all angles and ends of walls .
headers shall be evenly distributed and preferably arranged to interlock .
each stone shall be cleaned and saturated with water and shall be damp while being set and the bed which is to receive it shall be section num rubble masonry num cleaned and well moistened .
all stones shall be well bedded in freshly made mortar .
the mortar joints shall be full and the stones carefully settled in place before the mortar has set .
no spalls will be permitted in the beds .
joints and beds shall have an average thickness of not more than num inch num mm .
the minimum thickness of mortar between stones shall be at least num inch num mm .
whenever possible the face joints shall be properly pointed before the mortar becomes set .
joints which can not be so pointed shall be prepared for pointing by raking them out to a depth of num inches num mm before the mortar has set .
the face surfaces of stones shall not be smeared with the mortar forced out of the joints or that used in pointing .
the vertical joints in each course of coursed masonry shall break joints with those in adjoining courses at least num inches num mm .
in case any stone is moved or the joint broken the stone shall be removed the mortar cleaned from bed and joints and the stone reset in fresh mortar .
weepholes shall be constructed where indicated on the plans or designated .
immediately after laying and while the mortar is fresh all face stones shall be cleaned of all mortar and mortar stains and kept clean and free from mortar stains .
num .
in coursed and uncoursed rubble masonry headers shall hold in the heart of the wall the same or larger size than shown in the face .
they shall extend not less than num inches num mm into the core or backing and in walls num inches num mm or less in thickness shall extend entirely through the wall .
they shall occupy not less than num of the face of the wall .
num .
in rustic rubble masonry stone shall be laid without regard to courses or patterns have close joints and reasonably smooth faces and if not coped reasonably true lines on top of structure .
d copings bridge seats and backwalls .
copings bridge seats and backwalls shall be of the materials and size shown on the plans and when not otherwise specified shall be minor structure concrete which shall conform to the requirements for section num .
concrete copings shall be made in sections extending the full width of the wall not less than num inches num mm in thickness and from num to num feet num to num m long .
the sections may be cast in place or precast and set in place in full mortar beds .
e pointing .
pointing shall not be done in freezing weather or when the stone contains frost .
joints not pointed at the time the stone is laid shall be wet with clean water and filled with mortar .
the mortar shall be well driven into the joints and finished with an approved pointing tool .
the wall shall be kept moist while pointing is being done and in hot dry weather the pointed masonry shall be protected from the sun and kept wet for a period of at least three num days after the mortar has set or be cured as provided by subarticle numm .
after the pointing is completed and the mortar set the wall shall be satisfactorily cleaned and left in a neat and workmanlike condition .
num measurement .
accepted rubble masonry will be measured complete in place and the volume actually constructed within the neat lines of the work shown on the plans or designated will be computed in cubic yards cubic meters .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted volume of rubble masonry measured as above described will be paid for at the respective unit prices bid per cubic yard cubic meter for coursed rubble masonry uncoursed rubble masonry and rustic rubble masonry complete in place which shall be payment in full for all material equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary for the satisfactory completion of the work .
b concrete .
concrete used in conjunction with the rubble masonry will be paid for as provided under minor structure concrete section num. c payment will be made under item no .
numa type rubble masonry per cubic yard cubic meter section num brick and concrete block masonry num section num brick and concrete block masonry num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing brick or concrete block masonry in accordance with these specifications at the locations and to the dimensions lines and grades as shown on the plans or established .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the requirements of division num materials .
specific reference is made to the following section num building brick grade mw clay or shale brick unless otherwise specified on the plans or concrete brick and concrete block .
section num mortar for masonry .
num construction requirements .
a brick masonry .
the foundation shall be constructed firm and dry .
all brick shall be damp at the time of laying .
bricks shall be laid in courses in full close uniform joints of mortar .
adjoining courses shall break joints by onehalf length as nearly as practicable .
the courses shall be level in all places except where otherwise directed .
all exposed surfaces shall be smooth and clean and the tie joint shall not exceed num inch num mm in width .
broken or chipped bricks shall not be used in the faces of the masonry .
the joints shall be cleaned and pointed before the mortar sets .
the exposed surfaces of the bricks shall not be smeared with mortar forced out of the joints or that used in pointing but shall be kept clean and free from mortar stains .
for straight masonry walls at least one course in seven shall be a header course .
no masonry work shall be done in freezing weather .
b concrete block masonry .
when so specified on the plans andor in the proposal masonry walls may be constructed of hollow concrete blocks instead of bricks .
applicable construction details shall be the same as for brick masonry .
c manholes inlets and catch basins .
brick masonry for manholes inlets and catch basins shall conform to details shown on the plans .
construction details shall be as specified in subarticle numa .
where shown on the plans the faces of these and similar structures shall be given a plaster coat .
mortar for this coat shall be of the same mix as used in laying the brick and the coat shall be not less than num of an inch num mm in thickness .
before applying the plaster coat the brick shall be thoroughly wetted and the surface allowed to dry sufficiently to insure proper bond of the plaster coat .
full mortar beds shall be provided for setting castings required by the plans .
castings shall be set carefully to the specified elevations .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of brick or concrete block masonry will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters of completed and accepted masonry except that when the proposal specifies payment by the unit for manholes inlets and the like measurement will be by the completed and accepted units .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the number of cubic yards cubic meters of brick masonry or concrete block masonry measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices for these items which shall be payment in full for excavating except as specified in section num laying backfilling and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
manholes inlets catch basins and the like will be paid for as specified in section num .
section num slope paving num b payment will be made under item no .
numa brick masonry per cubic yard cubic meter numb concrete block masonry per cubic yard cubic meter section num slope paving num description .
this section shall cover the work of paving with concrete any fill or cut slopes as shown on the plans or designated .
the slope paving shall be laid to line grade and dimensions shown on the plans or directed .
slope paving shall include but not be limited to paving of slopes at bridge ends under grade separation structures concrete slope drains paving of side ditches median ditches special ditches and other designated areas for control of erosion .
slope paving shall include wire mesh or other type of reinforcement when and as shown on the plans .
num materials .
the concrete shall meet the requirements of section num .
consideration will be given to the use of local or manufactured fine aggregate meeting the requirements of section num if approved the aggregate proportions shall be varied as directed .
steel reinforcement shall meet the appropriate requirements of section num .
joint filler and sealers shall meet the appropriate requirements of section num .
num construction requirements .
the slope to be paved shall be uniformly dressed and compacted with mechanical tampers to the satisfaction of the engineer before placing the concrete .
where grading has been completed under another contract and regrading is necessary to obtain correct grades for the slope paving such regrading shall be considered incidental to the placement of the slope paving and no measurement or direct payment for such will be made .
the concrete shall be mixed placed and cured in accordance with the requirements of section num which is applicable to this work .
weep holes approximately num inches num mm in diameter shall be placed in alternate runs of the pavement where deemed necessary by the engineer .
after placing the concrete shall be finished smooth and unless otherwise directed when partially set shall be cut with a finishing tool as shown on the plans .
where reinforced concrete slope paving is specified on the plans reinforcement shall be placed in accordance with details shown on the plans and in conformity with requirements of section num .
unless otherwise shown on the plan details joints for slope paved areas shall be in accordance with the following a contraction joints .
this type joint is essentially provided to control cracking and may be formed by tooling sawing or other approved methods for not less than num nor more then num the depth of the concrete .
except for sawed joints all joints shall be finished with a num inch num mm edging tool .
for flumes and ditch paving not adjacent to other paving the transverse contraction joint spacing shall be as approved by the engineer but generally not in excess of num feet num m. longitudinal contraction joints may be ordered by the engineer for paving widths in excess of num feet num m but are not to be placed where joint cracking will cause excessive seepage into subgrade .
for medians islands and ditches paved adjacent to curbs gutters or other paving transverse contraction joint spacing shall be located wherever possible so as to line up with existing joints .
longitudinal contraction joints may be ordered for paving widths in excess of num feet num m to control pavement cracking .
b construction joints .
the use and spacing of construction joints shall be as approved by the engineer consistent with the planned contraction and expansion joints for the paved area and the contractors paving plan .
the edges of all construction joints shall be finished with a num inch num mm edging tool unless otherwise ordered by the engineer .
section num grouted rubble slope drain num c expansion joints .
unless otherwise shown by plan details or directed by the engineer expansion joints num of an inch num mm wide shall be placed as follows where the slope paving joins drainage structures and other rigid structure supports .
to line up with expansion joints of adjoining pavement curbs gutters etc .
but in no instance more than num feet num m between joints .
where continuous runs of slope paving are num feet num m or longer transverse expansion joints shall be provided one joint for each additional num feet num m or fraction thereof of length .
where slope paving is confined longitudinally by other concrete units and the width of the slope paving is in excess of num feet num m one longitudinal expansion joint will be required for each additional num feet num m or fraction thereof of width .
paved islands of num square feet num m or less may be poured as a monolith if approved by the engineer .
expansion joints shall be formed using a filler and sealer specified in articles num and num .
unless shown otherwise by plan details the joint filler shall be from the bottom of the slope paving to num inch num mm from the top the sealer shall be num of an inch num mm thick and shall be recessed num of an inch num mm from the top .
num method of measurement .
slope paving will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters of paving complete in place .
regrading in excess of num inches num mm depth as described in article num will be measured and paid for as structure excavation section num .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted quantity as determined above shall be paid for at the contract unit price for slope paving which shall be payment in full for all excavation backfilling compacting slopes to be paved disposal of surplus material furnishing all materials mixing curing hauling and placing all materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa slope paving per cubic yard cubic meter numb reinforced slope paving per cubic yard cubic meter section num grouted rubble slope drain num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing gutter slope drain of grouted rubble masonry in accordance with the plans and these specifications and to the established lines grades and cross section shown on the plans and designated .
num materials .
a general .
the materials shall conform to the requirements of division num materials .
specific reference is made to subarticle numlb type ii masonry stone .
b grout .
grout shall meet the requirements of section num mortar for masonry except that it shall be of wetter consistency to flow as indicated in subarticle numc .
c base course material .
material shall be taken from sources shown on the plans or other approved sources of equal quality .
section num soil cement flumes num num construction requirements .
a foundation .
the foundation shall be formed at a depth of not less than num inches num mm below and parallel to the finished surface of the slope drain .
all soft or other unsuitable material shall be removed and the foundation shall be compacted and finished to a smooth firm surface .
b bedding stone .
the approved foundation material shall be prepared to form a bed as provided by the plans .
the slope drain stone shall be bedded in the foundation perpendicular to the finished surface flat face up with the longest dimension parallel to the slope drain .
the stone shall be fitted and laid in close contact and shall break joints satisfactorily .
each stone shall be tamped into place until the stones are firm and the surface conforms to the finished grade and cross section .
c finishing .
while the slope drain stones are being tamped the spaces between stones shall be filled and rammed with backfill material selected from unclassified excavation to within num inches num mm of the top and any irregularities in the slope drain corrected .
the cement grout shall be poured and broomed into the spaces between and over the stones .
this operation shall be continued until the grout remains flush with the tops of the stones .
the slope drain shall be protected by wet burlap until the grout hardens then kept moist for at least three days after grouting .
no grout shall be poured in freezing weather .
num method of measurement .
accepted grouted rubble masonry slope drain will be measured in square yards square meters complete in place along the finished surface both longitudinally and transversely and computed to the nearest num square yard num m .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted grouted rubble slope drain will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter complete in place which shall be payment in full for excavating and preparing the foundation bed placing and grouting the stone and for furnishing all materials tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa grouted rubble slope drain per square yard square meter section num soil cement flumes num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing soil cement flumes at locations designated in accordance with details shown on the plans .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the requirements of division num materials .
specific reference is made to the following cement section num .
water subarticle numb .
local sand sandgravel and stone screening for miscellaneous construction use section num .
preformed joint filler article num .
test specimens will not be required for soil cement flume .
section num soil cement flumes num num construction requirements .
a subgrade .
subgrade shall be finished and compacted to the section as shown on the plans or as designated .
side forms and transverse forms of the size and shape necessary to secure the desired section shall be placed prior to the placing of the mix and at such intervals which will insure a true finished grade and section by screeding with a straightedge .
b mix .
the mix shall be one part portland cement and six parts by loose moist volume local sand or sandgravel and shall be mixed in an approved concrete mixer or by approved hand methods to a consistency dry enough to stand on the slopes without subsequently settling and sloughing and tamped rough graded and finished by means of a hand float .
after screeding the surface shall be finished by hand float methods .
c curing .
as soon as the soil cement has hardened sufficiently to prevent marring of the surface and not later than the morning following its placement it shall be cured for a period of num hours using one of the methods provided in article num. d joints .
transverse expansion joints shall be constructed at maximum intervals of num feet num m. they shall be filled with either preformed joint filler or acceptable yard lumber board of num inch num mm nominal size pine snums .
the finished surface shall be scored transversely with a grooving tool to a depth of at least num inch num mm so as to form a weakened plane joint at intervals of num feet num m. e toe walls .
toe walls shall be constructed across the ends of each flume as follows on upper end a toe wall of num inches num mm in thickness and num inches num mm in minimum depth below subgrade of the flume on the lower end a toe wall num inches num mm in thickness and num inches num mm in minimum depth below subgrade .
f solid sod strip .
a strip of solid sod shall be placed along each edge of the flume .
num method of measurement .
accepted soil cement flume will be measured in square yards square meters complete in place along the finished top surface both longitudinally and transversely and computed to the nearest num square yard num m .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
accepted soil cement flume measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard square meter complete in place which shall be payment in full for excavating and preparing the subgrade and foundation bed furnishing and erecting forms furnishing all materials mixing and placing the mix curing backfilling and for all other materials tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
aggregate available from the rightofway may be obtained by the contractor without any charge for royalty and such material will not be included in excavation items .
no direct payment will be made for toe walls .
the solid sod strip will be paid for under item num solid sod .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa soil cement flume per square yard square meter section num bituminous treated glass fiber flumes num section num bituminous treated glass fiber flumes num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and placing a layer of bituminous treated glass fibers on planted ditch slopes and other areas as shown on the plans or directed .
num materials .
a glass fibers .
glass fiber material used for mulching shall consist of continuous fibers drawn from molton glass coated with a chromecomplex sizing compound collected into strands and lightly bound together without the use of clay starch or like deleterious substances .
the glass fibers shall be formed or wound into a cylindrical package in such a manner that the glass fibers can be continuously fed through an ejector driven by compressed air and expanded into a mat of glass fibers on the soil surface .
the material shall contain no petroleum solvents or other agents known to be toxic to plant or animal life .
the glass fibers shall conform to the following specific requirements property limits test method fiber diameter num to num inches num to num m astm d num yardspound mkg of fibers num num astm d num organic content num max .
astm d num pkg .
weight mass num num pounds num num kg astm d num b bituminous asphalt .
asphalt shall be one of the emulsified type permitted by subitem numbnum.b and complying with the requirements noted therein .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the surface to be treated shall have been installed and prepared by one of the methods provided in section num num or num unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
application of the bituminous treated glass fibers shall be accomplished within num hours after completion of planting operations .
b application of the glass fibers .
the glass fibers shall be dispersed by equipment specifically designed for the purpose of using compressed air as the moving force .
the glass fibers shall be spread over the area to be treated at a rate of approximately num to .num pounds per square yard num to num gm .
where water is expected to enter the flume the fiber blanket shall be anchored into the natural ground a minimum of num inches num mm .
c bituminous treatment of glass fibers .
after application of the glass fibers the area shall be treated with emulsified asphalt undiluted at the approximate rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num lm .
after application of the asphalt and the emulsion has broken and become tacky a light application of sand or pulverized soil shall be applied to the treated area if so directed by the engineer so as to prevent adherence of objects which may come in contact with the asphalt .
care shall be taken not to apply sand or soil in an amount detrimental to the newly planted area .
d maintenance .
the contractor shall maintain and repair the treated area to the satisfaction of the engineer until final acceptance .
num method of measurement .
accepted bituminous treated glass fiber flumes will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements to the nearest num square yard num m .
erosion control treatment required under the bituminous treated glass fiber flumes will be measured and paid for under the appropriate item of erosion control ordered used .
section num concrete sidewalks and driveways num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted bituminous treated glass fiber flumes measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard square meter which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of all materials the placing of materials and includes furnishing of all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa bituminous treated glass fiber flumes per square yard square meter section num concrete sidewalks and driveways num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing a portland cement concrete sidewalk or driveway with or without reinforcement as shown on the plans in one course on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and of the thickness and typical crosssection shown on the plans .
lines and grade shall be as shown on the plans or established .
subgrade in this section shall mean the prepared foundation on which the sidewalk or driveway is constructed .
this section shall also cover the work of retrofit installation of truncated domes detectable warning devices on existing sidewalks .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall comply with the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the following concrete shall meet the requirements for a class a concrete as provided in section num .
reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of section num and plan details .
truncated domes for retrofit shall be selected from the departments list iinum detectable warning devices .
this list is in the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
only the materials on this list shall be furnished for use .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
num construction requirements .
a equipment .
the equipment used for mixing concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the contractor may use forms or if requested in writing and approved by the department an approved automatic extrusion type paving machine .
forms shall be of wood or metal and shall be sufficiently staked to hold them true to line and grade while concrete is being deposited against them .
if of wood they shall be num inch num mm or num inch num mm nominal size stock lumber surfaces on all sides .
if of metal they shall be of approved section having a base width of at least num inches num mm and shall have a flat surface on top .
the depth of the forms shall equal the depth of the sidewalk or driveway .
adequate means shall be provided for securely fastening the ends of forms together .
any automatic extrusion machine considered must be demonstrated to produce a consolidated concrete section conforming to the dimensions crosssection line and grades shown on the plans or directed within the requirements noted herein in this section .
b subgrade .
all soft or other unsuitable material in the subgrade shall be removed and replaced with suitable material .
all fills and filling material shall be placed and compacted by rolling with an approved roller or hand tamped with approved tamping devices in layers not exceeding num inches num mm in thickness .
any existing areas that have been previously compacted by traffic to a greater degree than the remainder of the subgrade shall be loosened and the whole subgrade uniformly compacted as directed .
section num concrete sidewalks and driveways num c foundation backfill .
where provided by the plans andor proposal foundation backfill shall be placed and constructed as provided in section num .
no direct payment will be made for foundation backfill except when item numb is provided in the proposal and such is ordered placed by the engineer .
d setting forms .
forms shall be set to true line and grade and rigidly held in place by stakes or braces .
ends of adjoining form sections shall be flush .
forms and division plates shall be cleaned and oiled before placing concrete against them .
e handling measuring proportioning and mixing materials .
the method of handling measuring proportioning and mixing concrete materials shall conform to section num structure concrete .
where metal reinforcement is shown on the plans andor provided in the proposal it shall be placed in accordance with section num. f placing concrete .
a template resting upon the side forms and having its lower edge at the exact elevation of the subgrade shall be drawn along the forms and the subgrade shaped true before any concrete is deposited .
the subgrade shall be moist and shall be free of debris and all foreign material when concrete is deposited upon it .
the freshly mixed concrete shall be placed promptly on the prepared subgrade to the depth required to complete the sidewalk or driveway in one course .
it shall then be vibrated andor tamped and struck off with an approved straightedge resting upon the side forms and drawn forward with a sawing motion .
the concrete shall then be floated with a wooden float until the surface is true .
concrete laid during cold weather shall conform to the requirements given in section num. g joints .
unless otherwise shown by plan details the surface of sidewalks and driveways shall be marked in squares or rectangles not exceeding num square feet num m in area by using an approved marking tool .
the marking tool shall provide a groove approximately num inch num mm in depth and with rounded edges .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer expansion joints num of an inch num mm min .
wide shall be placed as follows at all curb returns and where the walks or drives join other concrete units .
to line up with expansion joints of adjacent curbs drives etc .
but in no instance more than num feet num m between joints .
where continuous runs of walks or drives are num feet num m or longer transverse expansion joints shall be provided one joint for each additional num feet num m or fraction thereof of length .
where walks or drives are confined longitudinally by other concrete units and the width of the walk or drive is in excess of num feet num m one longitudinal expansion joint will be required for each additional num feet num m or fraction thereof of width .
expansion joints shall be formed using a filler and sealer specified in articles num and num .
unless shown otherwise by plan details the joint filler shall be from the bottom of the walks or drives to num inch num mm from the top the sealer shall be num of an inch num mm thick and shall be recessed num of an inch num mm from the top .
h curing and protecting .
immediately after the finishing operations have been completed the entire surface of the newly laid concrete shall be protected against rapid drying out and cured as provided in subarticle numm unless the contractor elects to use type iii portland cement in which case the total curing time will be reduced .
no vehicles shall be permitted on the new concrete for seven days and pedestrians shall not be permitted thereon for at least num hours unless the contractor elects to use type iii portland cement in which case the time limit will be reduced to num hours for walks and four days for driveways .
i backfilling .
after the concrete has set sufficiently the side forms shall be removed and the spaces on both sides shall be backfilled with suitable material .
this backfill shall be compacted to a level num inch num mm below the walk or driveway and left in a neat and workmanlike condition .
section num pipe culvert end treatments num j truncated dome retrofit a truncated dome retrofit shall be installed according to the details shown in the plans .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of accepted sidewalks or driveways will be measured complete in place and the area computed in square yards square meters .
measurement for separate payment for foundation backfill will only be made when item numb is provided in the proposal and such is ordered by the engineer .
truncated dome retrofit shall be measured per square foot square meter complete in place .
truncated domes installed as part of a new sidewalk will not be measured separately for payment but will be included in the cost of the sidewalk .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted quantity of sidewalk or driveway will be paid for at the contract unit price for concrete sidewalks or concrete driveways complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials including joints for the hauling preparation and placing of all materials for the preparation of the subgrade excavation backfilling and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa concrete sidewalk ____ inches mm thick per square yard square meter numb concrete driveway ____ inches mm thick per square yard square meter numc truncated dome retrofit per square foot square meter section num pipe culvert end treatments num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing a pipe culvert end treatment in accordance with these specifications and the plan details at the locations shown on the plans or directed .
unless specified otherwise on the plans or in the proposal the contractor may for the required end treatment either furnish and install a prefabricated pipe culvert concrete end section or construct a slope paved headwall all in accordance with plan details and these specifications .
class num shall designate those end treatments which do not require a grate .
class num shall designate those end treatments which do require a grate .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of section num division num materials the plan details and the following concrete end sections shall comply with the requirement shown by plan details and section num for class num pipe except that the threeedgebearing test will not be required .
concrete end sections with metal sleeves shall comply with the provisions noted above .
the metal sleeve shall comply with the appropriate provisions of articles num and num .
metal sleeves used in conjunction with coated and or paved invert pipe shall be coated using the same coating with the exception of paved invert used in the pipe culvert to which the sleeves are attached .
in lieu of the bituminous coating the contractor may substitute a polymeric coating meeting the requirements specified in item numcnum .
safety grates when required shall be fabricated in accordance with plan details .
num construction requirements .
a excavation and backfill .
all excavation involved shall be in accordance with the provisions of the sections for the type pipe involved and section num .
backfilling shall be as specified under sections num num and the applicable pipe culvert section .
section num minor structure concrete num b installation of end treatments .
when prefabricated end sections are used they shall be installed and securely affixed to the pipe line as shown on the plans or directed all in conformity with the established lines and grades for the structure .
when slope paved headwalls are used they shall be constructed as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement .
the number of end treatments measured for payment will be the actual number of end treatments of the designated size and class complete in place on each designated pipe culvert .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the ordered and accepted pipe culvert end treatment of the designated class for each size and appropriate type of pipe to which the end treatment is attached measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the end treatment .
such price shall be full compensation for the furnishing of all materials and the installation and construction thereof except for the items of structure excavation and foundation backfill necessary for the complete construction of the end treatment and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm pipe end treatment class ____ per each numb ___ inch mm span ___ inch mm rise pipe end treatment class ____ per each specify roadway or side drain .
section num minor structure concrete num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing minor concrete structures such as pipe culvert headwalls inlets and junction boxes concrete steps coping walls and other miscellaneous items .
all of which shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans and these specifications to the lines and grades established by the plans or directed .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements of division num materials and the following section num structure concrete section num reinforcing steel num construction requirements .
a general .
the concrete mix used for minor structure work shall be class a concrete unless otherwise provided by plan details all in accordance with the appropriate provisions of section num. b excavation and backfill .
excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the provisions of sections num and num. c forming and placing of concrete .
construction forming placing etc .
of the structures shall be in accordance with the requirements given in section num. d finishing and curing .
attention is directed to the requirement given in section num that all surfaces receive a class num surface finish and that all exposed surfaces receive a class num surface finish unless otherwise specified in the proposal or by plan requirements .
section num inlets junction boxes manholes and miscellaneous drainage structures num in order to permit proper surface finishing forms may be removed as soon as the concrete has set sufficiently that form removal will not damage the green concrete but in no event less than num hours after completion of the placing .
immediately after the pouring operations surfaces not covered by forms shall be covered with one of the curing materials specified in section num .
immediately after the removal of the forms the surface finishing operations noted in section num shall commence and the curing operations continued for at least num hours after the finishing operation using one of the curing materials specified in section num and the related curing method required with the material used .
failure to apply the initial surface finish or perform the curing operation as noted herein shall be just cause for rejection of the concrete .
removal and replacement of rejected concrete shall be at no additional cost to the department .
e concrete surface tolerances .
the finished concrete shall be within reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or directed and free from objectionable cavities or projections .
num method of measurement .
the volume of accepted concrete within the neat lines of the structure as shown on the plans or revised at the written direction of the engineer will be computed in cubic yards cubic meters .
the method of average end areas will not be used where results obtained differ from those obtained by more accurate mathematical computation .
no deduction will be made for the volume of concrete displaced by steel reinforcement weep holes conduits anchor bolts or for chamfers of less than num inch num mm leg measurements .
attention is directed to section num for reinforcing steel and sections num and num for excavation and foundation backfill .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted minor structure concrete measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the concrete complete in place including furnishing all materials except reinforcing steel form work finishing and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the item in accordance with plan details and these specifications .
in case of modification to an existing structure the breaking away of the concrete to the approximate lines shown on the plans and the disposal of the broken concrete and the preparation of the retained steel reinforcement for splicing as required shall be considered incidental to the work and the cost thereof absorbed in the unit price bid .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa minor structure concrete per cubic yard cubic meter section num inlets junction boxes manholes and miscellaneous drainage structures num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing miscellaneous drainage structures including necessary metal frames grates covers etc .
in accordance with the plan details and these specifications at the locations and to the grades shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the various units will be further designated by type to distinguish shape size etc .
by plan details .
certain units or portions of units may be constructed of castinplace concrete precast concrete andor masonry as specified by plan details .
this section shall also include the furnishing and installing of grates on new or existing structures when the item of numg is provided on the plans otherwise inlet grates are classified as an integral part of the inlet or catch basin .
this section shall also include the furnishing and installing of stilling basins when the item of numi is provided on the plans .
section num inlets junction boxes manholes and miscellaneous drainage structures num num materials .
a concrete reinforcing steel and masonry .
concrete and reinforcing steel for castinplace units and for precast units or parts of units not covered by other requirements shall conform to the requirements of sections num and num .
precast concrete units or portions of units shall conform to the appropriate requirements of astm c num and section num unless otherwise provided by plan details or by department approval .
masonry materials shall conform to the requirements of section num utilizing brick or block meeting the following requirements clay or shale astm c num grade ss ms or mm .
concrete brick astm c num type i grade n. concrete block astm c num type i or ii grade n. b grates and grate seats .
castings shall conform to the requirements of section num with attention directed to articles num num num and num .
they shall be sound smooth clean and free from blisters and other defects and where necessary planed to provide flat true surfaces .
welded grates grate seats etc .
shall be fabricated from astm a num material unless otherwise denoted by plan details .
inlet and outlet pipe shall conform to the appropriate requirements of the section of the specifications covering the kind of pipe to which they are to connect .
grates grate seats etc .
which are required for existing structures and are formed by welding of rolled or shaped iron shall unless otherwise specified by plan details comply with the following plates angles bars etc .
astm a num pipe astm a num type f e or s black extra strong xnum hydrostatic test not required .
galvanization of grates grate seats nuts bolts and miscellaneous metal hardware when specified on the plans shall be hotdipped galvanized after fabrication by one of the following methods casting grates and seats fabricated from rolled pressed or forged steel shapes astm a num .
nuts bolts and miscellaneous hardware astm a num .
the department has established list inum inlet grates and seats for drainage structures and miscellaneous fabricated items .
this list is in the departments manual material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
grates grate seats and related materials shall be furnished by the approved suppliers on this list .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
num construction requirements .
a excavation .
excavation shall be performed in accordance with the appropriate requirements set forth under section num structure excavation and backfill for drainage structures and minor structures .
b concrete units .
concrete units may be either pouredinplace or precast .
construction requirements relative to the two types shall conform to the following num .
pouredinplace units construction shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num .
precast concrete units holes for connector pipes in base section shall be cast with connector pipe holes of the specific number and dimensions necessary to incorporate the unit into the drainage system as shown by the plans .
should installation conditions require additional pipe holes for which no holes were cast the contractor may make such holes as necessary provided he performs said work in a manner approved by the engineer and he replaces or repairs any damaged unit to the satisfaction of the engineer .
pipe connections to the base sections shall be made using either concrete or masonry mortar .
precast bases shall be set to within num of an inch num mm of grade on a bed of compacted foundation backfill material approximately num inches num mm thick .
section num inlets junction boxes manholes and miscellaneous drainage structures num sectional precast sections used to form units shall have all joints sealed and wiped clean using one of the appropriate type sealers noted in subitem numdnum.a .
c masonry .
bricks shall be laid with full mortar joints not more than num inch num mm thick .
courses shall be level and at least one course in every seven shall be a header course unless otherwise directed .
all units shall be plastered on the inside of the unit with not less than num inch num mm of mortar same as used in the laying to a height of at least num inches num mm above the top of the outfall structure .
when specified the outside of the structure shall be plastered with num inch num mm of mortar for the height of the masonry .
all brick shall be dampened during laying and plastering to insure proper bond with mortar .
the masonry shall be cured by approved methods which will insure the mortar has sufficiently set before allowing backfilling operations .
when so specified on the plans andor in the proposal masonry units may be constructed of concrete blocks instead of bricks .
applicable construction details shall be the same as for brick masonry .
d inlet and outlet pipe .
pipe shall be laid in accordance with the appropriate requirements of the section of these specifications covering the kind of culvert pipe used .
pipe placed in masonry for inlet or outlet connections shall extend through the walls and beyond the outside surface of the walls a sufficient distance to allow for connections and the masonry shall be carefully constructed around them so that there will be no leakage around the outer surface of the pipe .
pipe connections to masonry or precast units shall be made using either concrete or masonry mortar .
e placing castings .
castings shall be set in full mortar beds or otherwise secured as shown on the plans .
the mortar used for setting castings shall conform to section num mortar for masonry .
castings shall be set below the finished grade of the pavement about num mm .
f backfilling .
backfilling shall be performed in accordance with the appropriate requirements of sections num and num. g cleaning .
all junction boxes inlets manholes and similar structures shall be cleaned of all form material excess mortar and all foreign matter and shall be free from such at the time of final inspection and acceptance .
h placing of metal grates and seats on structures .
grates and seat frames shall be set in full mortar beds or otherwise secured to the masonry unit as shown by plan details .
mortar used for setting grates shall conform to the requirements of section num mortar for masonry .
grates installed on drainage units constructed under a previous contract shall be fitted to the unit and affixed to the structure in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
num method of measurement .
a inlets and junction boxes .
inlets and junction boxes will be measured as individual units including footings bottom slab walls cover lid grating etc .
of the type size and shape shown on the plans .
if the height of the base unit is not shown on the plans num feet num m will be used as the height of the base unit .
measurements will be from the top of the bottom slab to the top of the cover grating or lid .
structures of greater height will have the additional height measured as noted in subarticle c below .
b manholes .
manholes will be measured as an individual unit including footings bottom slab walls cover lid grating etc .
of the type size and shape shown on the plans except that the maximum height of the base units of the structure shall be limited to num feet num m measured from the top of the bottom slab to the top of cover grating or lid .
structures of greater height will be measured as noted in subarticle c below .
section num inlets junction boxes manholes and miscellaneous drainage structures num c junction box inlet and manhole units .
where structures of greater height than the base units noted above are provided by the plans or ordered measurement for the additional height will be in junction box units inlet units or manhole units of the particular type specified by the plans or proposal .
such units will be complete wall sections of the respective type structure measured in increments of num feet num mm in height ordered increments of less than num feet num mm will be considered as a complete unit .
d item numg .
when item numg is provided on the plans or proposal the kind of inlet on which the grate will be used will be shown on the plans and the type grate to be used will be designated on the plans and proposal .
the accepted grates will be measured in individual units of each type ordered and accepted .
e item numi .
when stilling basins item numi are provided on the plans or proposal measurement will be as individual units including footings bottom slab walls etc .
of the type size and shape shown on the plans .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
the accepted number of junction boxes inlets and manholes measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices for each which shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials including gratings covers and other fittings and for all form work disposal of surplus material and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
the accepted number of junction box units inlet units and manhole units measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit price for each type complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials for all form work disposal of surplus materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
the ordered and accepted grates under item numg measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective unit price bid for each type specified .
said unit price shall be full compensation for the grate complete in place on the structure and includes furnishing of all materials fabrication of the grate installation of the grate and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
the accepted number of stilling basins measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit price for each type complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials for all form work disposal of surplus materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b excavation and backfill .
excavation and backfill will be paid for as provided in section num. c payment will be made under item no .
numa junction boxes type ____ per each numb junction box units type ____ per each numc inlets type ____ per each numd inlet units type ____ per each nume manholes type ____ per each numf manhole units type ____ per each numg inlet grates type ____ per each num i stilling basins type ____ per each section num resetting gratings and covers for catch basins inlets and manholes num section num resetting gratings and covers for catch basins inlets and manholes num description .
this section shall cover the work of raising or lowering the covers or gratings of existing inlets catch basins or manholes all in accordance with plan details and these specifications at the locations shown on the plans or directed .
num materials .
all new materials used shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num plan details and division num materials .
num construction requirements .
heads covers andor gratings of existing manholes inlets or catch basins that are raised lowered or moved in elevation without moving the structure proper will be considered reset .
all work shall be done in a workmanlike manner by competent workmen and the unit reestablished in proper working order at its new elevation .
any manhole inlet or catch basin heads covers gratings or other material broken destroyed lost or rendered unfit for reuse through carelessness negligence or improper handling of the work shall be replaced by the contractor without extra compensation .
concrete and brick masonry work shall conform to requirements of sections num and num respectively .
when adjustments to manholes inlets or catch basins require the removal of a portion of the existing facility the engineer will designate that portion of the structure to be removed .
the removal of such is considered incidental to the work and the cost included in the unit price bid for the reset item .
should the contractor remove any portions of the structure in excess of that directed by the engineer he shall restore the structure to the designated removal line without additional compensation .
num method of measurement .
manhole covers reset and gratings reset will be measured individually as one complete unit of the base height or less as provided by the plan details .
where adjustments to the manhole covers or gratings reset exceed the base unit height measurement and payment for the excess height will be made as provided in articles num and num for manhole or inlet units .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
accepted manhole covers reset measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for manhole covers reset which shall be payment in full for all material equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
accepted gratings reset measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for gratings reset which shall be payment in full for all material equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa manhole covers reset per each numb gratings reset per each section num curb gutter and combination curb and gutter num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing portland cement concrete gutter curb or combination curb and gutter constructed with or without metal reinforcement .
all of which shall be section num curb gutter and combination curb and gutter num constructed in accordance with the plan details and these specifications at the locations shown on the plans or established in conformity with the lines grades dimensions and cross sections shown on the plans or designated .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the requirements of division num materials .
concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
expansion joint filler shall be as specified in section num .
num construction requirements .
a concrete mixes .
concrete mixes shall be provided by section num with class a concrete being used with standard forms and either a class a or class c concrete mix modified as deemed necessary by the testing engineer to fit the type curbing machine being used .
b foundation .
the foundation shall be constructed or excavated to the required depth below the finished surface in accordance with the cross section shown on the plans or as designated .
all soft or other unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material in layers not to exceed num inches num mm compacted .
the foundation shall be compacted as provided for the applicable types of material involved .
c foundation backfill .
if provided by the plans andor proposal foundation backfill to replace unsuitable material shall be placed and constructed as provided in section num .
no direct payment will be made for foundation backfill except when the proposal includes a unit price for this pay item .
d forms .
num .
general .
the contractor shall use standard type metal forms as noted herein or if requested in writing and approved by the department an approved automatic extrusion type curb andor gutter machine .
num .
standard forms .
these forms shall be metal except for radial sections straight and free from warps and of sufficient strength when staked to hold the concrete true to line and grade without distortion .
they shall provide the approved typical section and depth of the section shown on the plans .
radial or curved forms may be of flexible metal or a wood form of approved design .
bent or damaged forms shall not be used .
all forms shall be securely staked braced and held together to the exact lines and grades established and shall be kept sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar .
all forms shall be cleaned and oiled with a suitable oil immediately before concrete is placed against them .
num .
machine formed .
any automatic extrusion type curb andor gutter machine considered for approval must be demonstrated to produce a section conforming to the dimensions crosssection lines and grades shown on the plans within the tolerances provided in item numhnum for formed curbs andor gutters .
failure to consistently produce an acceptable product shall be cause to withdraw approval of the machine and order the use of standard forms .
all types of curbs gutter and combinations shall be placed in one operation to the depth of cross section specified on the plans .
the use of a two stage operation will not be permitted .
e sections .
gutter curb and combination curb and gutter shall be constructed in sections of the lengths shown on the plans .
the length of section may be reduced where necessary to form closure .
f handling proportioning and mixing materials .
the handling storage proportioning and mixing of concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
section num curb gutter and combination curb and gutter num g joints .
all expansion contraction and construction joints shall be constructed as shown on the plans and in accordance with the requirements of article num .
if not shown on the plans joints shall be placed as follows num .
expansion joints shall be placed in curb andor gutter to match those in concrete pavement where the two are adjacent .
num .
expansion joints shall be num of an inch num mm wide .
they shall be placed where curb gutter or combined curb and gutter terminate against concrete driveways and other concrete structures except inlets .
the joints shall be placed at least num feet from the location of the termination of the curb gutter or combined curb and gutter at inlets .
num .
expansion joint filler and sealer shall meet the requirements given of articles num and num .
expansion joint filler shall extend from the bottom of the curb andor gutter to within num inch num mm of the top the sealer shall be num of an inch num mm thick and shall be recessed num of an inch num mm from the top .
num .
contraction joints shall be placed in curb andor gutter to match those in concrete pavement where the two are adjacent but in no instance more than num feet num meters between joints .
the contraction joints shall be sawed or otherwise cut num inches num mm deep by num of an inch num mm wide and shall extend num inches num mm below the pavement surface .
h placing and finishing concrete standard method .
num .
placing .
the subgrade and forms shall be checked and approved just prior to placing concrete against them .
all debris or other foreign material shall have been removed from the space to be occupied by the concrete .
the subgrade shall be moist but not wet or muddy .
after mixing the concrete shall be placed in the forms and shall be tamped spaded or vibrated sufficiently to produce a dense homogeneous mass and to bring the mortar to the surface .
particular attention shall be given to spading the concrete along and against the surface of the forms to prevent honeycombing and secure a smooth uniform surface .
num .
strikeoff and finishing .
when the forms are filled the concrete shall be struck off with a template cut to the curb edge design .
the exposed concrete surface shall then be finished smooth with a wooden float in a manner that will compact the mass and produce a true even top surface .
plastering with mortar to build up or finish will not be permitted .
the surface of the gutter and the face and top of the curb shall be checked with a num foot num m straightedge and any irregularities more than num of an inch in num feet num mm in num m corrected .
the alignment and grade shall not at any point vary more than num of an inch num mm from that established by the elevation control stakes .
excessive troweling with a steel trowel will not be permitted .
a textured finish shall be provided on the exposed surface just before the concrete becomes nonplastic by the use of a burlap or cotton fabric drag brush or broom which will produce a uniform gritty texture along the length of the curb gutter or combination curb and gutter .
the upper edges of curb and gutter shall be rounded with an approved edging tool to the radius shown on the plans .
the joint templates shall be set during the placing of the concrete and allowed to remain in place until the concrete has set sufficiently to hold its shape but shall be removed while the forms are still in place .
the forms shall be left in place until the concrete has set sufficiently so that they can be removed without damage to the work but unless otherwise directed they shall be removed within num hours after the concrete has been placed .
immediately after the removal of the forms the repair of any minor defective areas shall be accomplished .
i placing and finishing concrete machine laid .
the requirements of subarticle numh are applicable except that fixed forms are not required .
j curing and protection .
immediately after the finishing operation is completed the concrete shall be cured as provided by subarticle numm .
if mats are used they shall be kept continuously moist for a period of at least num hours .
during this period and until completion and acceptance of the work it shall be protected from damage by the elements or other cause .
section num cable guiderail num k backfilling .
after the concrete has set sufficiently spaces along the front and back sides of the gutter curb or combination curb and gutter shall be backfilled to the required elevation with suitable material which shall be compacted by tamping with approved metal tamps or mechanical tamps in layers not more than num inches num mm thick until firm and solid .
num method of measurement .
accepted concrete gutter concrete curb and combination curb and gutter will be measured in linear feet meters complete in place to the nearest num foot num m along the base of the curb face or along the flow line of the gutter continuing on such line extended across driveways alleyways and other entrances .
measurement for separate payment for foundation backfill will only be made when item numb is provided in the proposal .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted length of concrete gutter concrete curb and combination concrete curb and gutter measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices complete in place which shall be payment in full for all excavation backfilling disposal of surplus material all joints all special construction at driveways and other entrances and other points furnishing all materials hauling and placing materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the specifications including all approaches through curb and gutter indicated on the plans .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa concrete gutter per linear foot meter numb concrete curb type ____ per foot meter numc combination curb gutter type ____ per linear foot meter section num cable guiderail num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing posts anchors cables and miscellaneous hardware required for the construction of tensioned cable guiderail .
num materials and design .
the cable guiderail system shall be a system accepted by aldot and determined by fhwa as passing nchrp report num or the aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mash requirements for the test level post spacing slope placement location and other details as shown on the plans .
the cable guiderail system shall be designed by the manufacturer specific to the project site to limit the deflection to the design value shown on the plans .
the manufacturers design shall take into consideration the locations of the cable guiderail and cable guiderail runs as shown on the plans .
the manufacturer shall design anchors for the beginning and ending termini of each cable guiderail run as shown in the plans and shall determine if intermediate anchors within each cable guiderail run are necessary to limit the deflection to the design value .
num construction requirements .
a submittal of the design and details of the proposed cable guiderail system .
the contractor shall submit num sets of copies of the manufacturers system design and details to the engineer within num calendar days after the date of the notice to proceed .
the contract documents may include information regarding the existing soil but it is the contractors responsibility to provide the cable guiderail system manufacturer with any geotechnical information needed to design the cable barrier system .
the contractor shall include the manufacturers required soil parameters and the results of the geotechnical investigations in the submittal package .
section num cable guiderail num the submittal shall include a written statement from the cable guiderail manufacturer that the proposed cable guiderail systems anchor spacing is adequate to limit the deflection to the design value shown in the plans .
the manufacturers statement shall be signed and stamped by a professional engineer registered in the state of alabama .
if clarifications are required one set of the submittal will be returned to the contractor with comments for clarification .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days to provide clarification of the submittal .
the contractor shall submit num sets of copies of the system design and details to the engineer in each response to the request for clarification by the engineer .
the engineer will not approve the submittal but will review the submittal for completeness .
the engineer will distribute copies of the submittal when the review is complete .
b contractors responsibility for system installation .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for insuring that the cable guiderail system is constructed in compliance with the cable guiderail manufacturers recommendations and requirements .
c cable guiderail manufacturers representative .
a representative of the cable guiderail manufacturer shall be present at the site of the installation during the various phases of installation to insure that the contractor installs all components of the cable guiderail system in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
the various phases of installation include anchor installation line post installation attachment to guardrail splicing cable cable tensioning etc .
the manufacturers representative shall provide training for departmental personnel applicable to the installation and maintenance procedures for all features of the guiderail .
the manufacturers representative may also be required to provide training for local first responders regarding precautions to be taken when working in and around crash sites involving the guiderail .
the training sessions will be conducted at a location determined by the engineer and will be of sufficient length to address all training topics .
d letter of compliance .
within five calendar days after the completion of the installation of all components of the cable guiderail system the contractor shall submit a letter from the manufacturer to the engineer stating that all components of the cable guiderail system foundations and all geotechnical conditions are in accordance with the project specific design and manufacturers recommendations and requirements .
the cable guiderail system will not be accepted by the department until a satisfactory letter of compliance has been received .
num method of measurement .
a cable guiderail .
the cable guiderail will be measured in linear feet meters exclusive of that length of guiderail which is within the limits of measurement for the guiderail anchors .
measurement will be made from center to center of the outermost transition posts .
no separate measurement will be made of any cable rail post offset block concrete hardware or any other component of a cable guiderail .
b cable guiderail anchors .
the cable guiderail anchors will be measured per each .
an anchor will include all components of the cable guiderail from the terminal post to the center of the outermost transition post .
no separate measurement will be made of any intermediate anchors that may be required by the manufacturer to limit the deflection to the design value .
no separate measurement will be made of any cable rail post offset block concrete hardware or any other component of a cable guiderail anchor .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract prices for the cable guiderail and cable guiderail anchors shall be full compensation for submittals soil sampling and testing design of the anchors and sockets all posts foundations hardware materials equipment tools labor training and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the contract price for cable guiderail shall also be full compensation for all intermediate anchors and for furnishing the manufacturers recommended tension measuring device to become the property of the department .
section num concrete median strip num b payment will be made under item no .
numa cable guiderail per linear foot meter numb cable guiderail anchor per each section num concrete median strip num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing a concrete median strip of the size shape and dimensions shown on the plans at the locations to the lines and grades shown on the plans or designated .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements of division num materials and section num .
num construction requirements .
concrete used in the construction of the median strip shall be class a concrete complying with the requirements of section num except that when the median strip is placed on concrete pavement the concrete may be of the same type used in the pavement .
the median strip shall be constructed on any approved surface normally a subbase base or pavement layer .
forming placing finishing and curing of the concrete shall be in accordance with the provisions of article num .
expansion joints shall be provided as specified in subarticle numg for concrete driveways unless shown otherwise by the plans or directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
ordered and accepted concrete median strip will be measured either by linear measurement by the linear foot meter or volumetric measurement by the cubic yard cubic meter in accordance with the method of measurement designated by the pay item .
median strips on bridges will not be measured for payment but the volume of concrete shall be included in the concrete volume for the bridge structure .
linear measurement of a median strip shall be the actual length of the median strip measured along the center line of the strip .
volumetric measurement of a median strip shall be by the cross sectional average end area method unless a more accurate method of measurement is derived .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the quantity of the concrete median strip measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot meter or per cubic yard cubic meter for concrete median strip which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa concrete median strip per linear foot meter numb concrete median strip per cubic yard cubic meter section num concrete median and safety barrier num description .
this section shall cover the work of constructing a concrete median or safety barrier at the location shown on the plans proposal or directed .
barriers shall be basically classified as to type section num concrete median and safety barrier num which will designate the size shape height etc .
all in accordance with details shown in the plans .
barriers may be cast in place extruded by slip form equipment or precast and installed in a permanent manner .
this section shall also cover the work of retrofitting concrete bridge rail in accordance with the requirements shown on the plans .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the following concrete unless otherwise specified by plan details shall meet the requirements of section num for class a concrete .
steel reinforcement shall meet the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the concrete mix construction placing of the concrete curing and finishing shall be in accordance with the appropriate provisions of section num unless otherwise provided in this section or noted in the plan details .
b excavation and backfill .
excavation and backfill for permanent barriers shall be in accordance with the provisions of section num. c slip form method .
barriers constructed by the use of a slip form extrusion machine shall be well compacted dense concrete meeting all the requirements of section num except for the requirement for fixed forms .
the forming portion of the extrusion machine shall be readily adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine so that the top of the barrier can be maintained at the predetermined grade .
d concrete surface tolerances and finishing .
the finished concrete shall be within reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or directed the barrier shall present a smooth uniform appearance free from objectional cavities or projections .
a num foot num m straightedge laid on the top faces of the barrier shall not vary more than num foot num mm from the edge of the straightedge except at grade changes and curves and be free of humps sags or other irregularities .
concrete surfaces shall be finished in accordance with the requirements given in section num for class num with exposed surfaces receiving a class num coated surface finish .
e joints .
joints shall be in accordance with the provisions of section num except as follows surface edges on exposed vertical contraction joints shall be rounded with a num inch num mm edger or sawed .
vertical expansion joints may be open or sealed in accordance with plan requirements .
num method of measurement .
concrete barriers will be measured for payment by the appropriate method designated by the plans or proposal in accordance with the following item numa linear foot meter measured to the nearest num foot num m along the top surface barrier .
item numb cubic yards cubic meters of concrete with volumetric measure computed by the average end area method except where results obtained differ from those obtained by a more accurate mathematical computation .
item numc unit measurement where each end section is in accordance with the size shape and length designated by the plans .
item numd per each in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
one retrofit will be measured for each end of each concrete guardrail where the retrofit is constructed .
item nume per linear foot in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
excavation and backfill shall be measured in accordance with the provisions of section num .
section num guardrail and barrier rail num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the various types of median or safety barriers end sections and bridge guardrail and rail retrofit ordered and accepted measured as noted above shall be paid for at the appropriate unit price bid provided in the proposal .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for the furnishing of all materials and the construction of the barrier complete in place including all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa concrete median or safety barrier type ___ per linear foot meter numb concrete median or safety barrier type ___ per cubic yard cubic meter numc concrete median or safety barrier end section per each numd bridge guardrail retrofit type ___ per each nume bridge rail retrofit type ___ per linear foot meter section num guardrail and barrier rail num description .
this section shall cover the work of the furnishing and installation of complete sections of steel or aluminum beam guardrail guardrail end anchor systems and shaped tube type barrier rail at the locations shown on the plans or designated and in conformity with the detailed requirements of the plans and these specifications .
the plans will designate the class of guardrail to be used and in the case of steel rail also the type to be used .
when it is optional as to the choice of either steel or aluminum the alternate once selected shall be used throughout the contract .
unless specified otherwise class a guardrail will be used for roadways and class b guardrail will be used for bridges .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the requirements set forth in division num materials .
specific reference is made to section num guardrail and barrier rail materials and detail drawings provided in the plans .
material will be accepted by brand registration and guarantee as provided by aashto m num and list iinum of materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
spot checks will be made for material delivered to the project .
the material may be accepted or rejected based on these tests .
if alternate approved end anchors are shown to be allowed on the plans the contractor shall obtain a copy of the details from the manufacturer prior to installation .
the contractor shall also obtain a certification from the manufacturer that the end anchors meet the crashworthy requirements given in the national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num .
the contractor shall furnish a copy of the details and certification to the engineer upon request .
num construction requirements .
a erection of posts and end anchors .
num .
general .
the contractor shall place stakes to mark the location where guardrail is required .
the contractor shall not begin the installation of the guardrail posts until the engineer has approved the staked location of the guardrail .
num .
posts .
unless otherwise provided by the plans or proposal the contractor may use one of the optional type posts shown on the plans however once selected the same type shall be used throughout the contract .
posts shall be erected in such a manner that they shall be vertical with their top inside edges within num inch nummm of their correct position for both vertical and horizontal line .
the posts shall be erected to the dimensions shown on the plans and compacted by tamping puddling or as directed to obtain a rigid installation .
where posts are driven the tops shall be protected by a suitable driving cap and the adjacent area compacted if deemed necessary by the engineer .
if raising or other movement of the post is required the earth shall be compacted to fill any voids caused by such movement .
all posts section num guardrail and barrier rail num damaged in any way during erection shall be removed and replaced without additional compensation .
num .
end anchors .
the contractor shall use one of the type end anchors provided by the plans or directed .
the anchor assemblies shall be erected to the dimensions shown on the plans and the area backfilled with suitable material and compacted as provided in item num above .
posts that are attached to the anchor assembly shall be erected to the requirements for individual posts as provided in item num above .
b erection of rail .
num .
all metal except concrete reinforcement shall be fabricated in the shop .
no punching cutting burning or welding shall be done in the field .
holes for special details in exceptional cases may be made in the field when approved after it has been demonstrated that punching will not result in damage to the surrounding metal .
num .
the rail may be erected in any manner resulting in a smooth continuous rail closely conforming to the established line and grade of the surface the rail parallels .
the top of the rail shall be constructed to the height designated on the plans .
num .
rail shall be erected so that the bolts at expansion joints shall be located at the centers of the slotted holes .
bolts may be rethreaded after galvanizing if necessary .
all bolts except where otherwise required at expansion joints shall be drawn tight however bolts through expansion joints shall be drawn up as tight as possible without being tight enough to prevent the rail elements from sliding past one another longitudinally .
bolts shall be sufficiently long to extend at least num of an inch num mm beyond the nuts .
except where required for adjustments bolts shall not extend more than num of an inch num mm beyond the nuts .
bolts through variable thickness posts shall be cut off num of an inch num mm beyond the nuts and burred .
c metal treatments .
num .
general .
all steel elements posts and rail including all accessories used in the construction of guardrail and barrier rails shall be galvanized except when otherwise provided by the plans or proposal .
aluminum elements posts and rail and accessories will require no special treatment except where otherwise noted on the plans or proposal .
num .
steel .
a. galvanized .
painting of galvanized steel will not be required except that any damage to galvanizing or any bare areas developed during construction shall be painted with two coats of approved galvanizing repair paint section num or approved zinc spelter paint .
however should any galvanized metal be required by the plans or proposal to be painted the surface shall be treated with a wash of num ounces num g of copper or zinc sulphate dissolved in one gallon liter of water prior to the application of the required paint surface .
b .
not galvanized .
all metal not galvanized shall be cleaned and painted with one primer coat and two coats of paint structural steel second and third coats section num unless otherwise provided on the plans or in the proposal .
num .
aluminum .
aluminum elements of guardrail or barrier rail require no special preservative treatment unless otherwise noted on the plans .
d safety of traveling public .
at locations where public traffic is adjacent to the guardrail or barrier rail work all materials required to complete the work at any one location shall be available before beginning the work at that location .
posts shall be erected only far enough in advance to permit the construction to progress consistently uniformly and continuously .
all posts shall have the rail attached to them the same day that the posts are erected .
for installations in which neither end adjoins a fixed object the installation of the rail shall progress in the same direction as the traffic in the adjacent lane .
section num guardrail or barrier rail relocated num the intent of this specification is that each guardrail or barrier rail installation erected under traffic be completed including end anchors andor attenuating devices before nightfall of the day on which work on that installation began .
in the event that unforeseen conditions prevent the completion of an installation before nightfall the contractor will be required at his expense to protect and delineate the uncompleted installation by the use of reflectorized devices or other acceptable means .
the minimum requirement for this protection and delineation will be one or more reflectorized drums with a type b warning light on each drum .
if the existing guardrail or barrier rail is to be removed and reset replaced or relocated then only one installation ahead of the placing operation may be removed .
at any site where the rail has been removed and the new installation has not been completed the contractor will be required at his expense to protect the site with reflectorized drums with a type b warning light on each drum as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
posts will not be measured for payment separately .
the length of the beam guardrail or barrier rail constructed and accepted will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num foot num m from the end of each continuous installation exclusive of designated anchor assemblies along the centerline of the top of the rail posts for guardrail and of the rail element for barrier rail .
standard guardrail installations cover one rail element its supports post and accessories .
when installations are to cover special installations such as double faced rail two rail elements mounted on a single post a separate pay item will be provided and the special condition so noted in the description of the pay item .
end anchor assemblies shall be measured separately in individual unit assemblies complete in place including all hardware and accessories to complete the type anchor assembly ordered placed in accordance with plan details .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
accepted guardrail or barrier rail measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter for beam guardrail or barrier rail which shall be payment in full for excavating backfill disposal of surplus material for furnishing transporting erecting of posts and rail for all incidental material bolts brackets etc .
as shown on the plans and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
accepted guardrail end anchor assemblies measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per each which shall be full compensation for excavating backfilling disposal of surplus materials for furnishing erecting the anchor assembly and all incidental materials necessary to install the assembly complete in place as shown on the plans and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa steel beam guardrail class ____ type ____ per linear foot meter numb aluminum beam guardrail class ____ per linear foot meter numc guardrail end anchor type ____ per each numd barrier rail steel rectangular tubing per linear foot meter nume barrier rail extruded aluminum tubing per linear foot meter section num guardrail or barrier rail relocated num description .
this section shall cover the work of relocating guardrail or barrier rail and end anchor systems to the established lines and grades at the locations shown by the plans or directed in conformity with the plans and these specifications .
the relocation shall include the removal reconditioning and reinstallation of the rail posts hardware and anchor systems .
section num guardrail or barrier rail relocated num num materials .
a salvaged material .
all portions of the rail elements posts and other hardware designated to be reset or relocated shall be cleaned and inspected .
damaged portions shall be discarded or repaired as directed .
damage to galvanization on metal steel portions shall be repaired with approved galvanizing repair paint .
posts and rail elements shall be cut or drilled to conform to the requirements of the current plan requirements for the type rail being used .
timber posts shall be coated with one liberal coat of the type preservative used in the original treatment unless the use of another type preservative is authorized by the engineer .
galvanized steel posts which can not be repaired satisfactorily with galvanized repair paint shall be painted with an approved aluminum paint .
b new materials .
new materials shall meet the requirements specified in section num guardrail and barrier rail material .
paint shall meet the requirements of section num coatings paints enamels and varnishes for metal or wood structures .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the contractor shall promptly replace without extra compensation any materials lost damaged or injured on account of carelessness negligence or failure to conduct the work properly .
any such replacements shall be with materials conforming to the original material requirements .
should any of the rail posts or end anchors included in the relocation items be deemed by the engineer unsuitable for reuse through no fault or negligence of the contractor the engineer may either furnish materials acceptable for use or may require the contractor to furnish new materials .
payment for such new rail posts or end anchors but not hardware will be made as for unused materials outlined in subarticle numb .
attention is directed to the fact that this type work will be performed under traffic requiring special care to expedite the work and prevent undue hazardous conditions to occur during the operation .
attention is directed to the requirements of subarticle numd .
b post replacement .
post replacements shall be made with salvaged posts from other sources until exhausted .
all new replacement posts shall if practicable be placed together in selected sections of guardrail constructed in accordance with current standard plans and shall to the extent practicable be of the same type and size as the salvaged posts .
c installation .
installation shall be in accordance with the provisions of article num .
num method of measurement .
guardrail or barrier rail relocated will be measured in linear feet meters along the face of the rail to the nearest num foot num m from end to end of each continuous portion of rail relocated guardrail end anchors relocated will be measured in individual unit assemblies complete in place of the type designated relocated to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
guardrail and barrier rail relocated .
accepted guardrail or barrier rail relocated measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter for the type rail to be relocated which shall be payment in full for removing the in place rail and posts preparing the rail posts and hardware for relocation and for the installation of the posts rail and accessories .
the above unit prices shall include furnishing any additional necessary hardware equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete these items of work .
any new rail or posts required to replace damaged rail or posts through no fault of the contractor section num headlight glare screen num shall be furnished by the contractor with payment to be made the same as for unused materials outlined in subarticle numb .
num .
guardrail end anchor relocated accepted guardrail and anchors relocated measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per each which shall be payment in full for removing the in place anchor system preparing the anchor system and accessories for relocation and for the installation of the complete assembly .
the unit price bid shall include any additional hardware equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
any new end anchor required to replace an unserviceable end anchor will be paid for as for unused materials outlined in subarticle numb .
b payment will be made under item no .
numf relocated per linear foot meter numg guardrail end anchor relocated per each steel beam guardrail class ____ type ____ aluminum beam guardrail class ____ steel rectangular tube barrier rail extruded aluminum tube barrier rail type num num num etc .
section num headlight glare screen num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and erecting headlight glare screens in accordance with the details shown on the plans and as specified herein at the locations shown on the plans or designated .
where optional types are permitted the same type once selected shall be used throughout the project .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall meet the requirements of division num materials and the requirements noted in the plans .
num construction details .
all construction methods and equipment employed in installation of the headlight glare screen shall be in accordance with the requirements shown on the plans and those of the manufacturer of the materials being used and good erection practices so that the resulting structure will provide the expected service and be complete in every detail .
headlight glare screen may be supported by groundmounted posts or posts attached to guardrail posts rectangular tubing barrier rail along the top of the concrete median barrier wall or other special mounting as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement .
quantities of headlight glare screen to be paid for will be determined by the linear foot meter from actual measurements along the line of the completed headlight glare screen .
num basis of payment a unit price coverage .
the accepted quantity of headlight glare screen measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit bid price for each separate type of mounting .
the said unit price shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary for performing all work involved in constructing the headlight glare screens complete in place in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
when plans show the headlight glare screen to be mounted on existing facilities the unit bid price shall also include the necessary drilling welding andor other special treatment of the existing facility for satisfactory attachment of the posts .
section num chain link industrial fence num b payment will be made under item no .
numa headlight glare screen type of mounting per linear foot meter example ground mounted mounted on guardrail posts mounted on barrier rail rectangular tubing or mounted on concrete median barrier .
section num chain link industrial fence num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing complete in place commercial chainlink fence on posts and frames with either standard ground mounting or mounted on structures bridges retaining walls etc .
as required by the plans at locations shown on the plans or designated all in accordance with the details shown on the plans and these specifications .
num materials .
a general .
all materials shall conform to the requirements of division num materials and shall be in accordance with details shown on the plans .
special attention is directed to section num. b special mounted fence .
when the fence is to be installed on structures which can not utilize the standard method provided by the regular fence drawings the type of post installation etc .
will be shown on the plans .
requirements for such installations will be shown on the plans .
all miscellaneous steel used in such installations or mounting assemblies shall be of astm a num steel or approved equal and galvanized in accordance with astm a num unless such is otherwise provided by the plans .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all construction methods and equipment employed in the setting of fence shall be in accordance with requirements of the specifications of the manufacture of the fence materials being used and such that the resulting structure will provide the expected service and be durable and complete in every detail .
b clearing fence line .
all brush stumps logs large roots humps of earth boulders or debris which would interfere with proper construction of the fence in the required location and present a pleasing and acceptable profile along the tops of posts shall be removed before starting fencing operations .
sound standing trees in the fence line shall be removed or trimmed as directed to provide adequate working room .
the clearing andor grading of the fence line and the disposal of material removed shall be accomplished in such a way that trees and shrubs on the remainder of the right of way will not be damaged .
breaks in profile of the fence shall be spread over vertical curves of sufficient length to insure a pleasing appearance .
c setting posts .
posts and anchorages shall be set at intervals shown on the plans or directed .
the posts shall be set plumb and true in alignment on the side which the fabric is to be attached .
all end and corner posts brace posts pull posts and gate posts shall be set in concrete in accordance with plan details .
line posts may be set in place by one of the following methods num set in concrete in the same manner detailed in the plans for brace posts num driven provided soil conditions are suitable and full embedment depth is obtained .
when posts are driven methods shall be used to protect the posts from damage due to driving operations .
damaged posts shall be repaired as directed or removed and replaced without additional cost to the state regardless of the installation method used a stable fence frame shall be obtained .
where unstable soil is encountered the use of longer posts concrete anchorage or other approved post stabilization methods shall be required .
where fence is over solid rock or other hard unyielding material is encountered special treatment may be authorized .
section num chain link industrial fence num when installing fence through areas where other than ground installations are required special attention shall be given to the attachment of the mounting assemblies to the structure .
anchor bolts etc .
shall be cast into structures wherever possible .
other types of attachments if permitted by the plans must be approved by the engineer before use .
in any event anchorage must be so installed as to present a neat workmanlike appearance .
d constructing fence .
chain link fence shall be stretched taut and securely fastened to each post by means of approved metal bands or no .
num gage num mm wire spaced not more than num inches num mm apart on posts and not more than num inches num mm apart on the rail .
the method of attaching at end posts gates and corner posts shall be as shown on the plans .
if barbed wire is specified on the plans the barbed wire barbed wire arms and method of attachment shall be as shown on the plans .
wires shall be stretched taut and spaced as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of chain link fence of each separate height and variation shall be the accepted lengths exclusive of gates measured along the top rail overall in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num m complete in place .
the quantity of gates shall be the actual accepted number of gates classified according to type and width of gates .
when the item of protective cage industrial fence is provided in the plans or proposal the accepted protective cage shall be the complete cage structure installed in accordance with plan details for the designated bridge type structure .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted quantity of fence measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices of each separate height and variation complete in place which shall be payment in full for all preliminary clearing grubbing excavating and filling for all materials including concrete for posts hardware fittings and appurtenances for erecting bracing and aligning and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to finish and complete the work .
the accepted number of gates of each size measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing and erecting all materials all hinges braces and other necessary fittings including lock num keys and one master key for each gate and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to finish and complete the work .
when the item of protective cage industrial fence is provided in the plans or proposal the accepted complete unit measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for each respective unit complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials fabrication and erection of all pipe framework including the connectors and inserts necessary for the installation of the fabric and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to finish and complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa industrial fence ___ feet m high per linear foot meter numb industrial fence ___ feet m high plus barbed wire num arms per linear foot meter numc industrial fence ___ feet m high plus barbed wire vertical arms per linear foot meter numd gate ___ feet m wide complete with fittings with barbed wire or without barbed wire per each nume industrial fence ___ feet m high special mounting per linear foot meter numf protective cage industrial fence per lump sum section num woven wire fence num section num woven wire fence num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and erecting fences of woven wire and barbed wire together with appropriate gates .
posts shall be wood or metal in accordance with details shown on the plans andor proposal .
fences shall be erected at the locations and elevations shown on the plans or designated and shall comply with these specifications .
when it is optional as to the choice of the post type to be used the alternate once selected shall be used throughout the project .
num materials .
materials shall conform to requirements of division num materials with specific reference to section num and the details shown on the plans .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all construction methods and equipment employed in the setting of fence shall be in accordance with requirements of the specifications of the manufacturer of the fence materials being used and such that the resulting structure will provide the expected service and be durable and complete in every detail .
b clearing fence line .
all brush stumps logs large roots humps of earth boulders or debris which would interfere with proper construction of the fence in the required location and present a pleasing and acceptable profile along the tops of the posts shall be removed before starting fencing operations .
sound standing trees in the fence line shall be removed or trimmed as directed to provide adequate working room .
the clearing andor grading of the fence line and the disposal of material removed shall be accomplished in such a way that trees and shrubs on the remainder of the right of way will not be damaged .
c setting posts .
all posts and anchorage shall be set at intervals shown on the plans or directed .
the posts shall be set plumb and in true alignment on the side on which the wire is attached .
holes shall be dug to the minimum diameter and depth shown on the plans except that special treatment may be authorized when the fence is over solid rock .
steel or wood posts excluding posts that are to be set in concrete may be driven if the soil conditions are suitable .
methods shall be used to protect the posts and galvanized coating or wood preservative during the driving operation .
the heads of all posts shall be protected from damage by caps or driving heads of approved design .
heads of wood posts shall be protected by a suitable cushion of wood rope or like material and by a metal driving head .
posts that are damaged in any way shall be removed and replaced without additional cost to the state .
d installing wire and gates .
the woven wire fabric shall be stretched taut and securely fastened to each post by use of wire and an approved fencing tool so that the top of the fabric and lines of barbed wire are properly spaced from the top of each post as shown on the plans .
the stretching shall be done with an approved stretcher that will produce equal tension in each line of wire in the fabric .
at each end corner or gate post each strand or line of wire shall be wrapped around the post and securely fastened near the post by winding the end about the same wire .
where the fence crosses short depressions longer posts may be required and the space below the bottom of the fence filled in with additional strands of barbed wire tied to posts as directed .
where the fence crosses deep depressions or ravines the engineer shall require that posts likely to be lifted when the fence is stretched be anchored in concrete as required for corner posts .
the fence shall be connected to culvert andor bridge wing walls in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
the contractor however may submit for consideration by the department an alternate method of attaching the fence to the wing walls provided no additional cost to the project is section num barbed wire fence num incurred the method submitted presents a pleasing appearance to the eye and accomplishes the desired results .
num method of measurement .
all woven wire fences completed in compliance with these specifications at designated locations and accepted will be measured in place along the top of the posts overall between the extreme limits of each section excluding gates in linear feet meters to nearest foot num m. each gate completed in compliance with the plans and these specifications and accepted will be counted as a unit complete in place .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
fences constructed and measured as above provided will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter for woven wire fence completely in place which shall be payment in full for clearing grubbing and preparatory shaping for the fence line for disposing of waste materials for excavating for posts and braces and pouring concrete foundations where required for furnishing all materials for setting posts and braces installing wire and other incidentals and for all equipment tools and labor required to complete the work .
num .
the accepted number of gates of each width constructed and accepted as above provided will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices for each width which shall be payment in full for furnishing and installing gates together with all necessary fittings hinges braces locks keys and other specified accessories and for all materials equipment tools and labor necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa woven wire fence per linear foot meter numb gate ___ feet m wide per each section num barbed wire fence num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and erecting barbed wire fences of the type and size shown on the plans andor proposal .
posts shall be wood in accordance with details shown on the plans andor proposal .
fences shall be erected at the locations and elevations shown on the plans or designated and shall comply with these specifications .
num materials .
materials shall conform to requirements of division num materials with specific reference to section num and the details shown on the plans .
num construction requirements .
a clearing fence line .
all brush stumps logs large roots humps of earth boulders or debris which would interfere with proper installation of fence in the required location and present a pleasing and acceptable profile along the tops of posts shall be removed before starting fencing operations .
sound standing trees in the fence line shall be removed or trimmed as directed to provide adequate working room .
the clearing andor grading of the fence line and the disposal of material removed shall be accomplished in such a way that trees and shrubs on the remainder of the right of way will not be damaged .
b setting posts .
all posts and braces shall be set to the required depths and intervals .
the posts shall be set plumb and in true alignment on the side on which the wire is attached .
holes shall be dug to the minimum diameter and depth shown on the plans except that special treatment may be authorized when the fence is over solid rock .
posts may be driven if the soil conditions are suitable .
methods shall be used to protect the posts during the driving operations .
the heads of all posts shall be protected by a suitable cushion of wood rope or like material and by a metal section num fence reset num driving head .
posts that are damaged in any way shall be removed and replaced without additional cost to the state .
the backfill shall be well tamped into place .
c installing wire .
the barbed wire shall be stretched taut and securely fastened to each post by use of wire or staples and an approved fencing tool so that the lines of barbed wire are properly spaced on each post as shown on the plans .
the stretching shall be done with an approved stretcher that will produce equal tension on each line of wire .
at each end or corner post each strand or line of wire shall be wrapped around the post and securely fastened near the post by winding the end about the same wire .
where the fence crosses short depressions longer posts may be required and the space below the bottom strand of the fence filled with additional strands of wire tied to the posts as directed .
num method of measurement .
all barbed wire fences completed in compliance with these specifications and details shown on the plans at designated locations and accepted will be measured in place along the top of the posts in linear feet meters to the nearest num foot num m. num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
barbed wire fences constructed and measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter for barbed wire fence complete in place which shall be payment in full for clearing grubbing and preparatory shaping for the fence line for disposing of waste materials for excavating for posts and braces for furnishing all materials for setting posts and braces installing wire and other incidentals and for all equipment tools and labor required to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa barbed wire fence ____ strands ____ feet m high per linear foot meter section num fence reset num description .
this section shall cover the work of the resetting of fences gates stiles and cattle chutes required to be removed from their original position inside the right of way or erecting fence gates etc .
using new material of the type furnished to the contractor usually by the owner of the abutting land instead of materials removed from the right of way .
num materials .
existing materials shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible replacements for materials damaged or destroyed due to negligence on the part of the contractor shall be of at least the same grade of material used in the original fence .
approval of the replacement material shall be made by the engineer no testing of this material will be required unless such is ordered by the engineer .
num construction requirements .
a general .
attention is directed to the general construction requirements for construction of chain link industrial fence section num woven wire fence section num and barbed wire fence section num .
the contractor will be required to remove and reset the fence to the location on and beyond the right of way lines as designated using the material from the original fences and shall leave all fences in as good condition as before removal from their original location .
in case resetting of a fence will completely reenclose a previously enclosed area the contractor shall be responsible for all damages of any nature arising from the removal of the fence or delay or negligence in resetting .
no such fence shall be cut or disturbed until the contractor has made adequate provision for immediate repair or reconstruction .
watchmen to section num fence reset num control livestock where fence is being reset shall be provided by the contractor as necessary without extra compensation .
in case resetting of a fence will not reenclose a previously enclosed area it shall not be cut or moved without a written order from the engineer .
pending issuance of such written order the contractor will be permitted to install at his expense temporary fences and gates or other means of access .
the contractor provided reasonable caution is used will not be held responsible for damage arising from removing and resetting fence after receiving a written order for its removal .
b installation .
reset fences shall be true to line and grade with all wires taut and well fastened and shall present a workmanlike appearance .
c gates .
all gates shall be moved and made serviceable at the new location .
all damage to fence and gates due to moving operations shall be repaired by the contractor .
all posts and gates not in serviceable condition shall be replaced with posts and gates of serviceable materials .
the cost of such replacements shall be included in the price bid for fence reset and no direct payment will be made for such replacements .
the contractor will not be required to furnish any additional material except posts and gates as above provided and such materials as may be necessary to replace any and all parts of the fence and gates unnecessarily damaged in removing and handling and resetting .
should the owners or the lessees of the abutting property desire to improve any fence or portion thereof which is designated to be reset and the said owners or lessees agree to furnish the contractor at the site of the work the necessary material similar in character to that in the original fence the contractor will be required to rebuild and reset such fence using the material furnished by the owners or lessees in lieu of the original material .
the contractor will be responsible for such materials delivered on the site until incorporated in the fence .
the original material so replaced may be recovered by the owners or lessees .
d fence set .
when the item of fence set is included in the plans or proposal the contractor shall use the fencing materials which have been placed along the right of way at designated locations and construct a fence along the right of way making the necessary connections to existing or reset fences .
construction details shall be the same as required for reset fence .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of fence reset or fence set shall be the accepted net length including gates of completed fence removed and reset or of fence set at the new location measured along the top of the post line in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num m. no measurement or direct payment will be made for fence removed only and not reset .
the quantity of fence reset includes cattle chutes stiles and related fences .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted quantity of fence reset will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter for fence reset which shall be payment in full for furnishing all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the accepted quantity of fence set will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter for fence set which shall be payment in full for furnishing all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work including responsibility for the new materials furnished until used .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa fence reset per linear foot meter numb fence set per linear foot meter section num minor utility adjustments num section num minor utility adjustments num description .
this section shall cover the work of minor adjustments andor relocations of various types of public or private utilities that may be encountered within the construction limits of the project from their original location in order to clear the construction and comply with existing state laws .
num materials .
in the adjustment of utilities under this section the contractor shall use materials salvaged from the original facility plus new materials necessary to clear the construction of these facilities .
all new materials and accessories necessary to adjust andor relocate these facilities shall be furnished by the contractor with like material of at least equal quality of that in place .
num construction requirements .
the construction methods employed in the adjustment or relocation of the various types of utilities shall be in accordance with current local codes and practices of the type utility involved .
the contractor shall be required to adjust andor relocate the various types of utilities which may be encountered as shown on the plans or directed using the material salvaged from the original facility plus any new material necessary to clear the construction .
all salvable and unsalvable material not used in the adjustment of the facility involved shall become the property of the contractor unless otherwise provided by the plans and shall be disposed of by him off the limits of the right of way at his discretion .
work required for this adjustment shall be performed by the contractor in a manner that will limit interruption of the services for the utility involved a minimum period of time .
when adjusting installing or otherwise working with nonmetallic conduits for underground utilities the contractor shall install on the conduit a metallic tape or provide other suitable means whereby the installation can be relocated by electronic detection devices .
num method of measurement .
each type of utility either overhead or underground to be adjusted andor relocated for which direct payment is to be made will be designated on the plans or in the proposal .
for the purpose of measurement and payment each type of utility will be classified separately .
the method of measurement shall be as noted herein with measurements either per linear foot meter or per lump sum with each being measured as complete in place .
measurements in linear feet meters will be to the nearest foot num m along the centerline of the type utility being measured .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment for the utility adjustment measured as noted above will be made at the contract unit price bid per type utility which shall be payment in full for the adjustment as provided on the plans or proposal .
said contract unit price bid shall be payment in full for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the adjustment of the utility and restore the service of the type utility involved .
the unit price bid for underground utility adjustment will be based on placing the facility at a depth of num feet num m or less under the existing ground surface unless otherwise noted on the plans .
the accepted footage of underground facilities complete in place at depths greater than num feet num m below the ground surface shall have an adjusted unit price arrived at by increasing the contract price bid by the percentage indicated in the table below .
unit price coverage noted in paragraph num above shall govern for such adjusted unit price .
final acceptance of this work will be subject to approval by the utility company involved therefore the engineer may withhold payment for this work until the contractor has obtained the owners written approval that the work performed complies with the local codes and requirements of the utility company .
section num water line num depth utility installed below existing ground line percentage contract unit price bid to be increased more than num feet num m but less than num feet num m num num feet num m and more but less then num feet num m num num feet num m and more but less than num feet num m num num feet num m and more num b payment will be made under item no .
numa utility adjustment per linear foot meter numb utility adjustment per lump sum overhead or underground electrical communication telephonetelegraph gas water or sewerage note types of utilities in general will be classified as electrical communication telephone or telegraph gas water or sewerage .
section num water line num description .
this section shall cover the work of the following furnishing and installing new water pipe water mains water meters and boxes valves and valve boxes fire hydrants and appurtenances removing relaying and resetting existing water pipe water mains water meters and boxes valves and valve boxes fire hydrants and appurtenances constructing connections to existing water mains .
a water service line shall be defined as a lateral line leading from a water main to a building .
a water main shall be defined as the carrier pipe through which water is transmitted from the water source to the water service lines .
all work performed and materials used shall be in accordance with the aldot plans and specifications and the utilitys requirements .
in the event that there is a conflict between the aldot plans and specifications and the utilitys requirements the more stringent requirements shall govern .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements of section num and other appropriate sections of division num materials .
concrete used for thrust blocks shall be in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
num .
water pipe .
pipe shall be laid in the presence of the engineer .
pipe shall not be covered until allowed by the engineer .
pipe designated to be relaid that is damaged or rendered unfit for use through negligence or improper handling by the contractor shall be replaced by the contractor without additional compensation .
all new pipes shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent damage to the pipe and pipe lining .
the interior of all pipes valves and fittings shall be free from dirt and debris .
all material shall be stored in the appropriate manner to protect the materials from damage by freezing and subsequent handling .
the construction methods employed in the adjustment relocation and placement of the water pipe shall be in accordance with the current codes and practices of the utility company involved .
work required for the adjustments of a water main and service line shall be performed by the contractor in such a manner that shall limit interruption of the service for a minimum period of time .
notice shall be made by the contractor to the customers affected by the service interruption at least num hours but not more than num hours prior to service interruption .
section num water line num when ductile iron water pipe and fittings are located in potentially corrosive soil conditions the pipe shall be wrapped in polyethylene sheath meeting awwa cnum .
when installing nonmetallic water pipe the contractor shall install a metallic tape or locating wire on the pipe or provide other suitable means approved by the engineer to allow for location by electronic detection devices .
valves and other controls on the existing water system shall not be operated for any purpose by the contractor without approval and representation by the utility .
water mains shall be laid below existing drainage pipes existing water lines gas lines and other utility lines except for sanitary sewer by deflecting pipe downward unless otherwise shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
any deflection shall be approved by the engineer and in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendations .
pvc pipe installation shall meet the requirements of astm d num .
hdpe pipe used for the open cut method shall meet the manufacturers requirement for the pressure rating required for use .
num .
hydrant .
all hydrants shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum and traffic model design .
all hydrants shall be thoroughly cleaned of dirt or foreign matter before setting .
locations of hydrants will be determined by the engineer .
hydrants shall be located for complete accessibility and to avoid damage from vehicles and injury to pedestrians .
all hydrants shall stand plumb and shall have their nozzles parallel with or at right angles to the curb .
each hydrant shall be controlled by an independent gate valve .
a drainage pit num feet x num feet x num feet num m x num m x num m shall be excavated below each hydrant and filled with coarse gravel or crushed stone to a depth of num inches num mm above the hydrant opening .
the drainage pit shall not be connected to a sewer system .
the bowl of each hydrant shall be anchored as approved by the engineer .
each fire hydrant unit shall include num feet of piping to attach to the water line .
fire hydrant extensions shall be installed to connect the standard fire hydrant unit as shown on the plans to the water line when the line is deeper than the standard num foot fire hydrant piping attachment .
num .
valves .
all valves shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
all valves shall close when the nut is turned clockwise .
all valves shall have a nonrising stem .
gate valves shall be plumb and shall be set and jointed to the new pipe as specified for laying pipe .
cast iron valve boxes shall be plumb and centered over the wrench nut of the valve with the box cover flush with the finished pavement or unpaved area .
air release valves shall be installed where shown on the plans .
num .
retainer gland .
retainer glands shall be the type shown on the plans or designated by the engineer and shall be installed in accordance with the utility company requirements .
num .
water meter and box reset .
the water meter box shall be adjusted carefully to the designated location and elevation .
backfill shall be tamped around each box located in the pavement area to the required density of the adjacent material .
any meter box or accessories lost or rendered unfit for reuse due to negligence or improper handling by the contractor shall be replaced in kind without additional compensation .
num .
valve box reset .
a valve box shall not be reset until approved by the engineer .
the box shall be adjusted carefully to make sure that the top is at the designated location and elevation .
backfill shall be tamped around each box located in the pavement area to the required density of the adjacent material .
any box or accessories lost or rendered unfit for reuse due to negligence or improper handling by the contractor shall be replaced in kind without additional compensation .
num .
line stop .
section num water line num a line stop to stop the flow of water in a portion of the main without interruption of water service shall be manufactured and installed by either t.d .
williamson inc. severn trenthydrastop ipsco or an engineer approved equal .
the line stop and appurtenances shall be pressure rated for a minimum of num psi to safely cease the flow of water in the existing water main .
the line stop shall be designed for the water main material shown on the plans and field verified prior to installation .
the thrust restraint shall be as detailed in the project plans .
the contractor performing the installation of the line stop shall have successful experience in water main tapping and line stopping .
b excavation and foundation .
the trench shall be excavated to the designated line and grade .
the trench width shall be sufficient to permit work on the pipe and inspection of the work .
mains shall have a minimum trench width of num inches num mm plus the outside diameter of the pipe with the depth sufficient to provide for foundation preparation and proper cover .
trenches shall be properly sheeted or braced wherever needed to prevent cavein or loose soil from falling into the trench .
sides of the trenches shall be kept as near vertical as possible .
bell holes shall be excavated to insure that the pipe rests upon the bottom of the trench for its full length .
in the event that the bottom of the trench is in rock or is unsuitable material the trench shall be excavated at a minimum of num inches num mm below grade or as directed by the engineer .
the trench shall then be backfilled with crushed stone as specified in section num or engineer approved material up to the proper grade elevation .
all excavated material that is not suitable for use as backfill shall be removed from the project site or otherwise properly disposed .
the trench shall be dewatered to prevent standing or running water and to allow for proper installation of the water pipe .
c laying .
the laying of pipe in finished trenches shall be started at the outlet end and shall be installed up grade with the spigot end pointing in the direction of flow .
the pipe shall be laid to the line and grade shown on the project plans .
the pipe shall then be examined to make sure that it is free of defects .
pipe shall be fitted and matched to form a smooth uniform invert .
the pipe shall be installed in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
pipes shall be lowered so as to avoid damage and unnecessary handling in the trench .
the hubs and bells shall be clean when laid .
the pipe shall be cleaned of debris and dirt when jointing the pipe .
the ends of the pipes shall be securely closed when laying is stopped for the night to prevent animals and water from entering the pipe .
water mains shall have a minimum cover of num inches num mm under pavement and num inches num mm under ditches .
reaction or thrust backing or other approved anchorage shall be provided on all mains num inches num mm in diameter or larger at all wyes and tees plugs caps and at bends with a deflection angle equal to or greater than num degrees .
concrete for thrust blocks shall be placed against undisturbed earth .
walking and working on or over the completed water line except as necessary for backfilling and tamping shall not be permitted until at least num foot num m of backfill is in place over the top of the pipe .
d joints .
all joints shall be sealed for the entire circumference of the pipe providing an acceptable watertight joint .
the installation of rubber or other type gasket joints shall be in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
no joint shall be finished until the two next joints in advance have been placed .
any joint that is disturbed after jointing shall be removed cleaned and remade .
where a restrained joint is required locked mechanical joint retainer glands or restrained joint gaskets of adequate strength to prevent movement of the water main shall be used in addition to the concrete thrust block .
e backfilling .
backfilling shall be performed immediately after inspection as directed by the engineer to secure the pipe position prior to proceeding to the next section .
section num water line num the backfill material shall be carefully deposited equally on both sides of the pipe in uniform layers not to exceed num inches num mm in compacted thickness to a density of not less than num percent of aashto t num maximum density .
backfill that is not under roadbeds shall be compacted as directed by the engineer to be consistent with surrounding materials .
where roadways and other crossings are disturbed the contractor shall restore them to their original condition and shall replace all surface material and all paving sidewalks sod or other disturbed surfaces by furnishing all necessary new materials without extra compensation .
all pipe shall be pressure tested as noted in this section before complete backfilling of the pipe will be permitted .
all trenches and excavations shall be backfilled with approved natural soil unless shown otherwise on the plans .
after completing the backfill the contractor shall promptly remove all surplus material rubbish and all equipment leaving the site and adjacent areas in a neat and presentable condition .
f connection to existing water system .
connection to the existing water system shall be made as shown on the plans and as directed by the engineer .
the connection shall be made to minimize interruption of service .
the contractor shall notify the utility at least num hours prior to connecting to the existing system .
g pressure testing of installed lines .
num .
general .
all lines installed under this section shall be pressure tested as noted in this subarticle and in accordance with awwa cnum .
the contractor shall have the option of testing the mains and service lines under one of the following conditions a .
lines uncovered .
b .
lines partially covered with joints and valves exposed .
the cost for this work shall be included in the unit price bid for installing the water pipe .
num .
testing .
a .
water mains .
when a section of pipe is approved by the engineer for testing the contractor shall furnish all materials equipment and labor to properly carry out the testing operation .
this shall include as a minimum a test pump and a means of accurately measuring the volume of water necessary to maintain the required pressure during the prescribed time of testing .
a recording pressure gauge shall be used during the pressure test and the charts shall be provided to the engineer and the utility .
the contractor shall furnish install and remove any temporary bulkheads flanges and plugs as well as corporation stops at high points in the pipe line and at the test pump when such are necessary for the testing operation .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer all water mains including corporation stops shall be tested before service lines are installed .
if in the opinion of the engineer the high pressure testing of the mains must be done after service lines are in place the service lines shall be shut off at the corporation stops .
after necessary joints corporation stops bulkheads etc .
have been installed temporary corporation stops if no other means can be provided shall be placed in the high points of the pipe line and at the pumps as required to remove air from the water system .
the test pressure shall equal num percent of the working pressure but not less than num psi num kpa nor more than the pressure class of the pipe being tested .
the minimum test period shall be six hours .
however the testing period shall be extended if the engineer deems additional testing is necessary with no additional compensation given for the additional testing .
the maximum leakage allowed shall be determined by the following formula l s d pnum num ls d pnum num l allowable leakage in gallonshour litershour s length of pipe tested in feet meters p test pressure in psig bars d nominal diameter of the pipe in inchesinches section num water line num the contractor shall provide suitable means for determining the quantity of water lost by leakage under the test pressure .
when in the opinion of the engineer service lines can not be shut off from the section to be tested or other conditions exist where pressure testing as described above may cause damage the engineer may approve that the line be tested under normal operating pressure .
the contractor at his expense shall locate and repair defective joints sections or valves until the leakage is within the noted allowances .
all observed leaks shall be repaired whether or not the leakage test results are within the requirements specified above .
after the contractor has made the necessary corrections the main shall be retested as described above until the line passes the necessary requirements .
all tests and retests shall be at the contractors expense .
b .
water service lines .
these lines shall be checked under normal operating pressures for at least six hours and the line completely inspected for visible leaks unless checked along with the mains as noted in the preceding subitem a .
the contractor at his expense shall locate and repair or replace any connection or joint until leakage has been stopped .
h sterilization .
pipe lines and appurtenances both existing and new which are the responsibility of the contractor by being within the overall limits of construction shall be sterilized before being placed in service .
the sterilization process shall be performed and accepted before all pressure tests have been performed to prevent contamination of the existing system .
the sterilization process shall as a minimum be that required by the governmental regulatory body having jurisdiction over the utility .
the contractor shall contact the utility owner or regulatory body to determine the acceptable sterilization treatment .
the cost for this work shall be included in the unit price bid for the water pipe installation .
i pigging .
when the water main is num inches num mm in diameter or greater the main shall be pigged and then flushed at the scouring velocity .
the cost for this work shall be included in the unit price bid for the water pipe installation .
num method of measurement .
a water main and water service line .
the actual accepted length of water main and water service line laid or relaid will be measured in linear feet meters along the center of the line complete in place .
tees wyes crosses bends and fittings will not be deducted from the measurement for payment along the center of the line being laid .
b fittings .
ductile iron fittings will be measured by the fittings weight in pounds kg .
bolts and other miscellaneous items will not be included in the measured weights .
payment will be based on the manufacturers catalog weight of the supplied fitting .
pvc and hdpe fittings where allowed will not be measured separately for payment .
c fire and flush hydrants .
fire and flush hydrants will be measured individually as one complete unit .
d fire and flush hydrant reset .
fire and flush hydrant resets will be measured individually as one complete unit requiring removal and replacement .
e fire hydrant extensions .
fire hydrant extensions will be measured in vertical feet meters along the vertical center of the water line .
f valve .
valves and valve box where shown on the plans will be measured individually as one complete unit of the valve including a valve stem extension where required .
section num water line num g concrete for water mains .
concrete for water mains will be measured per cubic yard cubic meter installed for water main plugs supports anchors and thrust blocks .
payment will be based on the actual quantity placed for the appropriate base and pipe size for normal soil conditions .
larger size blocks and payment based on larger concrete dimensions may be used when approved by the engineer to accommodate poor soil conditions .
h retainer gland .
retainer glands will be measured per each retainer gland required .
i anchor tee .
anchor tees will be measured per each anchor tee required for fire hydrant installation .
j tapping valve and sleeve .
tapping valve and sleeves will be measured individually as one complete unit of the tapping valve and sleeve valve stem extension where required and valve box unit including performing the tapping operation .
k service tap .
a service tap will be measured per each tap as a unit that includes the tapping sleeve saddle corporation and curb stops and couplings .
l water meter and box set and reset .
a water meter and box set and reset will be measured as the number of each set or reset as shown on the plans and shall include the water meter meter box and cover all connections and pipe necessary to set or to remove and reset the water meter and box .
m valve box reset .
a valve box reset will be measured per each box reset and shall include the resetting of the valve box and cover .
n line stop .
a line stop will be measured per each line stop as a unit that includes installation and maintenance of the line stop and the thrust restraint the removal of the line stop and installation of a blind flange .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
general .
final acceptance of this work shall be subject to approval by the utility company involved .
therefore payment for this work will not be made until the contractor has obtained the owners written approval that the work performed complies with the local codes and requirements of the utility company .
num .
water main .
the accepted quantity of water main laid or relaid will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing and installing pipe including joint material polyethylene sheathing when required fittings for pvc and hdpe pipe restrained joint when specified making necessary pipe connections pigging flushing testing excavating backfilling backfill material and for all other materials tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
water service line .
the accepted quantity of water service line laid or relaid will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing and installing pipe fittings for pvc pipe only couplings and joint material excavating backfilling backfill material and for all other materials tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
fittings .
ductile iron fittings will be paid for at the contract unit price for each pound kg of fittings specified on the project plans which shall be payment in full for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install the size fitting required .
num .
fire and flush hydrant .
section num water line num fire and flush hydrants will be paid for at the contract unit price and include all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one hydrant .
fire hydrants shall also include num feet num m of piping to connect to the water line .
additional piping to connect to depths greater than num feet num m will be paid as fire hydrant extension .
num .
fire and flush hydrant reset .
fire and flush hydrant resets will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to reset one hydrant complete in place including excavation backfilling resetting the fire hydrant and all necessary connections valves and pipe .
if any new fire hydrant extensions are required they will be paid for under the appropriate pay item .
num .
fire hydrant extensions .
fire hydrant extensions will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to extend one fire hydrant unit to the required water line grade .
num .
valve .
valves will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one valve valve stem extension where required and valve box as appropriate for the type of valve being installed .
num .
concrete for water mains .
concrete for water mains will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and place the concrete .
num .
retainer gland .
retainer glands will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one retainer gland .
retainer glands may be used in lieu of restrained joint pipe upon which payment will be for restrained joint pipe not retainer glands .
num .
anchor tee .
anchor tees will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one anchor tee .
num .
tapping valve and sleeve .
a tapping valve and sleeve for extending water service availability will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one assembly of tapping valve and sleeve valve stem extension where required and valve box .
num .
service tap .
a service tap for providing water to a user will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one service tap including the tapping sleeve saddle corporation and curb stops and couplings .
num .
water meter and box set and reset .
water meter and box set and reset will be paid for at the respective contract price which shall include all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to set or to remove and reset a water meter and box complete in place .
num .
valve box reset .
valve box reset will be paid for at the respective contract price which shall include all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to reset the box complete in place .
num .
line stop .
a line stop for stopping the flow of water in a portion of the main without interruption of water service will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to install an utility approved line stop install the adequate thrust restraint maintenance of the line stop during construction removal of the line stop and the installation of a blind flange at the bypass outlet upon completion of the water main construction .
section num sanitary sewers num b payment shall be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm water laid per linear foot meter numb ___ inch mm water relaid per linear foot meter numc ductile iron fittings per pound kg numd fire hydrant per each nume fire hydrant reset per each numf fire hydrant extension per linear foot meter numg flush hydrant per each numh flush hydrant reset per each numi ___ inch mm air release valve per each numj ___ inch mm gate valve with box per each numk ___ inch mm butterfly valve with box per each numl concrete for water mains thrust blocks per cubic yard cubic meter numm ___ inch mm retainer gland per each numn ___ inch mm x ___ inch mm anchor tee per each numo ___ inch mm x ___ inchmm tapping valve and sleeve per each nump ___ inch mm service tap per each numq ___ inch mm water meter and box set per each numr ___ inch mm water meter and box reset per each nums valve box reset per each numt ___inchmm line stop per each show type of pipe ductile iron di polyvinyl chloride pvc polyethylene pe high density polyethylene hdpe crosslinked polyethylene pex type a copper .
designate one type main or service line .
designate restrained joint if required .
section num sanitary sewers num description .
this section shall cover the work of the following furnishing and installing new sanitary sewers force mains and manholes removing replacing and resetting existing sanitary sewers force mains and manholes constructing connections to existing sewers and manholes all work performed and materials used shall be in accordance with aldot plans and specifications and the utilitys requirements .
in the event that there is a conflict between the aldot specifications and the utilitys requirements the more stringent requirement shall govern .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements of section num and other appropriate sections of division num materials .
the pipe strength shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num unless otherwise noted by the project plans or determined by the actual laying conditions .
concrete used for construction of sanitary sewers force main and manholes shall be class a concrete in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
num .
sanitary sewer .
pipe shall be laid in the presence of the inspector and shall not be covered until allowed by the project manager .
pipe that is damaged or deemed unfit for use by the department due to negligence improper handling or improper installation shall be replaced by the contractor without additional compensation .
all new pipes shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent damage to the pipe and pipe lining .
the interior of all pipes shall be free from dirt and debris .
all material shall be section num sanitary sewers num stored in the appropriate manner to protect the materials from damage by freezing and subsequent handling .
the construction methods employed in the adjustment relocation and placement of the sewer lines shall be in accordance with the current codes and practices of the utility company involved .
work required for the adjustments of sewer mains fittings and service lines shall be performed by the contractor in such a manner that shall limit interruption of the service for a minimum period of time .
notice shall be made by the contractor to the customers affected by the service interruption at least four hours but not more than num hours prior to service interruption .
when installing nonmetallic sewer force main pipe the contractor shall install a metallic tape on the pipe or provide other suitable means to allow for location by electronic detection devices .
when ductile iron sewer pipe and fittings are located in potentially corrosive soil conditions the pipe shall be wrapped in polyethylene sheath meeting awwa cnum .
air and vacuum valve assemblies shall be installed in the force main to allow for the release of potentially trapped air along elevation changes in the force main as show on the plans .
the air and vacuum valve assembly shall be as detailed in the project plans and specifications .
when abandoning an existing sanitary sewer the sanitary sewer shall be cut filled with cement mortar flowable backfill section num mix num and the ends shall be capped .
num .
manhole .
precast concrete manholes shall be constructed in accordance with aashto m num .
manholes shall be smooth and free from fractures chips and honeycombs .
care shall be taken not to damage the manhole sections during handling and installation .
the manhole shall be constructed to minimize the number of manhole joints .
the invert and bottom curves of all manholes shall be neatly and accurately built and formed to facilitate the entrance and flow of sewage over them .
when required a branch pipe consisting of one segment of ductile iron pipe of the required size shall be built into manholes to receive either present or future branch lines .
branch lines for future flows shall have an engineer approved mechanical plug .
new manholes shall be supplied with engineer approved castin or cored flexible manhole pipe connectors boots for each pipe cutout .
the flexible manhole pipe connector boot shall meet the requirements of astm c num .
the connector shall be installed in the manhole wall in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
existing manholes cored for connection of sewer pipe shall be fitted with engineer approved flexible manhole pipe connectors boots .
the flexible manhole pipe connector boot shall meet astm c num requirements .
the connector shall be installed in the manhole wall in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
all manhole pipe connectors boots shall be sized specifically for the pipe material pipe size and manhole size being used .
joints in riser and cone sections shall have a rubber gasket or an approved equal meeting the requirements of astm c num .
manholes shall be provided with steps inflow dishes chimney seals and linings as required by the project plans and specifications .
num .
abandon existing manhole .
abandoning an existing manholes shall include breaking the manhole off to a depth of three feet below grade creating holes for drainage in the bottom furnishing placing and compacting sand or sandclay backfill to the original grade removing and cleaning the frame and cover and transporting the frame and cover to the utility .
num .
resetting manhole coneshaped top section cone .
manholes requiring the cone section to be removed and replaced to lower or raise the manhole top elevation more than two feet to allow for the additionremoval of a manhole unit section without moving the structure location shall be considered a manhole cone reset .
all work shall be done in a workman like manner by competent workmen and the manhole structure reestablished in proper working order at its new elevation .
any manhole material broken destroyed lost or rendered unfit for reuse through carelessness negligence or section num sanitary sewers num improper handling of the work shall be replaced by the contractor without extra compensation .
when adjustments to manholes require the removal of a portion of the existing manhole the engineer shall designate that portion of the structure to be removed .
the removal cost shall be included in the unit price bid for the manhole cone reset .
when required to reach the elevation shown on the project plans the manhole frame and cover shall be raised or lowered using brick and mortar concrete donut rings cast iron riser ring or engineer approved equal .
the resetting of an existing manhole cone section shall be in conjunction with installation of manhole unit sections .
num .
resetting manhole frame and cover .
manhole frame and covers that are raised or lowered in top elevation less than num feet num mm without removing the manhole cone or moving the structure location shall be considered reset .
all work shall be done in a workmanlike manner by competent workmen and the unit reestablished in proper working order at its new elevation .
any material broken destroyed lost or rendered unfit for reuse through carelessness negligence or improper handling of the work shall be replaced by the contractor without extra compensation .
concrete and brick masonry work shall conform to requirements of sections num and num respectively .
the manhole frame and cover shall be raised or lowered using brick and mortar concrete donut rings cast iron riser ring or department approved equal .
num .
manhole drop connection .
where required on the plans a drop connection shall be constructed at manholes as detailed in the project plans and specifications .
piping for drop connections shall be ductile iron except where noted otherwise on the plans .
b excavation and foundation .
the trench shall be excavated true to established lines and grades as shown on the project plans .
tunneling will not be permitted unless authorized in writing .
trenches shall be excavated at least num inches num mm on each side of the pipe .
trenches shall be properly sheeted or braced wherever needed to prevent cavein or loose soil from falling into the trench .
sides of the trenches shall be kept as near vertical as possible .
bell holes shall be excavated to insure that the pipe rests upon the bottom of the trench for its full length .
in the event that the bottom of the trench is in rock or is unsuitable material the trench shall be excavated at a minimum of num inches num mm below grade or as directed by the engineer .
the trench shall then be backfilled with crushed stone as specified in section num up to the proper grade elevation .
all excavated material that is not suitable for use as backfill shall be removed from the project site or otherwise satisfactorily disposed .
the trench shall be dewatered to prevent standing or running water and to allow for proper installation of the sewer .
c laying .
the laying of pipe in finished trenches shall be started at the outlet end and shall be installed up grade with the spigot end pointing in the direction of flow .
the pipe shall be laid to the line and grade shown on the project plans .
the pipe shall then be examined to make sure that it is free of defects .
pipe shall be fitted and matched to form a sewer with a smooth uniform invert .
the pipe shall be installed in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
pipes shall be lowered so as to avoid damage and unnecessary handling in the trench .
the hubs and bells shall be clean when laid .
the pipe shall be cleaned of debris and dirt when jointing the pipe .
the end of the pipes shall be securely closed when laying is stopped for the night to prevent animals and water from entering the pipe .
wyes or tees shall be installed along with lateral sewer pipe where designated on the project plans to connect existing or future services .
when laterals are required on the plans or instructed by the engineer the lateral shall extend to the rightofway line or as directed by the engineer .
when the lateral is not connected to an existing lateral the end shall be plugged as specified by the engineer .
section num sanitary sewers num force mains shall have a minimum cover of num inches num mm and num inches num m when under pavement .
concrete thrust blocks shall be placed along the force main at vertical and horizontal bends and fittings .
the thrust block shall be poured against undisturbed earth .
walking and working on or over the completed sewer line except as necessary for backfilling and tamping will not be permitted until at least num foot num m of backfill is in place over the top of the pipe .
air and vacuum valves for force mains shall be placed along the force main as required by the project plans .
d joints .
all joints shall be sealed for the entire circumference of the pipe providing an acceptable watertight joint .
the installation of rubber or other type gasket joints shall be in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
no joint shall be finished until the two next joints in advance have been placed .
any joint that is disturbed after jointing shall be removed cleaned and reinstalled .
where a restrained joint is required on the project plans locked mechanical joint retainer glands or restrained joint gaskets of adequate strength to prevent movement of the force main shall be used in addition to the concrete thrust block .
retainer glands shall be the type shown on the plans or designated by the engineer and shall be installed in accordance with the utility company requirements .
e backfilling .
backfilling shall be performed immediately after inspection as directed by the engineer to secure the pipe position prior to proceeding to the next section .
all trenches and excavations shall be backfilled with approved natural soil or when directed by the engineer with foundation backfill material .
the backfill material shall be carefully deposited equally on both sides of the pipe in uniform layers not to exceed num inches num mm in compacted thickness to a density of not less than num percent of aashto tnum maximum density .
backfill that is not under roadbeds shall be compacted as directed by the engineer to be consistent with surrounding materials .
where roadways and other crossings are disturbed by placing the sewer the contractor shall restore them to their original condition and shall replace all surface material and all paving sidewalks sod or other disturbed surfaces furnishing all necessary new materials without extra compensation except as provided in this section .
topsoil disturbed by excavation across private property shall be replaced as nearly as possible to its original position .
after completing the backfill the contractor shall promptly remove all surplus material rubbish and all equipment leaving the site and adjacent areas in a neat and presentable condition .
f connection to existing sewer system .
connection to existing sewer shall be made as shown on the plans and as directed by the engineer .
connection shall be made to minimize interruption of service .
where required to allow for continuous service bypass pumping shall be performed and shall be incidental to the installation of the sanitary sewer .
connection to an existing manhole shall be made by coring the manhole wall and installing a engineer approved manhole pipe connector boot .
the void space around the boot and manhole shall be filled with nonshrinking grout .
connection of dissimilar type pipes shall be made with a coupler or adapter as approved by the engineer .
g testing .
after completion of the installation of the sanitary sewer all lines shall be tested .
all lines shall be cleaned of dirt and debris prior to testing .
debris and dirt shall be removed from the sewer system and not flushed to the next segment of sewer .
the sanitary sewer and force main shall be either air tested or hydrostatic tested as required by the engineer .
all manholes shall be tested as required by the project plans and specifications .
testing of manholes and structures shall be performed after curing of linings .
any leakage in the manhole or structure before during or after the test shall be repaired by the contractor for no additional compensation .
section num sanitary sewers num num method of measurement .
a sewer pipe .
the actual accepted length of sanitary sewer and force main laid or relaid will be measured in linear feet meters along the center of the line complete in place .
b fittings .
ductile iron fittings will be measured by the fittings weight in pounds kg .
bolts and other miscellaneous items will not be included in the weights .
payment will be based on the manufacturers catalog weight of the supplied fitting .
c stacks and laterals .
the actual accepted length of service stacks and laterals will be measured in linear feet meters along the center of the line complete in place .
d abandon existing sanitary sewer .
the abandonment of an existing sanitary sewer will measured per linear foot of sanitary sewer abandoned .
e sanitary sewer lateral cleanout .
a sanitary sewer lateral cleanout will be measured per each complete cleanout required .
f retainer gland .
retainer glands will be measured per each retainer gland required .
g manhole .
manholes will be measured per each as individual units including footing bottom slab bench wall sections cone casting and manhole cover .
manholes shall also include steps lining chimney seal and inflow dish as shown to be required on the plans .
the maximum height of the measurement of a manhole for payment will be num feet num m. this will be measured from the top of the bottom slab to the top of the cover .
the additional height of a manhole above num feet num m that is required for raising or lowering a manhole will be measured in manhole units .
h manhole unit .
manhole wall sections required to raise or lower an existing manhole or lower a new manhole will be measured per each manhole unit .
the manhole unit will be in increments of num feet num mm and shall match the structure being raised or lowered .
required increments that are less than num feet num mm will be measured as a complete manhole unit .
i manhole cone reset .
manhole cone reset will be measured per each as one complete unit of the manhole cone shaped top section and manhole frame and cover requiring removal and replacement when raising or lowering the elevation of an existing manhole .
j manhole frame and cover reset .
manhole frame and cover reset will be measured per each as one complete unit of the manhole frame and cover requiring removal and replacement when raising or lowering and existing manhole without the addition or removal of manhole units less than two feet num mm .
k connection to existing manhole .
connection to existing manhole will be measured per each connection .
l abandon existing manhole .
the abandonment of an existing manhole will measured per each manhole abandoned .
m manhole drop connection .
manhole drop connection will be measured per vertical foot meter of drop from entrance of the sewer pipe to the invert of the manhole including tee bends fittings and pipe .
n air and vacuum valve assembly .
an air and vacuum valve assembly will be measured per each complete assembly as detailed in the project plans and specifications .
o sanitary sewer lift station .
a sanitary sewer lift station will be measured per each complete lift station .
section num sanitary sewers num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
general .
final acceptance of this work shall be subject to approval by the utility company involved therefore the engineer may withhold payment for this work until the contractor has obtained the utilitys written approval that the work performed complies with the local codes and requirements of the utility company .
num .
sewer pipe .
the accepted length of sanitary sewer and force main laid or relaid will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices for the types and sizes specified in the proposal including the excavation and backfilling which shall be payment in full for furnishing hauling excavating foundation preparation laying or relaying backfilling compacting cleaning up and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work except manholes junction boxes or like connecting masonry .
sanitary sewer pipe being relaid shall mean removing and reusing the existing sewer pipe .
the contract unit price shall be for an embedment depth of num feet num m or less below the existing ground line .
the length of sanitary sewer pipe laid or relaid measured as provided above at depths greater than num feet num m below the existing ground line shall have an adjusted unit price arrived at by increasing the contract unit price by the percentage indicated in the table below .
depth sewer installed below existing ground line percentage contract unit price bid to be increased more than num feet num m but less than num feet num m num num feet num m and more but less than num feet num m num num feet num m and more but less than num feet num m num num feet num m and more num num .
fittings .
ductile iron fittings will be paid for at the contract unit price for each pound kilogram of fitting specified on the project plans which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install the size fitting required .
num .
stacks and laterals .
stacks and laterals will be paid for at the contract unit price for the types and sizes specified in the proposal and shall include all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to extend the lateral from the main to the rightofway or easement line .
the unit price shall also include pipe fittings plugs caps backfilling compacting hauling and excavating .
num .
abandon existing sanitary sewer .
the abandonment of an existing sanitary sewer will be paid for at the contract unit price for the sizes specified in the proposal which shall be payment in full for furnishing all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary including flow able backfill and end caps to abandon an existing sanitary sewer .
num .
sanitary sewer lateral cleanout .
a sanitary sewer lateral cleanout will be paid for at the contract unit price for the size specified in the proposal which shall be payment in full for furnishing all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary including single or double sweep tee pipe recessed nut cap traffic loading cap when required for a complete sanitary sewer cleanout .
num .
retainer gland .
retainer glands will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one retainer gland .
retainer glands may be used in lieu of restrained joint pipe upon which payment will be made for restrained joint pipe not retainer glands .
num .
manhole .
a manhole will be paid for at the contract unit price for thesizes specified in the proposal which shall be payment in full for furnishing hauling excavating backfilling section num sanitary sewers num compacting cleaning up and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
manhole unit .
a manhole unit will be paid for at the contract unit price for the sizes specified in the proposal which shall be payment in full for furnishing hauling excavating foundation preparation backfilling compacting cleaning up and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the removal and replacement of the manhole cone and frame and cover will be paid for under manhole cone reset .
num .
manhole cone shaped top section cone reset .
a manhole cone reset measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price for manhole cone reset which shall be payment in full for all material equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work herein specified .
the unit price shall include the removal and reinstalling of the existing manhole cone section and manhole frame and cover .
num .
manhole frame and cover reset .
a manhole frame and cover reset will be paid for at the contract unit price for manhole frame and cover reset which shall be payment in full for all material equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
connection to existing manhole .
connection to existing manhole will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment in full for a manhole pipe connector boot all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary to connect the new sanitary sewer pipe to an existing manhole .
num .
abandon existing manhole .
abandon existing manhole will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment in full for all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary including backfill to abandon an existing manhole .
num .
manhole drop connection .
a manhole drop connection measured as noted above will be paid for at the contact unit price for the type specified which shall be payment in full for all pipe tees wyes cleanout stack materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
air and vacuum valve assembly .
an air and vacuum valve assembly will be paid for at the contract unit price for the size specified in the proposal which shall be payment in full for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one air and vacuum valve assembly which shall include the boxmanhole containing the valve .
num .
sanitary sewer lift station .
a sanitary sewer lift station will be paid for at the contract unit price for each lift station specified in the proposal which shall be payment in full for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one lift station .
this shall include all items within the lift station limits shown on the plans including all piping valves valve boxes pumps wet well buildings fencing grading and site access when required .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm sanitary sewer pipe laid per linear foot meter numb ___ inch mm sanitary sewer pipe relaid per linear foot meter numc ductile iron fittings per pound kg numd ___ inch mm retainer gland per each nume ___ inch mm stacks and laterals per linear foot meter numf abandon inch mm existing sanitary sewer per linear foot meter numg ___ inch mm sanitary sewer lateral cleanout per each numh ___ inch mm manhole per each numi ___ inch mm manhole unit per each numj manhole cone reset per each numk manhole frame and cover reset per each numl ___ inch mm manhole drop connection per linear foot meter numm connection to existing manhole per each section num natural gas line num numn abandon existing manhole per each numo ___ inch mm air and vacuum valve assembly per each nump sanitary sewer lift station per each show type of pipe ductile iron di polyvinyl chloride pvc high density polyethylene hdpe high performance polypropylene pp designate one type gravity or force main designate restrained joint if required show type ductile iron di polyvinyl chloride pvc section num natural gas line num description .
this section shall cover the work of the following furnishing and installing new gas mains and valves removing relaying and resetting existing gas mains and valves constructing connections to existing gas mains .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements of section num and other appropriate sections of division num materials .
num construction requirements .
a general .
num .
gas pipe .
pipe shall be laid or relaid in the presence of the engineer .
pipe shall not be covered until allowed by the engineer .
pipe designated to be relaid that is damaged or rendered unfit for use through negligence or improper handling shall be replaced by the contractor without additional compensation .
all new pipes shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent damage to the pipe and pipe lining .
the interior of all pipes valves and fittings shall be free from dirt and debris .
all material shall be stored in the appropriate manner to protect the materials from damage by freezing and subsequent handling .
the construction methods employed in the adjustment relocation and placement of the gas lines shall be in accordance with the current codes and practices of the utility company involved .
the work shall conform to the applicable requirements of the us department of transportation transportation of natural and other gas by pipelines minimum safety standards .
notification to the line locators to locate the other utilities in the construction area shall be made at least num hours prior to performing work .
work required for the adjustments of a gas main and service line shall be performed by the contractor in such a manner that shall limit interruption of the service for a minimum period of time .
notice shall be made by the contractor to the customers affected by the service interruption at least four hours but not more than num hours prior to service interruption .
when installing nonmetallic gas pipe the contractor shall install a detectable tape or locating wire on the pipe or provide other suitable means approved by the engineer to allow for location by electronic detection devices .
valves and other controls on the existing gas system shall not be operated for any purpose by the contractor without approval and representation by the utility .
welding of steel pipe shall be in accordance with asme bnum or api num .
each welder shall be certified for the type work specified .
certificates of welders performing the work shall be furnished to the engineer prior to beginning the work .
test pieces cut from the work being performed shall be provided to the engineer when required .
each section of the gas distribution system shall be thoroughly cleaned with compressed air to remove all dirt and foreign matter .
taps shall be provided at all remote points .
once section num natural gas line num all lines have been completely and thoroughly purged the taps shall be tightly sealed with steel plugs or by welding .
cathodic protection shall be provided as described in the project plans and specifications .
num .
valves .
all valves shall close when the nut is turned clockwise .
all valves shall have a nonrising stem and extension matching the valve stem to the finished grade .
all valves shall be plumb and shall be set and jointed to the new pipe as specified for laying pipe .
valve flanges shall be as specified for fittings .
valve boxes shall be plumb and centered over the wrench nut of the valve with the box cover flush with the finished pavement or unpaved area .
valve boxes subject to traffic loading shall be set on brick or concrete to prevent box from bearing against the valve or piping .
the word gas shall be cast into the cover of the valve box .
num .
valve box reset a valve box shall not be reset until approved by the engineer .
the box shall be adjusted carefully to make sure that the top is at the designated location and elevation .
backfill shall be tamped around each box located in the pavement area to the required density of the adjacent material .
any box or accessories lost or rendered unfit for reuse due to negligence or improper handling by the contractor shall be replaced in kind without additional compensation .
b excavation and foundation .
the trench shall be excavated to the designated line and grade when required .
the trench width shall be sufficient to permit work on the pipe and inspection of the work .
mains shall have a minimum trench width of num inches num mm plus the outside diameter of the pipe with the depth sufficient to provide for foundation preparation and proper cover unless stated otherwise on the project plans .
trenches shall be properly sheeted or braced wherever needed to prevent cavein or loose soil from falling into the trench .
sides of the trenches shall be kept as near vertical as possible .
the trench shall be excavated to insure that the pipe rests upon the bottom of the trench for its full length .
in the event that the bottom of the trench is in rock or is unsuitable material the trench shall be excavated at a minimum of num inches num mm below grade or as directed by the engineer .
the trench shall then be backfilled with crushed stone as specified in section num or engineer approved material up to the proper grade elevation .
all excavated material that is not suitable for use as backfill shall be removed from the project site or otherwise properly disposed .
the trench shall be dewatered to prevent standing or running water and to allow for proper installation of the gas pipe .
c laying .
the laying of pipe in finished trenches shall be started at the outlet end and shall be installed up grade .
the pipe shall be laid to the line and grade shown on the project plans .
the pipe shall then be examined to make sure that it is free of defects .
pipe shall be fitted and matched to form a smooth uniform invert .
the pipe shall be installed in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
pipes shall be lowered so as to avoid damage and unnecessary handling in the trench .
the pipe shall be cleaned of debris and dirt when jointing the pipe .
the ends of the pipes shall be securely closed when laying is stopped for the night to prevent animals and water from entering the pipe .
gas mains shall have a minimum cover of num inches num mm under ditches and num inches num mm under pavement unless stated otherwise on the project plans .
walking and working on or over the completed gas line except as necessary for backfilling and tamping shall not be permitted until at least num foot num mm of backfill is in place over the top of the pipe .
d joints and fittings .
all steel pipe joints and fittings shall be welded .
fittings shall be in accordance with ansi b num or ansi bnum .
all joints shall be sealed for the entire circumference of the pipe providing a watertight joint .
section num natural gas line num all polyethylene joints shall be welded as required by the manufacturers requirements .
e backfilling .
backfilling shall be performed immediately after inspection as directed by the engineer to secure the pipe position prior to proceeding to the next section .
the backfill material shall be carefully deposited equally on both sides of the pipe in uniform layers not to exceed num inches num mm in compacted thickness to a density of not less than num percent of aashto t num maximum density .
backfill that is not under roadbeds shall be compacted as directed by the engineer to be consistent with surrounding materials .
where roadways and other crossings are disturbed the contractor shall restore them to their original condition and shall replace all surface material and all paving sidewalks sod or other disturbed surfaces by furnishing all necessary new materials without extra compensation .
all pipe shall be tested as noted in this section or the method prescribed by the engineer whichever is the more stringent before complete backfilling of the pipe shall be permitted .
all trenches and excavations shall be backfilled with approved natural soil or when directed by the engineer with select foundation backfill material .
after completing the backfill the contractor shall promptly remove all surplus material rubbish and all equipment leaving the site and adjacent areas in a neat and presentable condition .
f connection to existing gas system .
connection to the existing gas system shall be made as shown on the plans and as directed by the engineer and designated as hot tap .
the connection shall be made to minimize interruption of service .
the contractor shall notify the utility at least num hours prior to connecting to the existing system .
service connections shall be made to the top or side of the main and shall be graded as to drain into the main unless otherwise noted on the plans .
g air pressure testing of installed lines .
num .
mains .
when a section of pipe is approved by the engineer for testing the contractor shall furnish all materials equipment and labor to properly carry out the testing operation .
a recording pressure gauge shall be used during the pressure test and the charts shall be provided by the contractor to the utility .
the contractor shall furnish install and remove any temporary bulkheads flanges and plugs when such are necessary for the testing operation .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer all gas mains shall be tested before service lines are installed .
the pipe shall be air pressured to num num times the maximum allowed operating pressure maop for the system .
the pipe shall hold the air pressure for num hours .
the contractor at his expense shall locate and repair defective joints sections or valves until the leakage is eliminated .
all observed leaks shall be repaired .
after the contractor has made the necessary corrections the main shall be retested as described above until the line passes the necessary requirements .
all tests and retests shall be at the contractors expense .
num .
service lines .
service line testing shall be as noted for mains except for the pressure which must be held for num minutes .
h holiday detector test .
immediately prior to lowering the pipe into the trench the pipe shall be tested by an engineer approved holiday detector .
the contractor at his expense shall locate and repair defective joints sections or valves .
after the contractor has made the necessary corrections the main shall be retested as described above until the line passes the necessary requirements .
all tests and retests shall be at the contractors expense .
num method of measurement .
a gas main and gas service line .
the actual accepted length of gas main and gas service line laid or relaid shall be measured in linear feet meters along the center of the line complete in place .
tees wyes crosses bends section num natural gas line num and fittings shall not be deducted from the measurement for payment along the center of the line being laid .
b fittings .
fittings shall be measured individually per each fitting including bolts and gaskets as needed .
c valves .
valves shall be measured per each individually as one complete unit including a valve stem extension where required and a valve box .
d hot tap .
hot taps shall be measured individually per each hot tap performed for the various sizes and types and shall include the tapping tee and saddle when necessary to perform the hot tap .
e valve with box reset a valve with box reset will be measured per each box reset and shall include the valve and the resetting of the valve box and cover .
f gas valve box reset a valve box reset will be measured per each box reset and shall include the resetting of the valve box and cover .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
general .
final acceptance of this work shall be subject to approval by the utility company involved .
therefore payment for this work shall not be made until the contractor has obtained the utilitys written approval that the work performed complies with the local codes and requirements of the utility company .
num .
gas main .
the accepted quantity of gas main laid or relaid shall be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing and installing pipe including joint material making necessary pipe connections pipe line markers testing excavating backfilling and for all materials tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
gas service line .
the accepted quantity of gas service line laid or relaid shall be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place which shall be payment in full for furnishing and installing pipe and joint material excavating backfilling and for all materials tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
fittings .
fittings shall be paid for at the contract unit price for each fitting specified on the project plans and includes all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install the size fitting required .
num .
valve .
valves shall be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one valve valve stem extension where required and valve box .
num .
hot tap .
a hot tap shall be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment for all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install one hot tap including tapping valve .
num .
valve with box reset valve with box reset will be paid for at the respective contract price which shall include all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and install the valve and to reset the box complete in place .
num .
gas valve box reset valve box reset will be paid for at the respective contract price which shall include all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to reset the box complete in place .
section num encasement pipe for utilities num b payment shall be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm gas laid per linear foot meter numb ___ inch mm gas relaid per linear foot meter numc ___ inch fittings per each numd ___ inch mm valve with box per each nume ___ inch mm x ____ inchmm hot tap per each numh ___ inch mm ____ valve with box reset per each numj gas __ per each show type steel polyethylene designate one type main or service line .
valve box reset etc .
section num encasement pipe for utilities num description .
this section shall include the work of furnishing and installing an encasement pipe for a utility carrier pipe .
an encasement pipe may be utilized as a carrier pipe as noted in this section and when shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the type of installation will be based on the location of the encasement pipe .
the three types of installation are designated as follows type num open cut .
type num jack and bore or tunneling .
type num directional drilling .
the contractor may substitute the type num or type num installation for the type num installation if the substitution is done without extra compensation .
type num and type num installations are intended for use under existing facilities and where traffic is not to be disturbed .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements of section num utility encasement pipe and other appropriate sections of these specifications .
the size and depth of pipe shall be as shown on the project plans or as described in the project proposal .
num construction requirements .
a general .
type num encasement pipe installed by open trench method complying with requirements for installation and backfill given in section num .
type num encasement pipe installed by an approved jack and bore or tunneling procedure .
type num encasement pipe installed by directional drilling .
the encasement pipe shall be laid to the line and grade shown on the project plans .
all pipe and other materials shall be new and unused when delivered and shall be suitable for installation and operation under the condition for which they are intended .
any material that has mixed with or coated with dirt or foreign substances or damaged during its delivery or handling shall not be used .
encasement pipe for a gas carrier pipe shall have two vent pipes installed to allow for release of gas in the event of a leak .
the vents shall be installed within num foot num m of the end of the encasement pipe .
the vent located on the low end of the encasement shall be installed on the underside of the encasement and the vent located at the high end of the encasement shall be installed on the top of the encasement .
the vent pipe shall slope upwards away from the encasement .
the vent pipe shall be above ground unless otherwise noted on the project plans .
b open cut method .
the procedure for excavating and backfilling by the open cut method shall be as prescribed in section num .
section num encasement pipe for utilities num c jack and bore or tunneling method .
num .
general .
the contractor shall submit the procedure proposed for the type num installation jack and bore or tunneling to the engineer at least num calendar days prior to the beginning of the installation .
the engineer will not approve the submittal but will review it for completeness .
work shall not begin until the engineer informs the contractor that the submittal is complete .
the submittal shall contain a list of all equipment proposed for use and a description of the procedure proposed for installation .
the encasement pipe shall be installed simultaneously with the boring action .
the results of this procedure shall produce a neatly installed encasement pipe without damage to the existing facility roadbed slopes etc .
and without excessive voids in the earth surrounding the encasement pipe .
if there are indications that voids exist around the encasement the engineer will order the contractor to pump a concrete grout under pressure to seal the voids .
any damage to the facility caused by the installation operation shall be restored by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer without cost to the department or utility .
num .
seating of carrier pipe .
encasement pipe spacers shall be used to maintain separation of the encasement pipe and the carrier pipe to ensure stability of the carrier pipe .
spacers shall be either stainless steel or nonmetallic as approved by the engineer and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
end treatment of encasement pipes .
end seals shall be mechanically attached to the ends of the encasement pipe and to the carrier pipe to prevent the entrance of dirt and water into the encasement pipe .
d directional drill method .
high density polyethylene hdpe pipe installed by the directional drilling method shall be as specified in section num .
the hdpe pipe shall meet the requirements for the depth of embedment and loading .
steel encasement pipe installed by directional drilling shall meet the requirements given in section num .
steel encasement pipe for gas that is installed by directional drilling as a carrier pipe shall meet the requirements for gas pipe given in section num .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer the details of the procedure and equipment proposed for the directional drilling at least num calendar days prior to beginning the drilling .
the directional drilling procedure shall produce a neatly installed carrier pipe without damage to the existing facility roadbed slopes etc .
and without excessive voids in the earth surrounding the pipe .
if there are indications that voids exist around the pipe the engineer will order the contractor to pump under pressure a concrete grout to seal the voids .
any damage to the facility caused by the installation operation shall be restored by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer without cost to the department or utility .
installation of the pipe shall meet the requirements of astm f num .
joining of the hdpe pipe shall be performed by thermal buttfusion in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendations .
the piping shall be assembled in a manner that does not obstruct adjacent roadways or public activities .
the pipe installed by the directional drill method shall be to the alignment and grade shown on the project plans .
the contractor shall provide a record drawing showing the constructed horizontal and vertical alignment shown for intervals not exceeding num feet num m. the contractor shall perform the construction in a manner so that the drilling fluids and cuttings are contained and not released into waterways or their tributaries .
the contractor shall handle the hdpe and steel pipe in a manner that will not over stress the pipe at any time before during and after construction .
a sizing pig shall be used to determine the presence of buckles dents out of roundness and any other deformations .
anomalies shall not exceed num of the nominal pipe diameter or excessive ovality greater than num of the nominal pipe diameter .
num method of measurement .
encasement pipe will be measured by the linear foot meter .
section num topsoil num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the encasement pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the type of installation required .
the unit price bid shall be compensation in full for furnishing and installing the pipe all excavation and backfill vent pipes spacers end treatments disposal of excess material and all labor material tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm encasement pipe type installation per linear foot meter show type steel high density polyethylenehdpeetc .
show type num num or num section num topsoil num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and placing topsoil and the placement of state furnished topsoil from stockpiles .
num materials .
a required properties of topsoil .
topsoil furnished or stockpiled by the contractor shall meet the requirements given in astm d num standard specification for topsoil for landscape purposes .
the composition of the topsoil shall be as follows from astm d num required properties of topsoil deleterious materials rock gravel slag cinder roots sod in the total sample num maximum by weight mass organic material in portion of sample passing the no .
num num mm sieve num to num by weight mass sand content in portion of sample passing the no .
num num mm sieve num to num by weight mass silt and clay content in portion of sample passing the no .
num num mm sieve num to num by weight mass ph num to num topsoil will be sampled at the source and tested prior to application by the engineer in accordance with astm d num for compliance with these requirements .
b sources of topsoil .
num .
topsoil furnished by contractor .
topsoil furnished by the contractor shall be taken from areas outside of the right of way .
the areas where topsoil is removed shall be developed maintained and restored in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numb .
num .
topsoil furnished by the state from stockpiles .
the contractor shall use topsoil from stockpiles that were created in accordance with the requirements given in subarticle numb .
num construction requirements .
a preparation for topsoil placement .
the contractor shall not place topsoil from any source contractor furnished or state furnished until the engineer has been given the opportunity to sample test and evaluate the source for compliance .
the grading and shaping of the area where topsoil must be placed shall be completed prior to the placement of the topsoil unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
section num ground preparation vegetation establishment and mowing num b application of topsoil .
topsoil shall be applied to the depth shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
applied topsoil shall be compacted by tracking .
tracking shall be accomplished by the operation of a tracked vehicle leaving ridges perpendicular to the direction flow of water down the slope .
the topsoil shall then be prepared in accordance with the requirements given in num .
ground preparation and vegetation establishment operations shall commence as soon as possible after the application of topsoil to reduce the potential for the erosion of the topsoil .
c portions of stockpiles that remain after removal of topsoil .
portions of stockpiles that remain after the removal of topsoil shall be reshaped as directed by the engineer .
any additional temporary or permanent seeding mulching and other erosion control measures that are required will be paid for under the appropriate items of work .
num method of measurement .
a topsoil item numa .
this item covers topsoil material furnished by the contractor .
topsoil furnished by the contractor will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters by loose measure in the delivery vehicle at the point of delivery .
b topsoil from stockpiles item numb .
this item covers topsoil made available to the contractor in state furnished stockpiles on the right of way .
this topsoil will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters by the cross section and average end areas method at the stockpile .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
topsoil will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard cubic meter which shall be full payment for furnishing the topsoil ground preparation handling hauling spreading shaping harrowing disking compaction disposal of unacceptable material and for furnishing all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
topsoil from stockpiles will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard cubic meter which shall be full payment for ground preparation cleaning and removing debris from the topsoil handling hauling spreading shaping harrowing disking compaction and for furnishing all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa topsoil per cubic yard cubic meter numb topsoil from stockpiles per cubic yard cubic meter section num ground preparation vegetation establishment and mowing num description .
this section shall cover ground preparation work and the work of establishing an acceptable permanent stand of vegetation of the species designated for establishment.this section also covers mowing of vegetated areas .
num materials .
materials seed mixes mulch fertilizer etc .
shall be furnished in compliance with the requirements given in section num .
num construction requirements .
a construction sequence .
the required sequence and timing of the placement of permanent seeding during excavation and embankment construction is given in subarticle numa .
the engineer may direct even to the exclusion of other operations that the contractor promptly complete grading and ground section num ground preparation vegetation establishment and mowing num preparation to allow the establishment of permanent vegetation in areas where it is necessary for the control of erosion and sediment .
b seed mixes for the establishment of permanent vegetation .
the appropriate seed mix shall be chosen from tables in section num .
the appropriate seed mix is based on planting zone planting date and type of area to be seeded .
seed mixes of a temporary nature are required in some areas of the state when permanent seed mixes are out of season .
these mixes are shown in section num as requiring seeding in stubble for the establishment of the required permanent plant .
c inspection .
the contractor shall notify the project manager at least num hours in advance of any work related to seeding .
this includes the mixing of seed as well as the sowing of seed .
the contractor shall notify the engineer of the proposed type of seed mix or mixes to be incorporated into the project prior to beginning seeding operations .
seeding work shall not begin prior to the measurement of the area to be seeded .
all work shall be performed in the presence of the engineer .
d preparation and planting in soft soil .
num .
ground preparation .
after grading and topsoil placement and prior to ground preparation the contractor shall remove all boulders stumps roots or other objects with any dimension larger than num inches num mm .
topsoil shall meet the requirements given in section num .
ground preparation shall consist of cultivating the topsoil to a loose depth of at least num inches num mm except on slopes num or steeper .
the plowing harrowing cultivating and all other operations shall be performed with proper equipment and in such a manner as to break up all clods .
the ground shall be plowed to the required depth and then cultivated with a rotary tiller or disk harrow in crossing directions if necessary until the result is a smooth uniform loose and well broken soil providing a suitable bed for seed .
in small or inaccessible areas the use of hand tools will be permitted .
the contractor shall add water as necessary to provide sufficient soil moisture to prepare the ground .
all trash and other debris shall be removed from the cultivated topsoil .
all pieces of wood rocks and unbroken clumps of earth with any dimension larger than num inches num mm shall be removed from the planting area .
num .
initial soil amendments .
the initial fertilization shall be a commercial fertilizer that will provide at least num pounds num kg of n num pounds num kg of pnumonum and num pounds num kg of knumo per acre hectare as computed from the nominal contents of fertilizer elements .
only one half of this rate shall be applied when the required seeding is annual ryegrass .
agricultural limestone lime shall be applied prior to seeding at a rate of two tons per acre num metric tons per hectare .
lime may be applied in dry pelletized or slurry form .
the rate of application is required regardless of the form of application .
the required rates of placement of fertilizer and lime may increase as directed by the engineer based on the results of the testing of the topsoil from stockpiles as described in article num .
additional fertilizer and lime for topsoil from stockpiles will be paid for separately in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
reductions in rates will result in a price adjustment for seeding .
fertilizers and agricultural limestone lime shall be applied uniformly at the required rates of placement .
the fertilizer shall be well pulverized and free of lumps when applied .
in no case shall fertilizer that is not mixed with soil be permitted to be in direct contact with seed .
when fertilizers are applied hydraulically they shall be diluted sufficiently so that no damage is done to either seed or established vegetation .
agricultural limestone basic slag or a combination of limestone and slag shall be applied separately but may be incorporated into the soil with fertilizers in one operation .
fertilizerand agricultural limestone that is not applied hydraulically shall be uniformly mixed with the soil by harrows rotary tillers or other soil mixing equipment prior to subsequent operations .
mixing with the soil will not be required when the fertilizerand agricultural limestone is applied hydraulically .
section num ground preparation vegetation establishment and mowing num num .
sowing seed .
mechanical or hydraulic seeders shall be used for sowing unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
sowing shall not be performed during windy weather when the prepared surface is crusted or when the ground is frozen wet or otherwise in a nontillable condition .
the addition of water may be required to render excessively dry soils tillable .
equipment for applying seed hydraulically shall be designed for this purpose .
the equipment shall be capable of mixing and pumping the water seed mixture mulch and fertilizer uniformly over the area to be seeded .
power driven agitators shall be provided to keep the mixture uniform during the application .
num .
covering seed .
care shall be exercised during covering operations to preserve the line grade and crosssection of the seeded areas so that areas adjacent to pavement walks etc .
are not left higher than the paved surface .
the seed bed shall be compacted immediately after sowing .
compaction shall be done with a cultipacker light roller or approved drag .
the weight mass of the roller or drag needed shall be determined by the contractor according to the type and physical condition of the soil .
rolling or covering of seed may be omitted when both seeding and mulching are hydraulically applied .
num .
mulching .
mulching shall be applied in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
seeded areas shall be covered with mulch within num hours after seeding .
mulching will be measured and paid for separately under section num .
num .
soil amendments after growth .
after the required plant species have emerged and shown normal growth usually approximately num days and while the soil surface is moist a second application of fertilizer shall be made .
this second application shall be placed as a uniformly applied top dressing of num pounds numkg each of n pnumonum and knumo per acre hectare respectively or equivalent approved by the engineer .
this application of fertilizer will not be required for temporary planting annual ryegrass .
e preparation and planting in rocky or hardpan areas .
num .
conditions for planting in rocky areas .
the requirements for planting in rocky or hardpan areas shall apply when the engineer determines that the area is too rocky or compacted for plowing disking and harrowing but is sufficiently soft or shaley to permit some form of treatment num .
initial soil amendments .
one half of the fertilizer and all of the lime required for the initial fertilization of soft soil shall be applied before the initial scarification .
num .
initial scarification .
the fertilizer and lime shall be worked into the rocky or hardpan area by an initial scarification as directed by the engineer .
num .
coverage with topsoil .
approximately num inches num mm of topsoil shall be placed over the scarified and fertilized rocky or hardpan area .
num .
soil amendments after placement of topsoil .
the second half of the fertilizer required for the initial fertilization of soft soil shall be applied after the placement of the topsoil .
num .
sowing covering mulching and fertilizing after growth .
the sowing of the seeds covering of the seeds mulching and fertilization after growth of the seeds shall be in accordance with the requirements given for this work in soft soil .
section num ground preparation vegetation establishment and mowing num f preparation and planting on steep slopes numhnumv or steeper .
num .
ground preparation .
planting operations may proceed without further ground preparation after topsoil spreading and tracking if the planting can be accomplished within num hours after the tracking operations .
tracking is the mechanical roughening of the slope surface .
tracking shall be accomplished by the movement upslope and downslope not along the slope of heavy equipment that operates on tracks .
num .
initial soil amendments .
one half of the fertilizer and all of the lime required for the initial fertilization of soft soil shall be applied hydraulically .
num .
sowing .
the sowing of seeds shall be in accordance with the requirements given for this work in soft soil with the exception that hydraulic seed application is required .
num .
mulching .
mulching shall be applied in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
seeded areas shall be covered with mulch within num hours after seeding .
mulching will be measured and paid for separately in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num .
second application of fertilizer after mulching .
half of the fertilizer required for the initial fertilization of soft soil shall be applied hydraulically approximately num calendar days after mulching .
num .
third application of fertilizer .
a third application of fertilizer shall be made approximately num calendar days after the second application of fertilizer .
this application shall be placed hydraulically as a uniformly applied top dressing of num pounds num kg of num fertilizer per acre hectare or equivalent approved by the engineer .
g seeding in stubble .
the seeding in stubble method of planting shall be used to establish permanent species when initial vegetation establishment occurs during a season that is not optimal for the permanent planting .
dates for seeding in stubble are designated in the seed mix tables in section num .
this method requires that the existing vegetation be mowed to a height of approximately num inches num mm or sprayed with an approved herbicide or both to retard further growth .
the area shall then be lightly scarified by disking or other approved method to prepare a suitable seedbed .
the initial fertilization sowing of the seeds covering of the seeds and fertilization after growth of the seeds shall be in accordance with the requirements given for this work in soft soil .
additional agricultural lime application will not be required for seeding in stubble .
mulch may be applied to bare areas if requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
mulch shall be furnished and paid for in accordance with the requirements given in section num. h establishment and acceptance .
all work shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements given in section num as well as the requirements given in this section .
the contractor shall provide plant establishment of the required species of permanent vegetation prior to final acceptance of the project .
plant establishment shall consist of preserving protecting reseeding or replanting and other such work and at such time as may be necessary to keep the vegetated areas in a satisfactory condition.all of the above work shall be performed without additional compensation unless otherwise specified .
the acceptance of designated seeded areas will be based upon verification of a satisfactory stand of vegetative cover in the season for each species required for establishment .
if a satisfactory stand of desired vegetation is not established the area shall be reseeded after appropriate soil preparation and reestablished without additional cost to the department .
a satisfactory stand of vegetative cover shall be defined as a cover of living plants after true leaves are formed of the required seed species designated for establishment .
generally an num coverage will be considered acceptable .
should the contractor protest the determination of satisfactory stand based on visual analysis a random sampling of num samples per acre num ha using a square yard meter template may be executed to determine the percent coverage .
there should be no areas void of the required species larger than num square feet num square meter .
payment for seeding fertilizer and agricultural limestone and mulch will be made in full upon section num ground preparation vegetation establishment and mowing num satisfactory application .
payment for additional fertilizer and agricultural limestone will be made in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
payment for seeding may be withdrawn for areas where vegetative cover is not established or not satisfactorily maintained and fertilized after establishment .
every effort should be made to establish vegetation of permanent species in accordance with the seasonal requirements shown for each species in section num .
areas where the season and required seed mix causethe method of seeding in stubble to be necessary for the establishment of a permanent plant will not be considered acceptable until vegetation of a permanent species is satisfactorily established .
the project will not be accepted for maintenance prior to acceptable establishment of vegetation after seeding in stubble .
payment will not be made for areas of unsatisfactory stands of vegetative cover the repair of areas damaged by the contractor or for the repair of washes in areas where sufficient erosion control measures are available to the contractor .
requests from the contractor for payment for areas of unsatisfactory stands of vegetative cover will not be considered by the construction engineer without the submittal of documentation of absolute adherence to the requirements for the application of topsoil and for the establishment of the vegetation .
i mowing .
the contractor shall mow all seeded areas of medians shoulders and front slopes as directed or permitted by the engineer .
the contractor shall mow when the vegetation becomes a hazard to motorists and as necessary to promote growth of the required permanent plant .
mowing shall be performed in a manner that will not cause unnecessary damage to desirable vegetation .
mowing of lespedezas and tall fescue shall not be done until after these plants have produced mature seed .
mowing shall generally be done twice each year as directed or permitted by the engineer and when vegetation has grown to a height of num inches .
if the project is being considered for acceptance for maintenance by the department and has been mowed within the last num months additional mowing will not be required .
the contractor shall mow cut and trim as close as practicable to all fixed objects exercising extreme care not to damage trees plants shrubs delineators and other appurtenances .
damage to trees plants shrubs delineators or other appurtenances shall be repaired or replaced immediately by the contractor at no cost to the department .
the engineer will determine if the damage must be corrected by repair or replacement .
num method of measurement .
a seeding .
seeding will be measured in acres hectares parallel to the seeded surface regardless of the method of establishment .
b mowing .
mowing will be measured in acres hectares parallel to the mowed surface .
each separate mowing of the same location will be measured separately .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
seeding will be paid for at the contract unit price per acre hectare which shall be full compensation for all ground preparation furnishing preparing soil amendments fertilizer and lime seeds including water needed in mixing planting establishing and maintaining of the seeded areas until final acceptance and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
additional fertilizer or agricultural limestone ordered by the engineer will be paid at the verified invoice price plus num percent .
the seeding item will be used for payment for establishing vegetation regardless of the methods used for planting and establishment .
vegetation established outside of the normal planting season annual ryegrass will be paid for at the contract price for seeding .
vegetation established by seeding in stubble will also be paid for at the contract unit price for seeding .
all mowing cutting and trimming including mowing required for seeding in stubble will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per acre hectare which shall be payment in full for the mowing including equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
the section num solid sodding num contract unit price shall also be for mowing required when the vegetation becomes a hazard to motorists and as necessary to promote growth of the required permanent vegetation .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa seeding per acre hectare numc mowing per acre hectare section num solid sodding num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing solid grass sodding in designated locations throughout the construction limits of the work .
basic work consists of ground preparation furnishing and placing required soil amendments and furnishing and installing sod and maintenance of the sod including watering of the sod for the life of the contract .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the requirements of article num .
a list of acceptable mulch control netting products list iinum tackifiers mulch control netting and hydraulic mulch products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
num construction requirements .
areas to receive sod shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements for planting vegetation in soft soil given in section num .
the requirements for ground preparation and the application of initial and final amendments to the soil shall apply to this work .
the sod shall be placed on the prepared and amended soil with no gaps between the individual sod pieces or rolls .
the entire sodded area shall be rolled with a weighted roller to set each piece of sod into the topsoil .
staking or stapling of sod is required on slopes num or steeper and all channel applications and shall be done without additional compensation .
when required by the plans mulch control netting shall be applied in accordance with section num and shall be a subsidiary obligation .
the contractor shall water fill washes and otherwise protect and maintain all sodded areas until the contract is accepted for maintenance or until the bond is released if a bond was required .
payment will not be made for areas of unsatisfactory stands of vegetative cover the repair of areas damaged by the contractor or for the repair of washes in areas where sufficient erosion control measures are available to the contractor .
requests from the contractor for payment for areas of unsatisfactory sod will not be considered without the submittal of documentation of absolute adherence to the requirements for the establishment of the solid sodding .
the requirements given in section num shall apply to the determination of a satisfactory installation of solid sod except that a num living coverage will be required .
num method of measurement .
solid sodding will be measured in square yards square meters from measurements made parallel to the surface of the area covered by the sod .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
solid sodding will be paid for at the contract unit price which price shall be full compensation for furnishing the sod ground preparation planting soil amendments rolling watering and maintaining the sod until acceptance of the contract and for all other materials equipment tools and labor necessary to complete the work .
additional fertilizer or agricultural limestone ordered by the engineer will be paid at the verified invoice price plus num percent .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa solid sodding per square yard square meter section num mulching for vegetation establishment num section num mulching for vegetation establishment num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and placing mulching materials over the soil surface to provide protection from soil erosion and to aid in retention of soil moisture for vegetation establishment .
num materials .
mulch materials shall be furnished in compliance with the requirements given in article num .
a list of acceptable hydraulic mulch products mulch control netting and tackifiers list iinum tackifiers mulch control netting and hydraulic mulch products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
num construction requirements .
a mulching operations .
seeded areas shall be covered with mulch within num hours after seeding .
mulch shall be applied at the rates required below for the type of mulch used .
mulch shall be furnished to effectively control erosion and promote the establishment of vegetation .
dry blown mulch shall be stabilized by crimping by the application of a tackifier adhesive or by anchoring with a mulch control netting with the following exceptions crimping shall only be allowed on slopes num or flatter and tackifier adhesive shall be required for applications within num feet num meters of traffic .
during crimping operations care shall be taken to follow as closely as possible to the contours of the mulched surface .
crimping shall result in the mulch being securely lodged into the soil providing both erosion protection and promotion of vegetation establishment .
tackifier adhesive shall be applied at the rate recommended by the manufacturer .
hydraulic mulch products shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations typically in opposing directions to provide a solid blanket of mulch product .
hydraulic mulches may be used within num feet num meters of traffic as an alternate to dry blown mulch with tackifier adhesive .
hydraulic mulches shall not be installed in areas subject to channelized flow or areas having a potential to flood during a local num year num hour storm event .
b rate of mulch application .
dry blown mulch shall be applied at a rate of not less than num tons per acre num kgha .
proof of material weight shall be provided to the engineer by the contractor upon delivery of the materials to the project site .
the weight ticket shall contain all items required in item numhnum .
with the exception of the name of the producer and the truck number .
hydraulic mulch products shall be applied at the rate designated by the manufacturer for the specific slope where they are being applied to provide a solid blanket of the mulch product with no soil showing .
in no case shall the applied rate be less than num ton per acre num kgha for hydraulically applied mulches .
the application rate will be verified by using the air dry weight mass per pound kilogram and dividing by the surface dimensions of the area covered .
c equipment .
dry blown mulch shall be applied with a mechanical mulch spreader designed to break up balls or clusters of mulch .
if a tackifier adhesive is used to secure the mulch the mulch spreader shall be equipped to apply the adhesive effectively to the mulch to form a uniform porous and stable mulch blanket held in place by the adhesive .
the adhesive may also be applied hydraulically after mulch application .
crimpers shall be rollertype devices equipped with flat uncupped dull edged disks .
the disks shall have a minimum width of num of an inch num mm and shall be placed a maximum of num inches num mm apart along the axle or shaft .
crimpers shall be specially designed so that by adding weight mass or using hydraulic force from the tractor the mulch will be imbedded a minimum of num inches num mm into the ground .
the diameter of the disks shall be large enough to prevent the axle or shaft from dragging or in any way disturbing the mulch or soil .
under no circumstances shall a disc harrow be used to perform the crimping operation .
section num rolled and hydraulic erosion control products num hydraulic mulch application shall be performed using equipment designed for this purpose and that is in compliance with the recommendations of the mulch product manufacturer .
num method of measurement .
mulch will be measured by the acre hectare of the finished surface dimensions of the area ordered treated .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
mulch will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment in full for materials including tackifiers or mulch control netting if used equipment tools and labor necessary to furnish place and maintain the mulch .
payment for this work will be made upon satisfactory application of the mulching .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa mulching per acre hectare section num rolled and hydraulic erosion control products num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing installing and maintaining rolled erosion control products recps and hydraulic erosion control products hecps .
recps and hecps will be referred to as erosion control products in this section .
areas to be covered by erosion control products ecps will be shown on the plans or will be designated by the engineer .
num materials .
a acceptable erosion control products .
erosion control products shall be furnished in compliance with the requirements given in article num .
a list of acceptable erosion control products list iinum rolled and hydraulic erosion control products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning the list and manual is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum general information concerning materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
b utilization of erosion control products .
erosion control products shall utilized as the final stabilization layer in conjunction with the required permanent vegetation .
num .
degradable erosion control products .
degradable ecps shall be furnished to effectively control erosion and enhance the establishment of vegetation during a defined minimum period of time called functional longevity .
the contractor shall be responsible for selecting approved ecps with a functional longevity of sufficient duration to allow establishment of permanent vegetation prior to product degradation or as shown on the plans or as designated by the engineer .
num .
permanent erosion control products .
permanent ecps shall be furnished to effectively control erosion enhance the establishment of vegetation and permanently reinforce vegetation for applications where permanent vegetation alone will not provide sufficient protection against anticipated erosive forces .
c selection of erosion control products .
ecps will be specified based on the characteristics of the intended application site .
the maximum slope or the maximum anticipated channel shear stress from the flow of water is given in the following table for each type of erosion control product .
section num rolled and hydraulic erosion control products num erosion control products product application ecp type maximum slope hv maximum anticipated channel shear stressnum pounds per square foot slope snum num snum num snum num snum num channel cnum num cnum num cnum num cnum num cnum num note num in the table of ecps the approximate shear stress that an ecp would be exposed to in a channel may be calculated from the formula approximate shear stress g x d x sb g unit weight of water num pounds per cubic foot d maximum expected depth of water in the channel feet sb slope of bed in feet per foot .
num construction requirements .
a required type of ecp .
the contractor shall furnish the type of ecp shown on the plans or designated by the engineer .
unless shown otherwise on the plans recps and hecps may be used interchangeably if equivalent recps and hecps are approved for use .
the required type of ecp shall not be changed without the written approval of the engineer .
areas requiring rapidly degrading or nonet products will be shown on the plans .
if the required type of ecp is not available to be selected from list iinum the contractor shall furnish a more substantial ecp from list iinum without additional compensation .
for example if a type snum ecp is shown to be required on the plans and there are no type snum products shown in list iinum type snum or type snum will be an acceptable substitute .
similarly if a type cnum ecp is shown to be required on the plans and there are no type cnum products shown in list iinum types cnum cnum or cnum will be an acceptable substitute .
b preliminary preparation .
prior to placement of the ecp the area shall have been prepared in accordance with the required ground preparation fertilizing seeding or other required treatment .
it is important that the soil surface is smooth to ensure maximum surface area contact with the ecp .
c installation of ecp .
the contractor shall submit the ecp manufacturers installation requirements including staple patterns for rolled ecps to the engineer before beginning the installation .
the ecp shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
rolled ecp typical installation shall be parallel to the direction of flow .
there shall be an anchor trench at the top of the installation .
upstream recps shall overlap any downstream recps .
adjacent recps shall also be overlapped .
staples shall be placed on overlaps at the toe of the recp and throughout the recp installation to ensure the recp is in contact with the underlying soil .
rolled ecps that are soilfilled permanent turf reinforcement mats will require either a temporary rolled erosion control product or sod installed on the soil surface to prevent erosion until permanent vegetation is established .
hydraulic ecp typical installation shall be in opposing directions to provide a solid blanket of product .
hecps shall be applied by equipment that meets the recommendations of the product manufacturer .
hecps shall be applied at the rate designated by the manufacturer specific to the slope .
the application rate will be verified by measuring the air dry weight mass per pound section num vines shrubs and tree planting num kilogram and dividing by the surface dimensions of the area covered .
hecps should not be installed in areas subject to channelized flow or areas having a potential to flood during a local num year num hour storm event .
d protection of ecp .
the ecps shall be protected during all construction operations .
payment will not be made for the repair or replacement of the ecps damaged by the contractor or for the repair or replacement of ecps that fail because of improper installation .
num method of measurement .
erosion control products ecps will be measured by the square yard square meter of the finished surface dimensions of the area covered .
separate measurement will not be made for folds laps check slots anchor slots etc .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
ecps will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for the furnishing and installation of the product including all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals required to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numc erosion control product type per square yard square meter type of ecp snum snum snum snum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum section num vines shrubs and tree planting num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing planting and establishing healthy live growing trees shrubs seedlings vines or other designated plants at designated locations on the project .
the specie size etc .
of vines shrubs seedlings and trees will be as indicated on the plans or proposal .
basic work consists of furnishing or harvesting of plants and transporting thereof preparation of plant site or beds including furnishing and preparation of soil fertilizer mulch and other miscellaneous items incidental to the planting procedure the planting of the plants in a workmanlike manner in accordance with accepted horticultural practices along with the water necessary to establish and maintain the plants in a live growing condition throughout the life of the project .
the amount of water to be used and when it shall be applied shall be the contractors responsibility until acceptance of the project .
num materials .
all materials shall conform to the requirements of division num materials .
specific reference is made to roadside improvement materials section num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all planting operations for vines shrubs and trees shall be done under the onsite direct supervision of a person possessing a current and valid professional services permit for the setting of landscape plants and a nursery dealer certificate issued by the alabama department of agriculture and industries .
proof of the possession of these permits shall be furnished to the engineer prior to the commencement of work .
any work performed without the onsite direct supervision of these permitted individuals will be subject to rejection by the engineer .
the normal growing period for vines shrubs and trees is defined as that time period between april num and september num .
all vines shrubs and trees shall be planted so as to provide the maximum growing time allowable under the contract time .
all plantings shall be scheduled to provide a minimum of one growing season except as noted in subarticle numb .
pine seedlings shall be planted in north alabama only between december num and march num in south alabama only between december num and february num .
planting will not be permitted during section num vines shrubs and tree planting num periods of drought or when the ground is frozen .
these seasonal limits may be changed only on written orders from the engineer .
any rock or underground obstructions shall be removed to the depth necessary to permit planting according to the plans and specifications unless other locations for the planting are approved .
explosives may be used only where and as expressly approved .
b planting operations for vines shrubs and trees .
num .
row planting .
a. furrows or trenches shall be opened in the locations designated to a depth at least num inches num mm greater than the depth of the roots or ball when extended in their normal position and in no case less than num inches num mm for vines and shrubs .
the width of furrows or trenches shall be at least num inches num mm greater than the spread of the roots when extended in their normal position and in no case less than num inches num mm for vines and num inches num mm for shrubs .
b .
the furrows or trenches shall then be partially filled with prepared plant topsoil and the vines or shrubs placed so that the crown bud or base of the tops as the case may be is at or slightly below the previous growing level and the roots are in a natural spread .
after the roots have been completely covered with plant topsoil the commercial fertilizer num shall be evenly scattered over the surface of the plant topsoil at the rate of approximately num pound per foot num kg per meter of furrow or trench followed by a satisfactory watering .
after the water has soaked in and the plant topsoil is no longer muddy additional plant topsoil shall be added and firmly compacted .
compaction shall stop when the compacted plant topsoil is num inches num mm below the finished grade .
the balance of the furrow or trench shall then be filled with loose plant topsoil until it is slightly lower than the finished grade .
num .
spot planting .
planting operations shall be in accordance with the specifications for row planting as far as applicable .
commercial fertilizer num shall be applied at a rate of num pound per square yard num kg per square meter .
pits for trees and shrubs shall not be less than num inches num mm deep and num feet num mm in diameter unless otherwise shown on the plans .
if the trees to be planted are larger than num inches num mm in caliper or num feet num m in height the size of the pits shall be increased in proportion to the increase in size of the trees .
for shrubs the pit shall be num inches num mm greater than the ball diameter or root spread .
the bottom of all planting pits for trees shall have the soil loosened at least num inches num mm deeper than excavated .
the side walls of all planting pits shall be vertical and the bottoms flat .
sloping walls of pits or crowding of root systems will be cause for rejection of the planting .
num .
drainage .
tile or pipe underdrain subsoil drainage shall be installed as provided by the plans or directed .
such tile pipe shall meet the requirements of section num .
trenches shall be not less than num inches num mm below finished grades .
drain tile shall be connected with a suitable outlet .
num .
disposal of excess soil .
excess soil shall be disposed of as directed .
num .
plant topsoil .
unless otherwise provided by the plans plant topsoil shall be used in preparation and in the backfill of plant pits in connection with row planting and spot planting .
num .
setting plants .
a .
all plants shall be set plumb at such a level that after settlement they bear the same relation to the level of the surrounding ground as they bore to the ground from which they were dug .
all plants shall be planted in plant topsoil which shall be settled by watering when required and by tamping .
for spring planting a shallow saucer capable of holding water shall be formed about each plant by placing a mound of soil around the edge of each pit unless otherwise directed .
care shall be taken in setting plants to protect adjacent planting from damage .
b. balled and burlapped plants or balled platform plants bb bp are to be planted with plant topsoil carefully tamped around and under the base of each ball to fill voids .
section num vines shrubs and tree planting num platforms shall be removed .
all cloth ropes et cetera shall be removed from the tops of balls but no cloth shall be pulled out from under the balls .
c. roots or bareroot br plants shall be properly spread out in a natural position and plant topsoil shall be carefully worked in among them .
all broken and frayed roots shall be cleanly cut off .
c planting operations for seedlings .
num .
general .
the pine seedlings shall be transported to the planting area in a manner that will protect the roots from the wind and sun and guard against skinning or otherwise damaging the plant or root system .
the roots shall be kept moist at all times .
the recommended method of hand planting is shown in detail on the plans .
seedlings shall be placed in the hole to an approximate depth of num of an inch num mm deeper than the depth the plant grew in the nursery .
care shall be taken not to bend or fold the roots due to a small shallow hole .
planting by use of a soil auger will be acceptable if care is taken to remove the air pockets by packing to ground level .
num .
fertilizer .
no extra fertilizer will be required on areas that have been previously fertilized fertilizer will be applied as directed by the engineer and payments made for extra fertilizer quantities provided on the plans .
num .
spacing .
the seedlings shall be spaced approximately num feet num mm on centers or as shown on the plans planting in an irregular pattern as outlined by the engineer .
d pruning .
all pruning shall be done on the site before planting in accordance with the schematic drawings provided in the plans and as directed .
pruning shall follow modern horticultural practices american standard for nursery stock and shall be done with approved tools designed for the purpose intended .
lopping topping or shearing of trees or shrubs will be grounds for rejecting the plants as unsuitable and not meeting the requirements .
damaged scarred frayed split or skinned branches limbs or roots shall be pruned back to live wood nearest to the next sound outside lateral bud branch limb or root .
the terminal leader or bud in all trees or shrubs shall be left intact and not removed unless damaged .
the top growth of all vines shall be cut back approximately onethird unless otherwise directed .
e guying staking and wrapping of trees .
num .
guying and staking .
all trees shall be staked or guyed unless otherwise directed .
unless otherwise directed all trees up to num inches num mm in caliper or up to num feet num m in height shall be supported by a single num foot num m above ground line stake all trees from num inch num mm caliper up to num inch num mm caliper or from num to num feet num to num m in height shall be supported by two num foot num m above ground line stakes .
all trees from num to num inch num to num mm caliper shall be supported by num stakes at least num feet num m above ground line long .
all stakes shall be at least num feet num mm in the ground .
all trees larger than num inch num mm caliper or other trees with heavy crowns shall be supported by anchored wires and guyed num ways with double no .
num wire .
stakes shall not injure plant balls .
no .
num wire and rubber hose or approved substitutes shall be used to secure the tree to stakes without chafing or injury .
wires used for guying shall be secured to the tree by passing through a rubber hose by using wood stakes protected from the bark by heavy cloth padding or by similar means to prevent chafing and injury at a point approximately num of the height of the tree .
guy wires shall be anchored in the ground to stakes or deadmen at a distance from the trunk of about num of the height of fastening .
guy wires shall be tightened by driving the stakes leaving subsequent tightening to be done by maintenance forces by twisting the wires .
num .
wrapping .
trees shall have their bark protected from transpiration using method a b or c. a .
method a .
section num vines shrubs and tree planting num all trunks and branches shall be sprayed with dowax or similar approved wax compound immediately before or after digging the material shall be applied as directed by the manufacturer .
b .
method b .
the trunks of all trees from the ground line to the height of the second branches or to the height directed shall be wrapped not later than four num days after planting .
trees over num inches num mm in caliper shall also have their larger branches wrapped .
a single layer of burlap bandage shall be wound spirally starting from the base and overlapping num inches num mm .
the burlap shall be securely tied in place with binder twine at about num inches num mm intervals .
c. method c. the trunks of all trees from the ground line to the height of the first branches shall be wrapped not later than four num days after planting with an approved wrapper overlapping as noted in method b. f pine straw mulch .
mulch shall be baled pine straw .
all pine straw shall be fresh and shall be without decomposition .
the minimum size of a bale of pine straw shall be num inches tall by num inches wide by num inches long and shall have enough straw to cover a minimum of num square feet to a depth of num inches .
pine straw shall be free of weeds weed seeds spores and fern fronds .
g watering .
the vine shrub and tree plantings shall be given one watering during the course of the planting operations and additional waterings as needed .
sufficient water shall be applied to wet thoroughly the adjacent area down through the root system .
water shall be applied in such a manner that will prevent erosion of the finished surface .
h care during construction .
the contractor shall properly care for all vine shrub and tree planted areas in a satisfactory condition until the work has been completed and until final acceptance as defined in section num and other requirements contained in provisions included in the proposal .
care shall consist of providing protection of the planting beds and seedling areas by the use of clearly visible stakes or markers to prevent damage by state maintenance vehicles andor others .
weeding and repairing of all planted areas or pits including an area num feet num m outside of the normal perimeter of the beds pits or bedding areas shall be required with particular attention directed to the following specific times num .
at the inspection of all planted areas to be made prior to placement of the plants .
num .
at the time of final inspection .
in addition to the above any damage to the adjacent areas mentioned above caused by the work involved in the preparing of or by the existence of the beds shall be repaired by the contractor without cost to the state .
i basis of acceptance and replacements .
the engineer shall make periodic inspections of the work to determine the condition of the plantings .
on these inspections especially those noted in this section all plants which the engineer determines are not in a healthy growing condition shall be rejected .
all plants rejected shall be immediately replaced by the contractor with the same kind and sizes and in the same manner as originally provided except that plantings out of season shall comply with the requirements for out of season plantings noted in article num .
not less than num or more than num calendar days prior to the completion date of the project an inspection of the plantings shall be made by the engineer at which time all defective dead or missing plants shall be replaced as prescribed for out of season plantings .
based on the findings of the above noted inspection the engineer shall direct the contractor to replace dead defective or missing plants such replacements shall be replaced in the same manner as noted for rejected plants in the paragraph next above .
all replacements etc .
for plants prior to final acceptance shall be considered incidental to the work and no additional compensation other than the unit prices bid will be allowed .
at the final inspection of the project all dead defective or missing plants shall be rejected and deleted from the contract and no compensation for rejected plants will be allowed .
section num transplanting trees shrubs and vines num num method of measurement .
a plant topsoil .
the accepted quantity of this material used as ordered will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters loose measurement in the vehicle at point of dumping .
no measurement will be made for overhaul of this material .
b vines shrubs and trees .
the quantity of vines seedlings shrubs andor trees to be paid for under this item will be the actual number ordered planted and accepted .
only vines seedlings shrubs and trees in a living healthy condition will be accepted .
c pine straw mulch .
pine straw mulch will be measured in bales and will be that quantity used on site during planting operations and post planting care .
the quantity subject to payment shall be that quantity verified by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
a plant topsoil .
this material will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per cubic yard cubic meter which price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing excavating loading hauling including overhaul unloading furnishing and mixing all component materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b vines seedlings shrubs and trees .
vines seedlings shrubs and trees ordered planted and accepted will be paid for at the contract unit price for each .
such price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing plants plant test or certification service planting pruning guying and staking wrapping mulching furnishing and applying fertilizer including all fertilizers covered by article num andor provided by the plans and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
c watering .
no direct payment will be made for water used in the placement and care of planting during the construction .
all water necessary shall be considered as a part of the unit price bid for items provided by this section .
d pine straw mulch .
pine straw mulch will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing loading transporting applying and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
e payment will be made under item no .
numa plant topsoil per cubic yard cubic meter numb vines type per each numc shrubs type per each numd trees type per each nume seedlings type per each numk pine straw mulch per bale section num transplanting trees shrubs and vines num description .
this section shall cover the work of transplanting of specified trees shrubs and vines and the reestablishing of them in positions shown on the plans or designated .
basic work consists of digging plants preparing them for transplanting and transporting thereof preparation of plant sites or beds furnishing and preparation of soil fertilizer mulch and other miscellaneous incidentals necessary to planting procedure the planting of plants in a workmanlike manner in accordance with accepted horticultural practices along with the water necessary to establish section num transplanting trees shrubs and vines num and maintain the plants in a live growing condition throughout the life of the project .
the amount of water to be used and when it is to be applied shall be the contractors responsibility until acceptance of the project .
num materials .
all materials shall conform with the requirements set forth in division num materials with specific reference made to section num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the requirements provided for vines shrubs and tree planting section num and roadside improvement materials section num shall apply in all respects to transplanting trees and shrubs except where otherwise indicated by specific requirements given below .
trees shrubs and vines to be transplanted will be identified clearly on the plans as to existing and proposed location species and size .
planting holes of the size shown on the plans for the particular specie of plant material shall be dug and approved prior to moving existing plants .
material to be transplanted shall be dug with the size ball for collected plants recommended in the american standard for nursery stock current edition unless otherwise shown by plan details or directed by the engineer .
b plant topsoil plant topsoil shall meet the requirements of section num. c watering .
the vine shrub and tree plantings shall be given one watering during the course of the planting operations and additional watering as needed .
sufficient water shall be applied to wet thoroughly the adjacent area down through the root system .
water shall be applied in such a manner that will prevent erosion of the finished surface .
d care during construction .
care during construction shall be the same as specified in subarticle numh .
e basis of acceptance and replacement .
the basis of acceptance and replacement shall be the same as specified in subarticle numi .
num method of measurement .
a vines shrubs and trees .
the quantity of transplanted vines seedlings shrubs andor trees to be paid for under this item will be the actual number ordered planted and accepted .
only vines seedlings shrubs and trees in a living healthy condition will be accepted .
num basis of payment .
a vines seedlings shrubs and trees .
transplanted vines seedlings shrubs and trees ordered planted and accepted will be paid for at the contract unit price for each .
such price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing plants plant test or certification service planting pruning guying and staking wrapping mulching furnishing and applying fertilizer and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b watering .
no direct payment will be made for water used in the placement and care of planting during the construction .
all water necessary shall be considered as a part of the unit price bid for items provided by this section .
c payment will be made under item no .
numa transplanting vines kind per each numb transplanting shrubs kind per each numc transplanting trees kind per each section num tree wells and tree root protection num section num tree wells and tree root protection num description .
this section shall cover the work of num protecting selected trees shrubs or other woody plants by the use of tree wells constructed so as to protect the root system andor num placing a porous tree root protection material mulch or other approved material to such depth around the roots as may be provided by plan details or directed .
tree wells shall be constructed of concrete rubble masonry or brick masonry as may be provided on the plans .
such construction shall be performed in accordance with the design and details indicated on the plans .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall comply with the appropriate requirements of division num materials with specific reference to the following tree well masonry concrete section num rubble masonry section num brick or concrete block masonry section num tree root protection material section num num construction requirements .
a excavation and drainage .
all excavation incidental to and necessary for constructing the work in the area of the trees to be protected shall be conducted so as to avoid injuring the root system .
no backfill of any nature shall be placed by the contractor above the root spread of a tree or plant designated to be preserved until a porous material not less than num inches num mm in depth or the depth directed has first been placed above the roots .
adequate drainage of tree wells etc .
shall be provided by means of weep holes drain tile etc .
as may be indicated on the plans or directed .
b tree wells .
tree wells shall be constructed in accordance with the dimension and arrangement shown on the plans or as directed .
they shall be made of masonry as shown on the plans or directed provided however that mortar will be omitted in any portion of the tree well extending below the level of the top of the contiguous broken stone root protection .
c tree root protection .
num .
where tree root protection is ordered the porous material shall be placed to a depth ranging from num to num inches num to num mm or to such other depths indicated on the plans over the root spread of the tree or trees selected about each of which a tree well is to be constructed or other trees within or without the fill area not to be welled but designated for tree root protection .
num .
the area for tree root protection shall be first cleaned of all vegetation and porous material shall be then spread loosely over the required area .
num .
following the spreading of the porous material for tree root protection a minimum of from num to num inches num to num mm of topsoil shall be spread above the porous fill to bring the area to the finishedgrade lines designated .
such topsoil shall be transported handled and paid for under the item of topsoil section num all as directed in writing .
num .
sufficient care shall be taken so that trees or shrubs which are to be preserved in place are not scarred or damaged by the operations under this item .
the root area to be protected shall be the area of ground surface lying within the periphery of the limb spread of the tree .
num method of measurement .
a tree wells .
the volume of masonry to be paid for shall be the number of cubic yards cubic meters of masonry measured complete in place and accepted .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num b tree root protection .
the volume of tree root protection to be paid for shall be the number of cubic yards cubic meters of stone gravel slag or other approved material placed in tree root protection measured loose in vehicle at point of delivery and accepted .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the volume of masonry determined as provided above shall be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard cubic meter bid for tree well masonry .
the volume of porous material tree root protection measured as provided above shall be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard cubic meter for tree root protection material which price and payment shall be full compensation for excavating and cleaning the ground surface for placing the porous fill for procuring and delivering all materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
no direct payment will be made for excavation including its backfill and disposal incidental and necessary to tree wells and tree root protection work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa tree well masonry per cubic yard cubic meter numb tree root protection material per cubic yard cubic meter section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num description .
this section shall cover but not limit those items of temporary soil erosion and sediment control necessary for the management of construction stormwater discharge quality .
the contractor shall provide and maintain temporary soil erosion and sediment controls designed to protect the project site from soil erosion and adjacent property and waters from damage by sediment transport and deposition during construction .
these temporary soil erosion and sediment controls shall be referred to as best management practices bmps .
a bmp is any procedure process technique plan or device that can be utilized to enhance the control of soil erosion and sediment transport .
num materials .
a temporary seeding .
seeds shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements given in item numanum .
seed mixes used for temporary seeding shall be in accordance with the following table temporary seeding september through december annual ryegrass num pounds per acre num kg per hectare kentucky num fescue num pounds per acre num kg per hectare reseeding crimson clover num pounds per acre num kg per hectare january through april num kentucky num fescue num pounds per acre num kg per hectare reseeding crimson clover num pounds per acre num kg per hectare annual ryegrass num pounds per acre num kg per hectare april num through august brown top millet num pounds per acre num kg per hectare kentucky num fescue num pounds per acre num kg per hectare hulled bermuda grass num pounds per acre num kg per hectare b temporary mulching .
temporary mulching materials shall conform to the requirements given in article num for mulching material .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num c temporary pipe .
temporary pipe may be constructed of any type of material that will be suitable for the required work .
the inside diameter of the pipe shall be selected by the contractor based on expected flows and shall be a minimum of num inches num mm or as shown on the plans .
end treatments joint sections and tees shall also be of materials and sizes that are suitable for the required work .
anchors shall be installed when required to keep the pipe in place .
d polyethylene .
polyethylene sheets may be of any size or color capable of serving the purpose intended provided it is of at least num mil num mm in thickness .
e temporary coarse aggregate .
temporary coarse aggregate shall be either stone or concrete from the demolition of structures on the right of way .
stone aggregate for stabilized construction entrances and temporary access roads to sedimentation basins shall meet the requirements for aldot number num coarse aggregate given in section num .
concrete from the demolition of structures shall meet the gradation requirements for aldot number num coarse aggregate given in section num .
reinforcing steel shall be removed from the concrete used for temporary coarse aggregate .
stone aggregate for other erosion and sediment control purposes shall be the size shown on the plans and shall meet the requirements given in section num. f temporary riprap .
unless shown otherwise on the plans temporary riprap shall be either stone or concrete from the demolition of structures on the right of way .
stone riprap shall meet the requirements for class num riprap given in section num .
concrete from the demolition of structures shall meet the size and weight requirements given for class num riprap in section num .
reinforcing steel shall be cut flush with the surfaces of the demolished concrete .
the geotextile used for both underlayment and as a choker shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum for permanent erosion control geotextile class num .
a list of geotextile materials acceptable for use in this application list iinum geotextiles is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
choker stone shall meet the requirements of section num. g hay bales .
bales may be either hay or straw containing num cubic feet num m of material and having a weight mass of not less than num pounds num kg with a minimum length of num feet num m. h sand bags .
bags may be cotton burlap woven polypropylene polyethylene polyamide fabric or other material that will adequately confine the aggregate content for the duration of the use of the bag .
bags shall be filled with sand limestone screenings or aggregate that is smaller than aldot num .
fill material shall be selected by the contractor based on the required bag application .
each filled bag shall have minimum dimensions of num x num x num num mm x num mm x num mm and shall have a minimum weight mass of num pounds num kg .
i silt fence .
silt fence shall be a geotextile filter supported between posts with a wire mesh backing as shown on the plans .
posts shall be strong enough to provide and retain the fence configuration shown on the plans while being subjected to loading of silt water and debris .
silt fence shall meet the requirements given in section num and aashto m num as supplemented by the following requirements the support backing for the geotextile shall be num gage steel wire mesh .
the vertical spacing of the wire in the mesh shall be num num mm inches .
the minimum horizontal spacing of the wires shall be num inches num mm and the maximum horizontal spacing shall be num inches num mm .
the geotextile filter shall be either a nonwoven geotextile or a woven geotextile composed of monofilament yarns .
a list of geotextile materials acceptable for use in this application list iinum geotextiles is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num j wattles .
a wattle shall be a tubular shaped product specifically manufactured for erosion and sediment control .
biodegradable wattles shall be manufactured using interwoven biodegradable plant material such as straw coir or wood shavings in biodegradable or photodegradable netting that is of sufficient strength to resist damage during handling installation and use .
wattles manufactured using nonbiodegradable materials shall be completely removed from the project when no longer required or useful .
disposal shall be in accordance with recommendations from the wattle manufacturer .
the required minimum diameter of the wattle shall be determined based upon its intended application and shall be as follows unless shown otherwise on the plans .
when installed for the purposes of slowing sheet flow or by interrupting the lengths of longer slopes slopes longer than num feet num m the minimum diameter of the wattle shall be num inches num mm .
for all other applications including perimeter sediment barriers the minimum diameter of the wattle shall be num inches num mm .
wattles of smaller than required diameter may be provided as a stacked installation in accordance with manufacturer recommendations for stacking if the total height of the installation is at least num inches num mm .
the diameter or height will be verified by measuring the wattle after installation .
wattles installed in a ditch check application shall have a geotextile underlayment that shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum for permanent erosion control geotextile class num .
a list of geotextile materials acceptable for use in this application list iinum geotextiles is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
a geotextile underlayment is not required if the ditch is otherwise lined with materials such as rolled erosion control product sod or established permanent vegetation .
a list of acceptable manufactured wattle products list iinum temporary erosion and sediment control products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
k silt dikes .
silt dikes shall be a triangular shaped cross section with a height of at least num num mm in the center with equal length sides and a num to num num mm to num mm base .
the triangular shape shall be urethane foam .
the outer cover shall be a woven geotextile fabric placed around the urethane foam .
the geotextile shall also extend beyond both sides of the triangle at least num feet num mm .
dikes shall be attached to the ground with wire staples in accordance with the silt dike manufacturers recommendations .
l brush barrier .
brush barriers shall be constructed of selected brush limbs and small trees from the clearing operations .
the geotextile used for both underlayment and as a choker shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum for permanent erosion control geotextile class num .
a list of geotextile materials acceptable for use in this application list iinum geotextiles is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
m manufactured inlet protection device .
manufactured inlet protection devices shall be provided in accordance with requirements shown on the plans .
manufactured inlet protection devices shall consist of filter fabric held in place by a rigid frame .
the frame shall be strong enough to support the stormwater flow and weight of any sediment that accumulates on the filter .
the manufactured inlet protection device shall have an overflow feature to allow the passage of water during high flow conditions .
the filter fabric shall have the following properties minimum tensile strength machine direction of num pounds num newtons astm d num minimum permittivity of num secnum astm d num maximum apparent opening size of us std num sieve num mm astm d num minimum uv stability of num astm d num at num hours .
a list of acceptable manufactured inlet protection devices list iinum temporary erosion and sediment control products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
n floating basin boom .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num floating basin booms shall consist of a reinforced fabric attached on the upper side to floatation members and ballasted on the lower side with chains or weights to form a bottomtensioned floating curtain boom .
floating basin booms shall be devices manufactured specifically for use in containing sediment suspended in water .
all materials used in the floating basin boom shall comply with the requirements shown on the plan details and the manufacturers recommendations for the intended application .
the floatation members shall be made of foam with a minimum diameter of num inches num mm or as shown on the plans .
the skirt depth below the foam floatation shall be a minimum of num feet num meters or as shown on the plans .
the ballast shall be galvanized proof coil chains or other acceptable weights capable of retaining the skirt in a vertical position .
the boom shall be yellow or international orange in color .
anchors capable of holding the floating basin boom in place shall be made of a material recommended by the manufacturer .
o sedimentation basins .
components of sedimentation basins shall meet the requirements shown on the plans .
materials for the construction of the sedimentation basins shall be selected from the lists in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements if lists are available for the materials .
if lists are not available materials shall be provided in accordance with all applicable department specifications and shall be of a quality that enables the sedimentation basin to function as intended for the duration of the need of the sedimentation basin .
the contractor shall submit a description of all of the materials proposed for the construction of the sedimentation basins .
the proposed list of materials shall be submitted with the submittal of the stormwater management plan swmp that is described in subarticle numb .
p flow baffles .
flow baffles shall be a rolled erosion control product supported between posts with a wire mesh backing as shown on the plans .
the posts and wire mesh shall meet the same requirements as given for silt fence .
the rolled erosion control product shall consist of num coconut coir fibers and meet the following requirements minimum weight of num ounces per square yard num grams per square meter astm d num open area of num as determined by physical measurement .
a list of materials acceptable for use in this application list iinum temporary erosion and sediment control products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
q basin dewatering devices .
basin dewatering devices shall be a product or structure that withdraws water from the surface of the basin and meets the requirements that are shown on the plans .
a list of acceptable basin dewatering devices list iinum temporary erosion and sediment control products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
num construction requirements .
a erosion control and runoff conveyance .
num .
temporary seeding and mulching .
a .
inspection to evaluate temporary stabilization .
the project shall be inspected in accordance with the requirements given in item numdnum .
areas of the project not undergoing active construction shall be evaluated for temporary stabilization requirements .
b .
temporary mulching only .
at locations where final grading should be completed within num calendar days all bare ground shall be stabilized with temporary mulching applied by either hydraulic or conventional methods at a rate of no less than num tons per acre .
c. temporary seeding and mulching .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num at locations where final grading will not be completed within num calendar days all bare ground shall be stabilized with temporary seeding and mulching .
ground preparation will not be required for temporary seeding and temporary mulching except as follows .
areas to be seeded temporarily shall be left in a rough graded condition .
areas that are smooth or hard shall be lightly scarified with scarifying teeth or some other acceptable method running perpendicular to the direction of water flow .
the intent of this scarifying is to obtain a rough area to hold seed and prevent the formation of rills and gulleys .
areas where sight distances must be maintained shall be bladed smooth .
all debris in these areas shall be removed to allow mowing .
application of num pounds num kg of num fertilizer per acre hectare shall be applied by either hydraulic or conventional methods .
seeding and mulching shall also be applied by either hydraulic or conventional methods at a rate of no less than num tons per acre separately or concurrently with fertilizer .
d. anchoring of temporary mulching near traffic and streams .
temporary mulch within num feet num meters of traffic or live streams shall be anchored by either crimping the application of a tackifier adhesive or the installation of a mulch control netting in accordance with the requirements given in section num. e. acceptance of temporary seeding and mulching .
full payment for temporary mulching will be made after application of the mulch in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
payment for temporary seeding will be made in full upon satisfactory application .
acceptance of the temporary seeding item requires a cover of living plants capable of effectively preventing soil erosion until such time that permanent soil erosion prevention measures can be installed .
num .
polyethyelene .
polyethylene sheets shall be placed to eliminate soil erosion on the surfaces of slopes berms ditchesand at other locations shown on the plans accepted swmp or as directed by the engineer .
the sheets shall be installed flat and securely anchored to the ground after the ground has been cleared of all objects that may tear the sheets .
upstream sheets shall overlap downstream sheets a minimum of num inches num mm .
anchors are considered incidental to this work .
num .
temporary earth berms .
temporary earth berms shall be constructed at the top of cut or fill sections and at other locations where the diversion of water is required .
stream diversion is addressed in sections num and num .
temporary earth berms shall be constructed at locations shown on the plans the approved swmp or as directed by the engineer .
temporary earth berms may be plated with polyethylene or aggregate .
the height of the berms shall be a minimum of num feet num mm after compaction .
the width of the top of the berm shall be num feet num mm with num side slopes .
the construction of berms is encouraged and berms of a very temporary nature may be constructed by the windrowing of material .
there will be no direct payment for berms not meeting requirements given in this section and the requirements shown in the plans .
if pay item numt is not included in the contract the cost of constructing temporary earth berms will be considered incidental to the grading operation .
num .
temporary pipe .
temporary pipe shall be sized to carry the anticipated volumes of flow and shall be installed as permitted by the engineer or as shown on the plans .
the length shall be as determined by the engineer .
temporary pipes may be placed without the bedding requirements required for the installation of permanent pipe .
pipes shall be securely anchored .
any required tees or joint sections are considered incidental to the work .
end treatments shall be installed in a manner to allow the pipe to function effectively .
num .
stabilized construction entrance .
stabilized construction entrances shall be constructed of materials at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the plans as modified in the accepted swmp or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the construction entrance to prevent sediment tracking .
num .
dust control .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num the contractor shall prevent visible dust from leaving the project site by the use of water dust control agents or other effective means as approved and directed by the engineer .
dust control shall be considered ineffective where dust creates a potentially unsafe condition public nuisance or condition endangering the value utility or appearance of any property .
there will be no direct compensation for dust control .
num .
slope tracking .
slope tracking or the surface roughening of slopes shall be accomplished by the walking of tracked equipment upslope and downslope not along the slope over the entire erodible area .
slope tracking shall be performed on slopes that are num or steeper and longer than num feet .
slope tracking shall be performed immediately after the final shaping of the slope .
b sediment control .
num .
placement of sediment control bmps in streams .
sediment control bmps shall not be placed in a live stream for the purpose of capturing upland sediment .
additionally no live stream shall be dammed or ponded for the purpose of water access and usage .
secondary sediment control bmps in the form of floating basin booms may be placed in live streams parallel to the flow along the bank only as shown in the plans or at the direction of the engineer .
num .
ditch checks .
ditch checks shall be constructed at locations shown on the plans the accepted swmp or as directed by the engineer .
materials and products used to construct ditch checks may include sand bags hay bales wattles with geotextile silt fence silt dikes or rock with geotextile .
the materials used shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in this section the requirements shown on the plans and the manufacturers recommendations for manufactured products .
num .
sediment barriers .
sediment barriers shall be constructed at the locations shown on the plans the accepted swmp or where directed by the engineer to intercept sheet flow runoff and to treat concrete washout wastewater .
sediment barriers utilized for sediment control adjacent to the construction limits or a live steam shall be installed prior to beginning any grubbing work in the contributing drainage area .
types of sediment barrier may include silt fence hay bales sand bags silt dikes or wattles .
the materials used shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in this section the requirements shown on the plans and the manufacturers recommendations for manufactured products .
num .
brush barriers .
brush barriers shall be constructed at the locations shown on the plans the approved swmp or where directed or permitted by the engineer .
brush barriers may be constructed in rural areas where natural ground is sloping away from the project .
brush barriers shall be compacted to a relatively dense barrier with uniform heights of between num and num feet and base widths of between num and num feet between num m and num m perpendicular to the flow .
geotextile underlayment and geotextile choker shall be securely attached to the faces of brush barriers .
these barriers shall be removed when no longer needed unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num .
inlet protection .
inlet protection shall be installed at locations and in accordance with requirements shown on the plans for the appropriate stages of construction or as directed by the engineer .
approved manufactured products shall be installed as per manufacturers recommendations .
site constructed protection may include wattles silt fence sand bags drainage sumps or other practices shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
in no case will instructure protection be allowed .
stage num inlet protection shall be installed after the outflow drainage has been installed and prior to the construction of the inlet .
stage num inlet protection shall be ditch checks andor sediment barriers and shall allow sufficient access to continue inlet construction .
stage num inlet protection shall be installed after the inlet is constructed and prior to backfilling .
stage num inlet protection shall be a sediment barrier .
hay bales are not acceptable for use during this stage of inlet construction .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num stage num protection is required after inlets are completed through grate installation and prior to complete stabilization of the area surrounding the inlet .
stage num inlet protection for drop inlets shall be in accordance with requirements and details shown on the plans .
stage num inlet protection shall be a manufactured inlet protection device or constructed with coarse aggregate wattles or sand bags .
hay bales are not acceptable for use during this stage of inlet construction .
stage num inlet protection for drop inlets shall be in accordance with requirements shown on the plans .
stage num inlet protection shall be a manufactured inlet protection device or constructed with hay bales wattles or sandbags stacked at least three bags high .
hay bales sand bags and wattles shall be used as a barrier along the perimeter of the slope paved apron as shown on the plans for a minimum distance of num feet num m. if impervious surfaces extend beyond num feet num m sand bags shall be used as a barrier across the surface num feet num m from the inlet .
stage num protection will only be required where there is surrounding impervious surfaces that may receive sediment laden runoff .
all inlet protection installations shall be constructed to ensure that runoff does not bypass the inlet .
components of inlet protection may be reused on future installations provided the condition meets the material requirements given in this section .
num .
outlet protection .
outlet protection required by the plans or directed by the engineer shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the plans as soon as practicable after the completion of the drainage structures .
num .
drainage sumps .
temporary drainage sumps shall be constructed as shown on the plans and in locations directed or permitted by the engineer using the erosion and sediment control plan escp as guidance for the location .
in general the shape should be rectangular at the surface with the longer dimension parallel to the flow of water .
the minimum volume shall be that shown on the plans .
sumps may be constructed with larger volumes as directed and permitted by the engineer .
construction of the sumps shall be accomplished by methods and equipment suitable for the purpose and acceptable to the engineer .
the sump may be supplemented by the use of a ditch check temporary pipe polyethylene or other temporary items shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
when the sump is deemed of no further use it shall be backfilled with suitable material and compacted as directed and the area dressed and shaped to blend with the adjacent natural ground .
num .
sedimentation basins .
sedimentation basins shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans and at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
sedimentation basins shall be constructed prior to beginning grading operations in the contributing drainage area .
where sedimentation basins are to be constructed in locations where permanent ditches are required the required ditch lines and grades shall be utilized for the construction of the sedimentation basins .
during removal of the sedimentation basin aggregate used to construct the sedimentation basin may remain in the ditch as a permanent lining .
sedimentation basins are designed to allow the removal of sediment and turbidity from stormwater runoff by the flocculation and settlement of suspended particles .
the removal of sediment and turbidity shall be accomplished by the retention of stormwater runoff in the basin for a period of time before completely draining .
in no case shall sediment be allowed to exceed one third of the height of the forebay or drainage sump adjacent to the inlet of the basin .
access roads to facilitate maintenance efforts shall be constructed of materials at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the plans as modified in the accepted swmp or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the access road until directed by the engineer to perform basin removal or retrofit .
the contractor shall take care during removal of accumulated sediment to not puncture the basin liner .
the contractor shall also take care during removal or retrofit of the sedimentation basin to not excavate past the original basin bottom elevation unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num .
flow baffles .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num flow baffles shall be installed in sedimentation basins or ditch applications as required by the plans to reduce the velocity of stormwater runoff .
they shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
num .
basin dewatering devices .
basin dewatering devices shall be installed in sedimentation basins in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
each device shall be capable of dewatering the full capacity of the basin over a period of num hours unless otherwise specified in the plans .
each device shall have a shutoff valve on the outlet pipe that should remain closed until discharges meet state water quality standards and the requirements of the adem npdes general permit .
num .
floating basin booms .
floating basin booms shall be installed only for secondary sediment containment or to prevent the migration of sediment within a water body .
floating basin booms shall be installed at the locations shown on the plans the accepted swmp or as directed by the engineer .
installation shall be as shown on the plans and as recommended by the manufacturer .
basin booms shall not be installed in locations where they will not be effective or in conditions where continuous maintenance is not practical .
c maintenance and removal requirements .
the contractor shall be responsible for daily inspection daily preventative maintenance and immediate repairs of all temporary soil erosion and sediment control items .
the contractor shall maintain onsite or have readily available sufficient erosion and sediment control devices and materials to perform maintenance repairs and prepare the site for impending rain events .
all bmps which capture sediment shall be cleaned by the removal and disposal of sediment when the holding capacity reaches one third full and when necessary for the bmp to remain functional .
any offsite sediment loss shall be removed as directed by the engineer .
any offsitetracking of sediment onto public roadways shall be removed and construction entrances shall be stabilized as needed .
sediment removed during the maintenance of bmps or collected from offsite cleanup should be reincorporated into the site or disposed of as approved by the engineer .
all temporary soil erosion and sediment control bmps shall be removed from the project when no longer needed unless shown otherwise on the plans the accepted swmp or directed or permitted by the engineer .
removal of temporary controls shall be only after permanent controls are in place and functioning properly .
the removal of all controls shall be followed by the immediate stabilization of the area as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
a temporary seeding .
temporary seeding item numa will be measured in acres hectares computed from surface measurements taken parallel to the treated surface .
computations will be to the nearest num of an acre num ha .
b temporary mulching .
temporary mulching item numb will be measured in units of tons metric tons .
proof of material weight shall be provided to the engineer by the contractor upon delivery of the materials to the project site .
the weight ticket shall contain all items required in subarticle numhnum .
with the exception of the name of the producer and the truck number .
c temporary pipe .
temporary pipe item numc will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num m with measurements taken along the center line of the pipe .
d polyethylene .
polyethylene sheets item nume will be measured in square yards square meters computed from surface measurements of the area treated .
computations will be to the nearest num square yard num square meter .
e temporary earth berms .
temporary earth berms item numt will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num meter with measurements taken along the top of the berm .
aggregate or polyethylene protection will be paid separately if directed or permitted by the engineer .
there will be no direct payment for berms not meeting requirements given in this section or shown in the plans .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num f temporary coarse aggregate .
temporary coarse aggregate item numn will be measured in units of tons metric tons .
g temporary riprap .
temporary riprap item numi will be measured in units of tons metric tons .
geotextile installed both as underlayment and as a choker for riprap ditch checks shall be measured separately and payment made in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
if provided in the plans stone used for choking shall be measured separately and paid in accordance with the appropriate pay item .
h hay bales .
hay bales item numf will be measured per each bale unless used in stage num inlet protection .
i sand bags .
sand bags item numg will be measured per each bag unless used in stage num or num inlet protection .
j silt fence and silt fence removal .
silt fence item numj and silt fence removal item numo will be measured along the top of the fence fabric in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num m. k wattles .
wattles item numq will be measured after installation in linear feet meters to the nearest num foot num meter with measurements taken along the top of the wattle installation unless used in stage num or num inlet protection .
wattles installed as sediment barriers or ditch checks shall have a diameter of num inches num mm verified by measurement of the circumference anywhere along the length of the wattle which shall be at least num inches num m. payment for stacked wattles will be made at the contract price for a single num inch num mm diameter wattle .
wattles installed as slope interrupters shall have a diameter of num inches num mm verified by measurement of the circumference anywhere along the length of the wattle which shall be at least num inches num m. field measurements will be used to verify lengths shown on shipping documentation .
the lesser of the two lengths will be used for payment.geotextile installed as underlayment for wattle ditch checks shall be measured separately and payment made in accordance with the requirements given in section num. l silt dikes .
silt dikes item numr will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num foot num meter with measurements taken along the top of the dike .
m brush barriers .
brush barriers item nums will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num meter with measurements taken along the top of the barrier .
geotextile installed both as underlayment and as a choker will be measured separately and payment made in accordance with the requirements given in section num. n inlet protection .
materials used to construct stage num and num inlet protection will be measured for payment as appropriate for items such as silt fence wattles hay bales etc .
this also applies to curb inlet protection necessary beyond stage num .
stages num and num inlet protection item nump for drop inlets will be measured per each stage of each inlet protected if protected in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
o drainage sump excavation .
drainage sump excavation item numk will be measured in cubic yards cubic meters computed from dimensions of the sump size and depth approved by the engineer .
material removed during sump maintenance operations will be measured for payment as drainage sump excavation to the nearest cubic yard num cubic meter .
no measurement will be made for material used as backfill when the sump is closed .
removal of sediment collected by sedimentation basins sediment retention barriers ditch checks and inlet protection will be measured as drainage sump excavation if soil erosion is being prevented to the maximum extent practicable .
if the proposal does not contain this item measurement and payment will be made under the item of unclassified excavation .
material removed will not be paid as muck excavation regardless of the consistency .
section num temporary soil erosion and sediment control num p sedimentation basins .
each component and work item required for the construction of a sedimentation basin will be measured individually for payment .
excavation and embankment will be measured as unclassified excavation .
removal of captured sediment will be measured as drainage sump excavation .
typical items required to construct the sedimentation basin may include unclassified excavation aggregates riprap filter fabric polyethylene flow baffles rolled erosion control products seeding basin dewatering device temporary pipe etc .
access roads to sedimentation basins as shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer will be measured separately and payment made as temporary coarse aggregate item numn and geotextile in accordance with the requirements given in section num unless otherwise specified in the plans .
no measurement will be made for access roads installed without the approval of the engineer .
q flow baffles .
flow baffles item numh will be measured along the top of the baffle material in linear feet meters to the nearest foot num m. r basin dewatering devices .
basin dewatering devices item numx will be measured per each .
elevated device rest outlet pipes valves and end treatments serving the basin dewatering device are considered to be a part of the device and will not be measured separately for payment .
s temporary pipe end treatments .
temporary pipe end treatments item numd will be measured per each .
t floating basin booms .
floating basin booms item numl will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num foot num meter with measurements taken along the top line of the boom .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the unit price for all temporary erosion and sediment control items except drainage sumps and silt fence shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials unless otherwise noted the construction and installation of the materials into complete erosion or sediment control measures and shall include all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work to perform maintenance to keep work in an acceptable condition and to remove the items when no longer needed as directed by the engineer .
the excavation of sediment collected by drainage sumps ditch checks sediment barriers and other sediment control bmps will be considered for payment as drainage sump excavation as long as erosion is being controlled to the maximum extent practicable.direct payment will be made for the removal of silt fence .
payment for stage num and stage num inlet protection shall include the installation and maintenance of all items at quantities shown on the plans as being required or permitted .
payment for sedimentation basins will be made for individual components and work items required for construction and shall be full compensation for the installation maintenance and removal of all components of the sedimentation basin as constructed in accordance with requirements shown on the plans .
payment for access roads to sedimentation basins will be made for individual components required for the construction and shall be full compensation for the installation maintenance and removal when no longer needed as directed by the engineer .
in the event that additional temporary or permanent erosion and sediment control measures become necessary due to the negligence or actions of the contractor or for the contractors convenience the temporary work shall be performed at the contractors expense .
temporary or permanent erosion control measures installed in previously stabilized areas that are necessary due to required work sequencing will be paid as outlined in this section .
payment will not be made for any temporary erosion or sediment control measures installed due to the methods chosen by the contractor to perform the required work .
measures include those utilized for convenience for access to the work work bridges or platforms stream crossings access roads haul roads those utilized for treating or handling water in order to assist the contractor in the execution of the work diversions dewatering conveyances or those utilized for protecting the contractors work or staging areas .
payment will also not be made for measures installed outside of the right of way or easements such as material pits haul or access roads plant sites and staging areas .
section num pest control num b payment will be made under item no .
numa temporary seeding per acre hectare numb temporary mulching per ton metric ton numc temporary pipe per linear foot meter numd temporary pipe end treatment per each nume polyethylene per square yard square meter numf hay bales per each numg sand bags per each numh flow baffle per linear foot meter numi temporary riprap class ____ per ton metric ton numj silt fence per linear foot meter numk drainage sump excavation per cubic yard cubic meter numl floating basin boom per linear foot meter numn temporary coarse aggregate aldot number ____ per ton metric ton numo silt fence removal per linear foot meter nump inlet protection stage num or num per each numq wattle per linear foot meter numr silt dike per linear foot meter nums brush barrier per linear foot meter numt temporary earth berm per linear foot meter numx basin dewatering device per each section num pest control num description .
the work covered by this section shall consist of furnishing and applying designated chemicals to control certain destructive pests namely armyworm fall armyworm cutworm spittlebug white grubs and pine bark beetles .
because of the destructive nature of the action of these pests to trees and ground cover with the possible result of erosion and ultimate siltation of areas control of these pests is a necessity .
both the engineer and the contractor have the responsibility of continually observing the planted areas for possible pest damage .
the contractor should upon observing any of these pests report such to the engineer both verbally and in writing .
the engineer will verify any reports of this type of pest and direct appropriate treatment to be taken .
the following brief descriptions are provided for ease in recognizing these pests armyworm a medium size caterpillar of dark green color with white stripes on sides and down the middle of the back size approximately num inch num mm in length .
this worm usually feeds only at night destroying foliage .
fall armyworm a medium size caterpillar of dark green color with white stripes on sides and down the middle of the back with a distinctive yellow inverted y on the head capsule .
size approximately num inch num mm .
this worm will feed both day and night destroying foliage .
cutworm a fat bodied caterpillar with a greasy appearance color mostly greybrown or mottled on top and lighter color underneath .
size approximately num to num inches num to num mm in length when full grown .
this worm hides during the day and feeds at night destroying foliage .
spittlebug most easily identified by a frothy mass of plant juice at the forks of plant stems resembling spittle .
this pest lives inside the spittle mass .
white grubs the immature larval stage of june or may beetles .
length num to num inches num to num mm have three pairs of legs near the head and characteristically rest in a cshaped position .
their heads and rear ends are brown .
green june beetle grubs crawl on their backs with their legs up .
pine bark beetles these beetles are distinguished from other bark beetles in that the rearward end of the abdomen is scooped out and spined num to num spines on each side .
the southern pine beetle and black turpentine beetle have a more rounded abdomen .
the black turpentine beetle is the larger of the two being about num inch num mm long .
the southern pine beetle is section num pest control num about num nummm inch long .
all of the pine bark beetles are roughly cylindrical and are dark brown to black .
num material .
the treatments to be used under this section shall be as per the current alabama pesticide handbook or guidelines as may be issued by the alabama cooperative extension service .
as new pesticide materials are approved by the state department of agriculture and industries the bureau of construction may allow their use upon written request by the contractor .
all chemicals shall be a product of a reputable manufacturer processed in accordance with all state and federal regulations for such manufacture .
restricted use of insecticides whenever the state department of agriculture and industries or other federal or state agency restricts the use of any insecticide on highway rightofway its initial or continued use shall require the approval of the construction engineer .
it is illegal to place herbicides in a manner that is not consistent with the requirements shown on the insecticide container labeling .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the engineer after verification of the pest occurrence and identification of the type pest shall direct the use of treatments as noted in article num in accordance with the following equipment used in the application shall be designed for the application method to be used and approved by the engineer for use .
the application of pesticides shall be performed by or under the direct supervision of a licensed pesticide applicator licensed in the area of rightofway pest control .
uniform coverage is required .
if uniform coverage is not obtained the contractor shall retreat the entire area in such a manner that uniform coverage is obtained .
retreatment because of uneven coverage shall be without additional cost to the state .
retreatment shall not be performed within seven days of the original treatment .
all treatments shall be at the direction of the engineer .
in all treatments dilutions of liquids and technical material dosage applied shall follow label instructions these specifications and be verified by the engineer .
any change to the dilution rates of a specific chemical or the substitution of chemicals other than those meeting the requirements of article num must have prior written approval of the construction engineer and any such approved change must be without additional cost to the state .
b safeguards .
safeguards in applying insecticides are the responsibility of the contractor and he shall be responsible for any damage to humans or wildlife incurred during application operations .
the following are minimum basic safeguards to be observed .
num .
avoid drift of any spray or dust material on adjacent property .
num .
confine sprays or dust to areas that will not contaminate streams or lakes adjacent to the rightofway .
num .
carbaryl sevin and malathion are highly toxic to bees therefore if spraying or dusting is carried out near bee yards give advance notice to beekeeper so that he can protect his bees .
num .
in general spraying with ground equipment is the least hazardous to wildlife therefore all treatment shall be applied by approved ground driven equipment unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
num .
operators of spraying or dusting equipment must wear the recommended apparel for specific insecticides being applied in executing this work .
num .
only qualified personnel will be permitted to engage in this type operation .
the contractor or subcontractor shall submit if required by the alabama department of transportation a list of the roads railroads or other areas that he has treated .
this list must be certified by the official for whom the work was performed .
num .
normally pesticide spraying will be restricted to roadside areas which are under construction and subsequently are not open to the public .
however should areas such as scenic overlooks rest areas etc .
be ordered treated precautions for the protection of the public must be taken namely by keeping pedestrians off the area section num preemergent herbicide treatment num until the insecticide dissipates from the turf area to a point that it is no longer an area of concern in accordance with the product labeling .
num method of measurement .
item numa will be measured in acres hectares computed from surface measurements taken parallel to the treated surface .
computations will be to the nearest num of an acre num ha .
item numb will be measured by the gallon liter of dispensed solution with measurements taken from the storage vessel before and following dispersal to determine the actual amount of solution used .
computations will be to the nearest gallon l. item numc will be measured by the square yard square meter of dispensed solution with surface measurements taken parallel to the treated surface .
computations will be to the nearest num square yard num square meter .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
completed and accepted pest control treatment measured as noted above shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the respective insecticide noted for the uniform application of the insecticide and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary for the satisfactory completion of the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa pest control treatment per acre ha numb spot pest control treatment per gallon l numc spot pest control treatment per square yard square meter specify type specify rate specify carrier rate of application specify type of carrier section num preemergent herbicide treatment num description .
this section shall cover the work of applying soil active herbicides on the highway rightofway in accordance with the plans specifications material label instructions or as directed by the engineer to control the growth of noxious weeds brush vines and grasses .
num materials .
materials furnished for use in this vegetation control work shall be produced by reputable recognized manufacturers and registered by the u.s. environmental protection agency .
materials shall be licensed for use in the state of alabama and shall be prequalified for use by the alabama department of transportation .
an approved drift control agent shall be used in all liquid broadcast applications .
adjuvants such as but not limited to surfactants shall be used when called for by product label instructions of the herbicide designated on the plans or directed by the engineer .
all herbicide and related adjuvants shall be labeled for rightofway use .
unless specified otherwise by the plans andor proposal potable water shall be the carrier for dispersing the herbicide .
the use of herbicides other than those dispensed with a water carrier such as granules pellets powders capsules etc .
shall be placed as indicated on the product label at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
herbicides and their application rates that are approved for use on aldot rightsofway may be found in the latest edition of the addendum to a manual for roadside vegetation management chapter iv which is revised printed and distributed annually by the alabama department of transportations maintenance bureau .
the type of herbicide required on the project and the required application rate will be shown on the plans .
section num preemergent herbicide treatment num num construction requirements .
a equipment .
num .
equipment for broadcast spraying .
the contractor shall utilize equipment in this contract that is in good working condition and is suitable and safe for accurately dispensing herbicide within the rightofway limits of the highway and for performing the work required under this contract .
the contractor shall provide sufficient equipment and accessory items necessary for efficient operation and completion of the herbicide application in the designated time limitations .
broadcast spraying equipment shall be capable of controlling the rate of application using a computerized calibrated sprayer .
the computer module and accessory equipment shall be capable of monitoring ground speed with the ability to compensate the output volume of the spray solution to provide accurate and uniform dispensing of the spray solution to the surface area of the highway rightofway throughout the operable speed range .
the computer shall have a nonvolatile memory with the ability to store and report data .
reporting capability shall include quantity of material sprayed area treated and hours of operation on a daily basis .
equipment shall be capable of dispensing herbicide by either num tank mixed solution or num chemical injection and mixing immediately prior to the distribution nozzles .
in the event tank mix equipment is used means shall be provided for constant agitation either jet or mechanical of the mixture during the filling and spraying operation .
each piece of equipment shall be equipped with a hand gun and nozzles capable of spreading the mixed solution uniformly at the specified rate over surface areas missed or inaccessible to the broadcast spraying .
herbicide application equipment operated from the roadway or paved shoulder surface shall be equipped with a portable sequential arrow unit and impact attenuator or be immediately followed at all times by a shadow vehicle equipped with these two items .
smaller motorized ground operated equipment may be used with the approval of the engineer .
this equipment may be used on smaller areas such as landscaped areas within the limits of the rightofway .
the smaller areas are defined as the areas that are inaccessable to truck mounted and agricultural type sprayers normally used for broadcast applications from the roadway or open areas within the rightofway .
this smaller motorized ground operated equipment shall be equipped with a hand gun andor nozzles capable of spreading the mixed solution uniformly over the area to be treated .
means shall be provided for constant agitation either jet or mechanical of the mixture during the filling and spraying operations .
num .
equipment for spot spraying .
spot spraying by means of hand guns backpack sprayers portable tanks etc .
shall be capable of applying the herbicide solution at the designated plan rate or as directed by the engineer .
herbicides placed with this type equipment shall dispense solution which contains the correct herbicide to carrier ratio .
the herbicide solution shall be directed and placed on the target area to provide uniform adequate and proper coverage .
b methods of operation .
prior to beginning work a conference between representatives of the department and the contractor will be arranged by the department .
in this meeting plans specifications unusual conditions methods for marking nonsprayable areas and other pertinent items regarding the work will be discussed .
certain nospray areas may occur these fall within the defined limits of the spraying area as indicated by the plans and specifications .
these areas are where various businesses or agencies have ornamental plantings or improved turf within the highway rightofway and perform their own maintenance or as directed by the engineer .
the department will determine all nonsprayable areas .
spraying will not be permitted when in the opinion of the engineer soil vegetation andor weather conditions are such that the rightofway or the vegetation would be damaged or spraying would be ineffective .
the contractor shall spray as close as practicable to all fixed objects exercising extreme care not to damage trees plants shrubs signs delineators or other appurtenances which are part of the facility .
any damage caused by the contractors spraying operations to any tree plant shrub sign delineator or other appurtenance which is part of the facility shall be pruned trimmed repaired or replaced immediately by the contractor at no cost to the department .
the section num preemergent herbicide treatment num engineer will determine whether the damage shall be corrected by pruning trimming repair or replacement .
the contractor shall be responsible for any damage to public or private property which may occur as a result of the spraying operation .
c spraying application requirements .
the contractor shall possess the appropriate license and permit required by the state of alabama department of agriculture and industries for conducting business in the state of alabama .
all personnel directly involved in the application of the herbicide solution to include operators and project supervisory personnel shall be experienced in the ground application of pesticides on highway rightsofway .
operators and project supervisors involved with this project shall possess a commercial applicator permit issued by the state of alabama department of agriculture and industries covering the rightofway category .
the contractor will furnish two copies of product labels and material safety data sheets for the products used on the project .
one copy of each will be furnished to the engineer and one copy will be kept with the vehicles applying the herbicide at all times .
while spraying care shall be exercised to prevent damage by spray drift or direct contact of herbicide to areas containing plantings of shrubs and bushes designated wildflower areas deciduous or evergreen trees residential plantings vegetable or flower gardens any susceptible farm crops or other desirable plants .
in the event of damage to any desirable plants which includes damage or brownout to low hanging limbs of trees along the rightofway the contractor will correct by either replacement pruning trimming or compensation of any damages caused by the misapplication or drift of the herbicide solution immediately following visual recognition verbal or written notification andor instructions from the engineer .
no herbicide solution shall be sprayed without a drift control agent .
no spraying shall be undertaken when the wind velocity is num mph num kmh or greater .
no spraying shall be undertaken during a rain when heavy rain is imminent or when soil is saturated .
the contractor shall take extreme care to insure that herbicide does not enter any lakes streams ponds or wetlands .
the speed of any vehicle used to apply the herbicide solution to the highway rightofway shall not exceed num mph num kmh when operated from the roadwaypaved shoulder surface or num mph num kmh when operated off the improved portion of the roadway .
the pattern of spray shall be such as to provide even uniform coverage .
d liability of contractor .
the contractor shall assume all liability for any damage resulting from the application of the herbicides for this project and shall hold the state of alabama harmless from any claims arising from this damage .
it is illegal to place herbicides in a manner that is not consistent with the requirements shown on the herbicide container labeling .
e record of work .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to scout ahead for each days anticipated work .
departmentfurnished forms bmnum herbicide scouting report shall be completed prior to the beginning of each days work .
a completed and signed copy shall be furnished to the departments engineer for each days operation .
the contractor shall account for each days work and provide information on location area covered weather conditions personnel equipment herbicide used rates and productivity .
this information shall be provided on the departments herbicide treatment report which will be provided by the department .
a completed and signed copy of this report shall also be furnished to the departments engineer for each days work .
num method of measurement .
item numa will be measured in acres hectares computed from surface measurements taken parallel to the treated surface .
computations will be to the nearest num of an acre num ha .
item numb will be measured by the gallon l of dispensed solution with measurements taken from the storage vessel before and following dispersal to determine the actual amount of solution used .
computations will be to the nearest gallon l. section num postemergent herbicide treatment num item numc will be measured by the square yard square meter of dispensed solution with surface measurements taken parallel to the treated surface .
computations will be to the nearest num square yard num square meter .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment for all satisfactorily completed work of preemergent herbicide application as specified measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract bid price which shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor equipment herbicides adjuvants carrier fuels incidentals and liability insurance necessary to complete the work .
partial payments will be made on monthly estimates based on the percentage of the total work performed as estimated by the engineer .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa broadcast preemergent herbicide treatment per acre ha numb spot preemergent herbicide treatment per gallon l numc spot preemergent herbicide treatment per square yard square meter specify type of herbicide specify rate of herbicide application specify carrier rate of application specify type of carrier section num postemergent herbicide treatment num description this section shall cover the work of applying contact foliage active herbicides on the highway rightofway in accordance with the plans specifications material label instructions or as directed by the engineer to control the growth of noxious weeds brush vines and grasses .
num materials materials furnished for use in this vegetation control work shall be produced by reputable recognized manufacturers and registered by the u.s. environmental protection agency .
materials shall be licensed for use in the state of alabama and prequalified for use by the alabama department of transportation .
an approved drift control agent shall be used in all liquid broadcast applications .
adjuvants such as but not limited to surfactants shall be used when called for by product label instructions of the herbicide designated on the plans or directed by the engineer .
all herbicide and related adjuvants shall be labeled for rightofway use .
unless specified otherwise by the plans andor proposal potable water shall be the carrier for dispersing the herbicide .
the use of herbicides other than those dispensed with a water carrier such as herbicides dispensed with oil shall be placed as indicated on the product label at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
herbicides and their application rates that are approved for use on aldot rightsofway may be found in the latest edition of the addendum to a manual for roadside vegetation management chapter iv which is revised printed and distributed annually by the alabama department of transportations maintenance bureau .
the type of herbicide and the required application rate will be shown on the plans .
num construction equipment a equipment num .
equipment for broadcast spraying .
the contractor shall utilize equipment in this contract that is in good working condition and is suitable and safe for accurately dispensing herbicide within the rightofway limits of the highway and for performing the work required under this contract .
the contractor shall provide sufficient equipment and accessory items necessary for efficient operation and completion of the herbicide application in the designated time limitations .
section num postemergent herbicide treatment num broadcast spraying equipment shall be capable of controlling the rate of application using a computerized calibrated sprayer .
the computer module and accessory equipment shall be capable of monitoring ground speed with the ability to compensate the output volume of the spray solution to provide accurate and uniform dispensing of the spray solution to the surface area of the highway rightofway throughout the operable speed range .
the computer shall have a nonvolatile memory with the ability to store and report data .
reporting capability shall include quantity of material sprayed area treated and hours of operation on a daily basis .
equipment shall be capable of dispensing herbicide by either num tank mixed solution or num chemical injection and mixing immediately prior to the distribution nozzles .
in the event tank mix equipment is used means shall be provided for constant agitation either jet or mechanical of the mixture during the filling and spraying operation .
each piece of equipment shall be equipped with a hand gun and nozzles capable of spreading the mixed solution uniformly at the specified rate over surface areas missed or inaccessible to the broadcast spraying .
herbicide application equipment operated from the roadway or paved shoulder surface shall be equipped with a portable sequential arrow unit and impact attenuator or be immediately followed at all times by a shadow vehicle equipped with these two items .
smaller motorized ground operated equipment may be used with the approval of the engineer .
this equipment may be used on smaller areas such as landscaped areas within the limits of the rightofway .
the smaller areas are defined as the areas that are inaccessable to truck mounted and agricultural type sprayers normally used for broadcast applications from the roadway or open areas within the rightofway .
this smaller motorized ground operated equipment shall be equipped with a hand gun andor nozzles capable of spreading the mixed solution uniformly over the area to be treated .
means shall be provided for constant agitation either jet or mechanical of the mixture during the filling and spraying operations .
num .
equipment for spot spraying .
spot spraying by means of hand guns backpack sprayers portable tanks etc .
shall be capable of applying the herbicide solution at the designated plan rate or as directed by the engineer .
herbicides placed with this type equipment shall dispense solution which contains the correct herbicide to carrier ratio .
the herbicide solution shall be directed and placed on the target area to provide uniform adequate and proper coverage in accordance with label instructions and as directed by the engineer .
b methods of operation prior to beginning work a conference between representatives of the department and the contractor will be arranged by the department .
in this meeting plans specifications unusual conditions methods for marking nonsprayable areas and other pertinent items regarding the work will be discussed .
certain nospray areas may occur these fall within the defined limits of the spraying area as indicated by the plans and specifications .
these areas are where various businesses or agencies have ornamental plantings or improved turf within the highway rightofway and perform their own maintenance or as directed by the engineer .
the department will determine all nonsprayable areas .
spraying will not be permitted when in the opinion of the engineer soil vegetation andor weather conditions are such that the rightofway or the vegetation would be damaged or spraying would be ineffective .
the contractor shall spray as close as practicable to all fixed objects exercising extreme care not to damage trees plants shrubs signs delineators or other appurtenances which are part of the facility .
any damage caused by the contractors spraying operations to any tree plant shrub sign delineator or other appurtenance which is part of the facility shall be pruned trimmed repaired or replaced immediately by the contractor at no cost to the department .
the engineer will determine whether the damage shall be corrected by pruning trimming repair or replacement .
the contractor shall be responsible for any damage to public or private property which may occur as a result of the spraying operation .
section num postemergent herbicide treatment num c spraying application requirements .
the contractor shall possess the appropriate license and permit required by the state of alabama department of agriculture and industries for conducting business in the state of alabama .
all personnel directly involved in the application of the herbicide solution to include operators and project supervisory personnel shall be experienced in the ground application of pesticides on highway rightsofway .
operators and project supervisors involved with this project shall possess a commercial applicator permit issued by the state of alabama department of agriculture and industries covering the rightofway category .
the contractor will furnish two copies of product labels and material safety data sheets for the products used on the project .
one copy of each will be furnished to the engineer and one copy will be kept with the vehicles applying the herbicide at all times .
while spraying care shall be exercised to prevent damage by spray drift or direct contact of herbicide to areas containing plantings of shrubs and bushes designated wildflower areas deciduous or evergreen trees residential plantings vegetable or flower gardens any susceptible farm crops or other desirable plants .
in the event of damage to any desirable plants which includes damage or brownout to low hanging limbs of trees along the rightofway the contractor will correct by either replacement pruning trimming or compensation of any damages caused by the misapplication or drift of the herbicide solution immediately following visual recognition verbal or written notification andor instructions from the engineer .
no herbicide solution shall be sprayed without a drift control agent .
no spraying shall be undertaken when the wind velocity is num mph num kmh or greater .
no spraying shall be undertaken during a rain when rain is imminent or when foliage is wet .
in the event a rain occurs producing a rainfall of onetenth of an inch num mm within four hours or less after the treatment of an area the area shall be retreated without additional compensations .
no spraying shall be undertaken during extended periods of extremely high temperatures and drought conditions .
the contractor shall take extreme care to insure that herbicide does not enter any lake stream pond or wetlands .
the speed of any vehicle used to apply the herbicide solution to the highway rightofway shall not exceed num mph num kmh when operated from the roadwaypaved shoulder surface or num mph num kmh when operated off the improved portion of the roadway .
the pattern of spray shall be such as to provide even uniform coverage .
d liability of contractor the contractor shall assume all liability for any damage resulting from the application of the herbicides for this project and shall hold the state of alabama harmless from any claims arising from this damage .
it is illegal to place herbicides in a manner that is not consistent with the requirements shown on the herbicide container labeling e record of work it shall be the contractors responsibility to scout ahead for each days anticipated work .
departmentfurnished forms bmnum herbicide scouting report shall be completed prior to the beginning of each days work .
a completed and signed copy shall be furnished to the departments engineer for each days operation .
the contractor shall account for each days work and provide information on location area covered weather conditions personnel equipment herbicide used rates and productivity .
this information shall be provided on the departments herbicide treatment report which will be provided by the department .
a completed and signed copy of this report shall also be furnished to the departments engineer for each days work .
num method of measurement item numa will be measured in acres hectares computed from surface measurements taken parallel to the treated surface .
computations will be to the nearest num of an acre num ha .
item numb will be measured by the gallon liter of dispensed solution with measurements taken from the storage vessel before and following dispersal to determine the actual amount of solution used .
computations will be to the nearest gallon l. section num stormwater turbidity control num item numc will be measured by the square yard square meter of dispensed solution with surface measurements taken parallel to the treated surface .
computations will be to the nearest num square yard num square meter .
num basis of payment a unit price coverage payment for all satisfactorily completed work of preemergent herbicide application as specified measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract bid price which shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor equipment herbicides adjuvants carrier fuels incidentals and liability insurance necessary to complete the work .
partial payments will be made on monthly estimates based on the percentage of the total work performed as estimated by the engineer .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa broadcast postemergent herbicide treatment per acre ha numb spot postemergent herbicide treatment per gallon l numc spot postemergent herbicide treatment per square yard square meter specify type specify rate specify carrier rate of application specify type of carrier section num stormwater turbidity control num description .
this section shall cover active and passive treatment methods of reducing the turbidity level of construction stormwater .
turbidity is typically the result of fine soil particles of erodible material exposed during construction dislodged by precipitation and runoff and subsequently suspended in stormwater .
conventional means of erosion and sediment control are not designed to remove turbidity from construction stormwater .
additional measures must be implemented to remove the suspended materials from the water .
chemical flocculants are used to increase the particle size of suspended materials making them easier to remove .
prior to discharging construction stormwater flocculated materials should be removed to the maximum extent practicable .
active treatment should be used as a supplement to passive treatment for stormwater discharges that do not meet water quality standards .
active treatment typically employs mechanical pumping of captured stormwater as the means of introducing flocculant prior to mechanical filtering of flocculated materials .
passive treatment typically employs precipitation and runoff as the means of introducing flocculant prior to physical settling of flocculated materials typically by means of filtering devices and sedimentation basins .
num materials .
a active treatment system .
the active treatment system shall be designed to treat and reduce the turbidity level of construction stormwater discharges to meet state water quality standards and the requirements of the npdes construction general permit at the flowrate required in the plans .
the active treatment system flowrate specified is designed to dewater the basin within num hours .
typical equipment and materials may include pumps manifolds flocculants filter bags sand media filters and other items designed to remove suspended materials from construction stormwater .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer the proposed active treatment system for review as part of the contractors stormwater management plan that is described in subarticle numb .
b flocculant .
flocculant shall be of the type that is manufactured for use in reducing turbidity caused by soil erosion and sediment transport .
all forms of flocculant utilized on a project shall be section num stormwater turbidity control num compatible and shall be provided from a single manufacturer .
flocculant may be in the form of blocks powder sock sets or other nonliquid forms .
liquid forms of flocculant may only be utilized in a monitored active treatment system .
the contractor shall be responsible for the testing of the project soil and potential sediment and for the proper selection of those flocculants that have a soil specific chemical makeup .
flocculant application rates shall be per the manufacturers recommendations .
a list of acceptable flocculants list iinum temporary erosion and sediment control products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
for flocculants without prior acceptance contractor shall submit to the engineer three copies of documentation of the effectiveness of the flocculant material safety data sheets and the manufacturers numday chronic ceriodaphnia reproduction testing for review and approval by the state construction engineer prior to use on the project .
c contractor retained turbidimeters .
turbidimeters shall be devices capable of measuring the nephelometric turbidity units ntu of construction stormwater that meets the following requirements portable waterproof device that meets usepa method num with a num ntu range sample tubes calibration kit and protective carrying case rechargeable battery usb interface cable and computer software .
a list of equipment acceptable for use in this application list iinum temporary erosion and sediment control products is given in the aldot manual titled materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf .
num construction requirements .
a active treatment .
the contractor shall provide an active treatment system at the locations given in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
treated construction stormwater discharges that do not meet state water quality standards or that do not meet the requirements of the npdes construction general permit cgp will not be allowed .
active treatment systems will typically be utilized for the dewatering of sedimentation basins .
valves located on the outlet pipe of the basin dewatering device shall remain closed until such time that the potential discharge meets state water quality standards and the requirements of the npdes cgp .
if discharge standards are not met and the sedimentation basin volume reaches num full or there is forecasted rain the engineer will determine if the basin should be dewatered by means of the active treatment system .
weather permitting discharges may be recirculated into sedimentation basins in an effort to achieve discharge standards .
the engineer may also direct dewatering by means of the active treatment system to facilitate sedimentation basin maintenance .
the contractor shall ensure proper flocculant dosing of the active treatment system per the manufacturers dosing recommendations to prevent the discharge of any harmful levels of flocculant .
the turbidity level of the active treatment system discharge and the effectiveness of the flocculant shall be monitored by the contractor and will be verified by the engineer .
b passive treatment .
the contractor shall apply flocculant at the locations given in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
flocculant shall be introduced to flowing stormwater at locations such as ditch checks temporary slope drains and forebays of sedimentation basins prior to retention bmps intended to promote settling and capture of flocculated material .
heavy sediment and sand should be captured prior to the location of the flocculant application .
flocculant shall never be applied directly to live streams or waters of the state .
flocculant shall be applied in accordance with the flocculant manufacturers dosing recommendations and the requirements shown on the plans for construction stormwater turbidity reduction .
the effectiveness of the flocculant will be monitored by the engineer .
aldot and contractor qcis shall inspect flocculant applications after each rain event to determine if the reapplication of flocculant is needed .
section num construction safety fence num c construction stormwater sampling and turbidity monitoring .
when construction stormwater sampling and turbidity monitoring is required per item numenum .
the contractor shall furnish the required quantity of turbidimeters for use by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide documentation of professional calibration of the device prior to delivery to the project and shall maintain annual professional calibration during the time that it is required on the project .
daily calibration and required stormwater sample testing shall be performed by the engineer .
the contractor shall immediately replace any turbidimeters that are in need of annual professional calibration or are otherwise not properly functioning without additional compensation .
the contractor shall retain ownership of the device and will be notified once the engineer determines that the device is no longer needed .
num method of measurement .
a active treatment system .
active treatment system item numa will be measured per each .
b active treatment system operating day .
active treatment system operating day item numb will be measured per each .
operating days shall be measured individually for each active treatment system .
c flocculant application .
flocculant application item numc will be measured per each based on the type of application ditch check temporary slope drain sedimentation basin or inlet protection .
d contractor retained turbidimeters .
contractor retained turbidimeters item numd will be measured per each .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
payment for active treatment system shall be full compensation for all equipment costs for a complete system designed to dewater at the required flowrate given in gallons per minute gpm including but not limited to delivery installation maintenance and rental fees .
payment will not be made for the replacement of an active treatment system that does not produce discharges meeting requirements .
payment for an operating day of the active treatment system shall be full compensation for all labor and material costs to operate one complete system at the required flowrate given in gallons per minute gpm for up to num hours including but not limited to flocculant filter media and other consumables .
payment shall only be made for operation directed by the engineer .
payment for flocculant shall be full compensation for testing if required furnishing and placing the flocculant .
payment for the accepted turbidimeter shall include furnishing of the device with all the required accessories and for any required calibrations .
payment shall be for the exclusive use of the device for the duration of the contract or until the engineer determines that there will be no further need for the device .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa active treatment system ____ gpm per each numb active treatment system ____ gpm operating day per each numc flocculant application per each numd contractor retained turbidimeter per each ditch check temporary slope drain sedimentation basin or inlet protection section num construction safety fence num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing erecting maintaining and removing construction safety fence as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer for the purpose of directing pedestrian traffic safely through construction work areas .
section num geometric controls num num materials .
construction safety fence shall consist of a plastic openmesh fencing material which shall be bright orange in color and mounted on posts by means of adjustable belts or loops or other means that will securely hold the fencing in an upright position .
posts may be of any type material that will adequately serve the intended purpose for the duration of the project .
fence material shall weigh at least num pounds per num foot long roll four foot wide roll num kg per num meter long roll num meter wide roll .
the department has established a list list vnum of acceptable construction safety fences .
the contractor may furnish any of the safety fences shown on this list .
the list is given in the departments manual material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
num construction requirements .
construction safety fence shall be installed as shown in the plans and as directed by the engineer .
the fence shall be continuous four feet in height above the ground surface and shall be spliced together only at support posts with a minimum num inch num mm overlap .
the maximum spacing between posts shall be num feet num meters .
the contractor shall maintain the integrity of the fence as long as the engineer deems necessary and while construction or associated activities are ongoing in the vicinity of the area enclosed or delineated by the fence .
the contractor shall routinely inspect the fence and correct any deficiencies immediately .
the fence shall remain in place until the engineer directs that it be removed .
the fence materials shall remain the property of the contractor and may be reused at other locations provided they are in satisfactory condition for reuse as determined by the engineer .
posts and the hardware for attaching the construction safety fence to the posts shall be considered a necessary requirement of the construction safety fence installation and no direct payment will be made for such .
num method of measurement .
construction safety fence will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num of a foot num meter along the line of the completed fence .
num basis of payment .
a general .
the unit price for construction safety fence shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary for performing all work involved in constructing maintaining removing and disposing of the construction safety fence .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa construction safety fence per linear foot meter section num geometric controls num description .
when this item is included in the proposal it shall consist of the contractor furnishing placing and maintaining construction stakes lines and grades necessary for establishing the accurate location of all features of construction .
num materials .
all materials needed in the performance of the work of geometric controls shall be furnished by the contractor .
num construction requirements .
a determination of lines and grades .
the engineer will furnish centerline control points p.c.s p.o.c.s p.t.s p.o.t.s etc .
at intervals determined necessary by the engineer for the contractor to establish alignment on all section num geometric controls num roadways .
where ramps cross roads service roads etc .
are geometrically tied to the mainline roadway the engineer will only establish control points along the mainline of the roadways .
the engineer will stake breaks of rightsofway and mark the clearing limits .
bench marks will be furnished at intervals along the project for vertical control .
sufficient design roadway cross section information elevations slope ratios etc .
will be provided to enable the contractor to establish grade stakes and slope stakes .
alignment data and flowline data for drainage structures including box culverts will be furnished by the engineer .
for each bridge site except box culverts the engineer will furnish a minimum of two horizontal control points and one bench mark for vertical control .
b contractors responsibility .
num .
contractors responsibility for establishing geometric controls .
the contractor shall be responsible for all layout and geometric control work necessary for construction of all items of work .
the contractor shall use the plans controls and other data furnished by the engineer in establishing the required location of all features of the work .
the contractor shall be responsible for the utilization and preservation of all furnished controls .
the contractor shall replace state furnished control stakes or marks that are disturbed by the contractor during construction .
num .
contractors responsibility to check furnished controls .
the contractor shall check all furnished controls as a first order of work to be assured that they are accurate .
the contractors use of all furnished points and marks for construction of the project shall be acceptance of the responsibility for the accuracy of these controls .
by acceptance of responsibllity for the accuracy of the controls the contractor waives all claims for extra compensation for corrective work if the controls are later found to be incorrect .
all discrepancies shall be reported immediately to the engineer in writing .
num .
setting geometric controls for roadway construction .
the contractor shall mark or monument the locations of the finished subgrade along the centerline at the edges of lanes and at breakpoints .
markings or monuments shall be provided at intervals of num feet num m on tangent alignments and at intervals of num feet num m on curved alignments .
the type of marking or monument shall be suitable for the purpose of checking the vertical and horizontal position of the location against the required position shown in the plans .
the type of marking or monument shall be approved by the engineer prior to being set .
the contractor shall also mark or monument locations on each layer of soil or aggregate base at transverse breakpoints on these layers at intervals of num feet num m. num .
setting geometric controls for bridge construction .
for all bridge work the contractor shall establish and maintain all horizontal and vertical control points and furnish all lines and grades necessary for the bridge construction from the initial layout to the final acceptance of the bridges .
the contractor shall accurately set all forms headers rails and screeds to provide the dimensions elevations and grades shown on the plans .
num method of measurement .
measurement of the item of geometric controls will be made on a lump sum basis .
when more than one project is included in a contract each project will be assigned a fractional part of the lump sum as shown on the plans .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the item of geometric controls measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid .
said lump sum shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials hubs stakes templates straightedges equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
partial payments for the item of geometric controls will be made on monthly estimates .
the amount paid each month will be a percentage of the lump sum contract amount .
this percentage shall be the same as the percentage of work performed during the estimate period .
when more than one project is included in a contract the amount of a partial payment will be the sum of separate calculations made for each project .
section num construction fuel cost num b payment will be made under item no .
numa geometric controls per lump sum section num construction fuel cost num description .
this section shall cover the cost of construction fuel for the equipment necessary for the performance of the required work except for the production of hot mix asphalt hma .
num bidding and cost adjustment .
the bidder shall enter an amount from zero dollars up to the maximum dollar amount shown in the pay item description for fuel on the proposal form .
the contractor signifies that this amount represents a reasonable estimate of the fuel costs isolated from all other costs of completing the required work except for the production of hma .
if a proposal contains an amount greater than the maximum amount shown in the pay item description the amount bid for construction fuel will be assigned a value that is the maximum amount .
a cost adjustment will be made to the amount of compensation due for construction fuel on each estimate .
this cost adjustment will be based on the cost of the fuel at the time of bid and the cost of fuel at the time of the estimate .
num method of cost adjustment .
the department will determine and publish a monthly fuel index utilizing the average area terminal price reports for regular unleaded gasoline and no .
num fuel of the platts oilgram price report published during the week in which the first day of the month occurs .
the base fuel index b for the project will be the monthly fuel index published for the month in which the bids were opened for the project .
before the expiration of contract time partial payments will be made on monthly estimates using the following formula p m b x pc where p numerical portion of the lump sum bid amount a number usually less than one .
round to nearest thousandth .
may be expressed as a percentage of the lump sum by multiplying by num . m fuel index for current monthly estimate b base fuel index pc percent of project completed during current estimate period i.e .
pc percentage of project complete to date minus percent project complete at the time of previous estimate .
percentage of project complete will not include payment for stored materials .
round percentage to nearest thousandth .
example num num after the expiration of contract time plus approved time extensions two calculations of a potential partial payment will be made .
the first calculation will be made using the current index and the base index as noted in the preceding formula .
the second calculation will be made using the index during the month that contract time plus approved time extensions expired and the base index .
the smallest amount of partial payment resulting from these two calculations will be made for the current estimate period .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the amount designated for construction fuel shall be full compensation after all applicable cost adjustments for the furnishing of fuel for equipment used on the project except for the fuel for the production of hma and for all materials equipment tools labor transportation and incidentals necessary for its use .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa construction fuel max .
bid limited to per lump sum section num traffic stripe num division num traffic control devices and highway lighting section num traffic stripe num description .
this section shall cover the work of placing a permanent or temporary traffic stripeat the locations shown on the plans or where directed by the engineer .
this section shall also cover the removal of existing or temporary traffic stripe .
num materials .
materials shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements given in sections num and num .
the required dimensions color class retroreflectivity and type of stripe will be shown on the plans .
the required type of material will be designated by class in accordance with the following .
class of traffic stripe class material num paint numh high build paint num standard thermoplastic material numt thin film spray applied thermoplastic material num tape w warrantedtraffic marking material the required reflectivity will be designated by type in accordance with the following .
type of traffic stripe type reflectivity a reflective b nonreflective class numh class num and class numt materials shall be in compliance with the formulations given in the tables in section num for each class .
class num class num class w and drop on glass beads shall be one of the materials shown on list vnum temporary traffic marking materials and list vnum permanent traffic marking materials .
these lists are in the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning these lists is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
num construction requirements .
a acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
the guidelines for the evaluation and acceptance of traffic marking materials are given in the procedure aldotnum acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
these guidelines shall be followed in the furnishing and placement of stripe .
b temporary traffic stripe .
num .
requirement for use .
a roadway shall not be opened to traffic without a traffic stripe unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
lane lines shall be maintained at all times when traffic is required to pass through the areas of construction .
existing lane lines covered by paving operations shall be replaced with temporary stripe .
temporary edge lines will not be required unless shown to be required on the plans or required by the engineer .
section num traffic stripe num num .
allowable material .
temporary traffic stripe shall be reflective and shall be permanent traffic marking materials class num list vnum or removable tape list vnum .
num .
weather conditions for application .
temporary striping may be placed without regard to the weather conditions if allowed by the engineer .
num .
configuration .
a broken line of temporary stripe shall consist of num inch num mm wide by num foot num m long markings placed on num foot num m centers .
a solid line of temporary stripe shall be a continuous num inch num mm wide stripe .
other width stripes may be required as shown on the plans .
num .
temporary traffic marking tape .
temporary traffic marking tape shall be applied as recommended by the tape manufacturer or as directed by the engineer .
any failure of traffic marking tape shall be repaired immediately .
num .
removal .
a temporary solid line stripe of marking tape used on an underlying pavement layer or any type temporary stripe of marking tape used on a wearing surface shall be removed .
a temporary solid or broken line stripe of paint used on a wearing surface shall be removed if it is not to be completely covered with a class numh or num permanent stripe .
other types of temporary stripe may remain in place if the temporary stripe will be covered by the placement of paving layers or permanent stripe .
c class num paint .
num .
usage .
class num paint shall be used for temporary striping unless shown otherwise on the plans .
class num paint shall not be applied to concrete surfaces .
num .
surface preparation .
areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
striping shall not begin until the engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the contractor that striping may begin .
num .
weather conditions for application .
class num paint may be placed without regard to the weather conditions if allowed by the engineer .
num .
equipment for application .
equipment for the application of class num paint shall be designed to place the paint and reflective beads when required .
the equipment shall be capable of placing the materials at the required rates of placement and within the allowable placement tolerances .
num .
rate of placement .
class num paint for temporary applications shall be placed at the rate of num gallons per mile for a num inch wide solid stripe num lkm for a num mm wide solid stripe except for the following circumstances .
the rate of placement for temporary applications shall be num gallons per mile for a num inch wide solid stripe num lkm for a num mm wide solid stripe on rough pavement surfaces such as open graded friction course ogfc milled surfaces or when used as a temporary stripe that will not be covered within num calendar days .
class num paint for permanent applications shall be placed at the rate of num gallons per mile for a num inch wide solid stripe num lkm for a num mm wide solid stripe except for the following circumstances .
the rate of placement for permanent applications shall be num gallons per mile for a num inch wide solid stripe num lkm for a num mm wide solid stripe on rough pavement surfaces such as open graded friction course ogfc and milled surfaces .
the rates of placement for other widths of stripe and for broken stripe shall be the prorated rates of placement determined from the placement rates given for num inch num mm solid stripe .
section num traffic stripe num paint stripe that is placed at a rate that is not greater than num of the required rate shall be replaced if the stripe is not accepted by the engineer with an approved price reduction .
num .
placement of reflective beads .
type num glass beads shall be placed at a rate of num pounds per mile for a solid num inch wide stripe num kgkm for num mm wide solid stripe .
prorated rates of application shall be made other widths of stripe and for broken stripe .
beads shall be applied before the final set of the paint has occurred to insure that the beads will adhere to the paint .
d class numh high build paint .
num .
usage .
class numh paint shall be used for state maintenance operations only .
class numh paint may be applied to asphalt and concrete surfaces .
asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the class num h paint .
concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the class num h paint .
num .
surface preparation .
areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
striping shall not begin until the engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the contractor that striping may begin .
curing compound on concrete surfaces shall be removed by grinding wire brushing sand blasting or other effective means .
num .
weather conditions for application .
permanent class numh paint shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
class numh paint shall only be placed when thepavement temperature is num f num c and rising .
num .
equipment for application .
equipment for the application of class numh paint shall be designed to place the paint and reflective beads when required at the required rates of placement and within the allowable placement tolerances .
num .
rate of placement .
class numh paint shall be placed at the rate given in the following table .
rough pavement surfaces are such surfaces as open graded friction course ogfc and milled surfaces .
class numh paint shall be placed at the rate of num gallons per mile for a num inch wide solid stripe num lkm for a num mm wide solid stripe except for the following circumstances .
the rate of placement for permanent applications shall be num gallons per mile for a num inch wide solid stripe num lkm for a num mm wide solid stripe on rough pavement surfaces such as open graded friction course ogfc and milled surfaces .
the rates of placement for other widths of stripe and for broken stripe shall be prorated rates determined from the placement rates given for num inch num mm solid stripe .
class numh paint stripe that is placed at a rate that is not greater than num of the required rate shall be replaced if the stripe is not accepted by the engineer with an approved price reduction .
the required width of the stripe will be shown on the plans .
num .
placement of reflective beads .
type num glass beads shall be placed on the class numh paint at a rate of num pounds per mile for a num inch solid wide stripe num kgkm for num mm wide solid stripe .
the rates of placement for other widths of stripe and for broken stripe shall be prorated rates determined from the placement rates given for num inch num mm solid stripe .
num .
retroreflectivity .
the target retroreflectivity shall be num mcdluxsq m for white stripe and num mcdluxsq m for yellow stripe .
the engineer will measure the retroreflectivity of edge lines for each color at num random locations throughout the project selected in accordance with the requirements given in aldot procedure num selecting samples by the random numbers method .
section num traffic stripe num if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or greater the stripe will be accepted without a price adjustment for retroreflectivity .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is less than num and greater than num of the target retroreflectivity the stripe will be paid for at a percentage equal to the percentage determined from the measurements .
for example if the average of the measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity payment for the stripe will be num of the contract unit price .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or less the stripe shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
any portion of the stripe that is determined by the engineer to be noticeably inconsistent with the overall striping and measures less than num of the target retroreflectivity shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
retroreflectivity measurements will be made in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum method of retroreflectivity measurement of traffic marking materials with the exception of the sampling frequency .
measurements will be made between num and num calendar days after the completion of the placement of all stripe .
num .
color and luminance factors .
the color and luminance factors shall meet the requirements given in section num. e class num standard thermoplastic .
num .
usage .
class num thermoplastic shall be used for permanent striping and for other circumstances designated by the engineer .
class num thermoplastic may be applied to asphalt and concrete surfaces .
asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
num .
surface preparation .
areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
curing compound on concrete surfaces shall be removed by grinding wire brushing sand blasting or other effective means .
a primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the class num thermoplastic shall be applied to concrete surfaces concrete pavement and bridge decks before the application of the thermoplastic .
longitudinal stripes shall be offset at least num inches num mm from longitudinal joints in concrete surfaces .
striping shall not begin until the engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the contractor that striping may begin .
num .
weather conditions for application .
class num thermoplastic shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
thepavement surface temperature shall be at least num f num c and rising before application will be allowed to asphalt pavement surfaces .
thepavement surface temperature shall be at least num f num c and rising before application will be allowed to concrete pavement surfaces .
num .
equipment for application .
the equipment shall be capable of placing thermoplastic and beads at the required rates of placement and within the allowable placement tolerances .
the equipment shall have the capacity to maintain the thermoplastic at temperatures greater than num f num c. the temperature of the thermoplastic shall be greater than num f num c at the point of application .
the equipment shall be capable of applying glass beads to the surface of the stripe by a double drop application .
the bead dispenser for the first bead drop shall be attached to the striping machine so that the beads are dispensed closely behind the thermoplastic material .
the second bead dispenser shall be attached to the striping machine so that the beads are dispensed immediately after the first bead drop application .
the bead dispensers shall be equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the section num traffic stripe num thermoplastic material .
the dispensers shall apply the glass beads to produce a uniform appearance on the entire surface of the stripe and num embedment of the beads .
the engineer will make the determination of the acceptability of the bead embedment by visual inspection .
num .
required thickness .
class num thermoplastic shall be placed to a target uniform thickness of num inches num mm .
the required width of the stripe will be shown on the plans .
the engineer will measure the thickness of the edge lines for each color at num random locations throughout the project selected in accordance with the requirements given in aldot procedure num .
if the average of the num thickness measurements is num of the target thickness or greater the stripe will be accepted without a price adjustment for thickness .
if the average of the num thickness measurements is less than num and greater than num of the target thickness the stripe will be paid for at a percentage equal to the percentage determined from the measurements .
for example if the average of the measurements is num of the target thickness payment for the stripe will be num of the contract unit price .
if the average of the num thickness measurements is num of the target thickness or less the stripe shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
any portion of the stripe that is determined by the engineer to be noticeably inconsistent with the overall striping and measures less than num of the target thickness shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
thickness and width measurements will be made in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum method of measuring traffic stripe and traffic control legends and markings with the exception of the sampling frequency .
measurements will be made between num and num calendar days after the completion of the placement of all stripe .
the removal and replacement shall be done without additional compensation .
num .
placement of reflective beads .
the contractor shall use either one of the optional double drop bead systems shown in the following tables .
option num aashto type num beads and aashto type num beads type of reflective beads aashto type num aashto type num order of placement first second minimum rate of placement num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum option num numm reflective elements and aashto type num beads type of reflective beads numm reflective elements aashto type num order of placement first second minimum rate of placement num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum num pounds per num square feet num kg per num mnum num .
retroreflectivity .
the target retroreflectivity shall be num mcdluxsq m for white stripe and num mcdluxsq m for yellow stripe .
the engineer will measure the retroreflectivity of edge lines for each color at num random locations throughout the project selected in accordance with the requirements given in aldot procedure num .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or greater the stripe will be accepted without a price adjustment for retroreflectivity .
section num traffic stripe num if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is less than num and greater than num of the target retroreflectivity the stripe will be paid for at a percentage equal to the percentage determined from the measurements .
for example if the average of the measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity payment for the stripe will be num of the contract unit price .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or less the stripe shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
any portion of the stripe that is determined by the engineer to be noticeably inconsistent with the overall striping and measures less than num of the target retroreflectivity shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
retroreflectivity measurements will be made in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum with the exception of the sampling frequency .
measurements will be made between num and num calendar days after the completion of the placement of all stripe .
num .
color and luminance factors .
the color and luminance factors shall meet the requirements given in section num. f class numt thin film spray applied thermoplastic .
num .
usage .
class numt thermoplastic shall be used for permanent striping and for other circumstances designated by the engineer .
class numt thermoplastic may be applied to asphalt and concrete surfaces .
asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
num .
surface preparation .
areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
curing compound on concrete surfaces shall be removed by grinding wire brushing sand blasting or other effective means .
a primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the class numt thermoplastic shall be applied to concrete surfaces concrete pavement and bridge decks before the application of the thermoplastic .
longitudinal stripes shall be offset at least num inches num mm from longitudinal joints in concrete surfaces .
striping shall not begin until the engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the contractor that striping may begin .
num .
weather conditions for application .
class numt thermoplastic shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
thepavement surface temperature shall be at least num f num c and rising before application will be allowed to asphalt pavement surfaces .
thepavement surface temperature shall be at least num f num c and rising before application will be allowed to concrete pavement surfaces .
num .
equipment for application .
equipment for the application of class numt thermoplastic shall be designed to place the thermoplastic and beads at the required rates of placement and within the allowable placement tolerances .
the equipment shall have the capacity to maintain the thermoplastic at temperatures greater than num f num c. the temperature of the thermoplastic shall be greater than num f num c at the point of application .
num .
required thickness .
class numt thermoplastic shall be placed to a target uniform thickness of num inches num mm .
the required width of the stripe will be shown on the plans .
the engineer will measure the thickness of the edge lines for each color at num random locations throughout the project selected in accordance with the requirements given in aldot procedure num .
if the average of the num thickness measurements is num of the target thickness or greater the stripe will be accepted without a price adjustment for thickness .
section num traffic stripe num if the average of the num thickness measurements is less than num and greater than num of the target thickness the stripe will be paid for at a percentage equal to the percentage determined from the measurements .
for example if the average of the measurements is num of the target thickness payment for the stripe will be num of the contract unit price .
if the average of the num thickness measurements is num of the target thickness or less the stripe shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
any portion of the stripe of the stripe that is determined by the engineer to be noticeably inconsistent with the overall striping and measures less than num of the target thickness shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
thickness and width measurements will be made in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum with the exception of the sampling frequency .
measurements will be made between num and num calendar days after the completion of the placement of all stripe .
the removal and replacement shall be done without additional compensation .
num .
placement of reflective beads .
type num glass beads shall be placed on the class numt thermoplastic at a rate of num pounds per mile for a num inch solid wide stripe num kgkm for num mm wide solid stripe .
the rates of placement for other widths of stripe and for broken stripe shall be prorated rates determined from the placement rates given for num inch num mm solid stripe .
num .
retroreflectivity .
the target retroreflectivity shall be num mcdluxsq m for white stripe and num mcdluxsq m for yellow stripe .
the engineer will measure the retroreflectivity of edge lines for each color at num random locations throughout the project selected in accordance with the requirements given in aldot procedure num .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or greater the stripe will be accepted without a price adjustment for retroreflectivity .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is less than num and greater than num of the target retroreflectivity the stripe will be paid for at a percentage equal to the percentage determined from the measurements .
for example if the average of the measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity payment for the stripe will be num of the contract unit price .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or less the stripe shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
any portion of the stripe of the stripe that is determined by the engineer to be noticeably inconsistent with the overall striping and measures less than num of the target retroreflectivity shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
retroreflectivity measurements will be made in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum with the exception of the sampling frequency .
measurements will be made between num and num calendar days after the completion of the placement of all stripe .
num .
color and luminance factors .
the color and luminance factors shall meet the requirements given in section num. g class num tape .
class num tape shall be used for permanent striping and for other circumstances designated by the engineer .
class num tape shall be applied in accordance with the procedures recommended by the manufacturer.tape stripe shall not be placed when the pavement temperature is below num f num c. tape may be placed at lower temperatures if shown in the manufacturers recommendations for placement and allowed by the engineer .
the target retroreflectivity of the class num tape shall be num mcdluxsq m for white tape and num mcdluxsq m for yellow tape .
the engineer will measure the retroreflectivity of edge lines for each color at num random locations throughout the project selected in accordance with the requirements given in aldot procedure num .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or greater the tape will be accepted without a price adjustment for retroreflectivity .
section num traffic stripe num if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is less than num and greater than num of the target retroreflectivity the tape will be paid for at a percentage equal to the percentage determined from the measurements .
for example if the average of the measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity payment for the tape will be num of the contract unit price .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or less the tape shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
any portion of the tape that is determined by the engineer to be noticeably inconsistent with the overall striping and measures less than num of the target retroreflectivity shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
retroreflectivity measurements will be made in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum with the exception of the sampling frequency .
measurements will be made between num and num calendar days after the completion of the placement of all stripe .
h warranted traffic marking materials .
class w traffic marking materials shall be used for permanent striping and for other circumstances designated by the engineer .
class w traffic marking materials shall be applied in accordance with the procedures recommended by the manufacturer .
i removing stripe and markers .
existing traffic stripe permanent or temporary markers and adhesive shall be removed by a method that will not damage or disfigure the appearance of pavement surfaces that will be visible at the completion of construction .
burning the old stripe will not be permitted .
hiding the old stripe by covering it with a striping material that is colored to match the appearance of the pavement surface will only be allowed if approved in writing by the engineer .
covering the old stripe will only be considered for hiding what may remain of the stripe on rough pavement surfaces like open graded friction course after other methods of removal have failed to adequately remove the old stripe .
the contractor shall propose the type color and application rate the striping material for review and approval by the engineer .
there will be no extra compensation given for furnishing and applying striping material to hide an existing stripe .
removal of traffic stripe existing or temporary will be paid for as a separate item of work .
j placement location .
the engineer will set the limits of nopassing zones .
the contractor shall provide all other controls required to place the stripe in accordance with the details shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall mark the surfaces prior to the placement of the stripe to insure that the stripe will be installed in the required location .
the contractor may be required to adjust the operation of the striping equipment to cover the width and length of existing stripe .
k width and length placement tolerances .
num .
permanent striping .
a tolerance of num of an inch num mm over or num of an inch num mm under the required width will be allowed provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the general appearance .
segments of broken line may vary up to num foot num m from the required length .
segments shall have neat edges without mist or drip .
variations from the control guide up to num inch num mm will be allowed provided the variation does not increase or decrease at a rate of more than num of an inch num mm in num feet num m. lines that do not meet these tolerances shall be removed and replaced without additional compensation .
establishment of tolerances does not relieve the contractor of responsibility to construct as closely as practicable to exact plan dimensions .
num .
temporary stripe .
the width of the temporary stripe shall not exceednum inches num mm but shall have a num inch num mm under tolerance .
traffic marking tape shall have a nominal num inch num mm width .
the tolerance for the lengths of the temporary broken stripe sections shall be num foot num m under and num foot num m over the length specified in subitem numenum.a .
strict compliance to alignment on underlying surfaces will not be required provided a reasonable straight line of markings is obtained .
the tolerances for placement on a wearing surface shall be the same as those for permanent striping .
num .
failure to meet width and length placement tolerances .
section num traffic stripe num permanent or temporary striping placed on a final wearing surface that does not meet the tolerances specified shall be removed and replaced without compensation .
this includes areas where the permanent striping does not match the alignment spacing etc .
of the temporary stripe leaving the temporary stripe exposed .
portions or as much as the entire pavement surface shall be overlaid with a bituminous plant mix layer in extreme cases of disfigurement of the pavement due to stripe removal .
the engineer will make the final determination of the severity of the disfigurement the requirement for the extent of the overlay and the material and placement requirements for the plant mix required for the overlay .
the contractor shall place the overlay without compensation .
l protection of traffic stripe .
traffic shall be prevented from crossing traffic stripe that is not dried cured or taken a set to bear the traffic .
the contractor shall use a sufficient number of flagmenor other protection for the stripe to prevent traffic from damaging the newly applied stripe .
sections of traffic stripe that have been marred or picked up by trafficshall be repaired and the pavement shall be cleaned outside the limits of the stripe .
repair and cleaning shall be done by the contractor without extra compensation .
m protection of traffic .
the contractor shall furnish and place without extra compensation all warning and directional signs required to direct control and protect the traveling public while marking and striping operations are in progress .
temporary barricades and signs of the design shown on the plans or directed by the engineer shall be placed as shown on the plans at the beginning and end of the section that the contractor proposes to stripe in one operation .
as soon as the striping material has dried or cured sufficiently in any one section to permit traffic to cross the traffic line the temporary barricades and signs shall be moved ahead to the next section .
barricades and signs shall not be left in place overnight .
the striping equipment shall be operated in a manner to cause the least disruption to the normal flow of traffic .
num method of measurement .
a items numa numb numc nume numf and numg .
solid or broken traffic stripe items numa and numc will be measured in miles kilometers along the centerline of each stripe either by direct measurement and computation to the nearest num mile num kilometer or by odometer to the nearest num mile num kilometer .
solid broken or dotted traffic stripe items numb nume numf and numg will be measured in linear feet meters along the centerline of the stripe to the nearest linear foot meter .
the length of broken traffic stripe and dotted traffic stripe complete in place and accepted will include the gaps shown on the plans as a part of the traffic line design but will not include the length of any other gap or section omitted by the engineer .
each width of traffic stripe will be measured separately for payment .
b items numd and numh .
any traffic stripe existing or temporary removed as directed items numd and numh will be measured in the same manner noted for placement of the type stripe involved .
removal of markings or legends will be measured and paid for under the appropriate item provided in section num .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the length of solid or broken traffic stripe item numa and the length of solid or broken traffic stripe item numg measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices and shall be full compensation for the stripe including the cleaning of the pavement the furnishing and applying of the striping material and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the item of work .
the length of dotted traffic stripe item numb measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials of the appropriate color consistent with the use of the stripe in accordance with the plan details the section num traffic control markings and legends num preparation of the pavement the application of the striping material and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
the length of solid or broken temporary traffic stripe item numc and the length of solid or broken temporary traffic stripe item nume and dotted temporary traffic stripe item numf measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of all materials of the appropriate color consistent with the use of the stripe in accordance with the requirements of the plan details and the mutcd the preparation of the surface the placing of the material the maintenance of the traffic stripe and for all equipment miscellaneous materials tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the item of work .
the length of existing or temporary solid or broken traffic stripe removed item numd and the length of solid broken or dotted traffic stripe removed item numh measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be payment in full for all materials equipment tools and labor necessary to complete the work .
when the traffic stripe to be removed consists of pavement markers used as traffic stripes the cost of removing markers marker adhesive and existing paint plastic or tape located between the markers shall also be included in the price .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa solidbroken color class type traffic stripe per mile kilometer numb dotted class type traffic stripe per linear foot meter numc solidbroken temporary traffic stripe per mile kilometer numd solidbroken traffic stripe removed per mile kilometer nume solidbroken temporary traffic stripe per linear foot meter numf dotted temporary traffic stripe per linear foot meter numg solidbroken color class type traffic stripe per linear foot meter numh solidbrokendotted traffic stripe removed per linear foot meter specify num numh num numt num or w. specify a or b .
specify paint plastic tape etc .
only if required .
section num traffic control markings and legends num description .
this section shall cover the work of placing permanent or temporary traffic control markings and legends at the locations shown on the plans or where directed by the engineer .
preformed thermoplastic markings may be used for permanent striping and for other circumstances as designated by the engineer .
this section shall also cover the removal of existing or temporary traffic control markings and legends .
num materials .
a general .
materials shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements given in sections num and num .
the required dimensions color type of material and reflectivity will be shown on the plans .
the required type of material will be designated by class and type in accordance with the requirements given section num class numh class num and class numt materials shall be in compliance with the formulations given in the tables in section num for each class .
class num class num class w preformed traffic markings and drop on glass beads shall be one of the materials shown on list vnum temporary traffic marking materials and list vnum permanent traffic marking materials .
these lists are in the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning these lists is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
section num traffic control markings and legends num preformed traffic markings and legends shall also meet the requirements given in article num .
all preformed traffic markings and legends shall meet the dimensions as shown in the plans and shall meet the tolerance requirements given in item numcnum .
num construction requirements .
a acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
the guidelines for the evaluation and acceptance of traffic marking materials are given in the procedure aldotnum acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
these guidelines shall be followed in the furnishing and placement of traffic markings and legends .
b temporary traffic markings and legends .
temporary traffic control markings and legends shall be furnished and placed in accordance with all of the requirements given in section num for temporary traffic stripe except for the placement tolerances for length and width .
the length of the markings and legends shall be no greater than num inches num mm over or num inch num mm under the required length .
the width of the markings and legends shall be no greater than num of an inch num mm over or num of an inch num mm under the required width .
c permanent traffic markings and legends .
num .
applicator applied traffic markings and legends .
permanent traffic control markings and legends shall be furnished and placed in accordance with all of the requirements given in section num for permanent traffic stripe except for the following any type of equipment may be used that produces acceptable results class num thermoplastic shall be placed to produce a minimum uniform thickness of num inches num mm .
the length of the markings and legends shall be no greater than num inches num mm over or num inch num mm under the required length .
the width of the markings and legends shall be no greater than num of an inch num mm over or num of an inch num mm under the required width beads may be hand placed .
num .
preformed traffic markings and legends .
a .
general all preformed traffic markings and legends shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
preformed thermoplastic may be applied to asphalt and concrete surfaces .
asphalt pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
concrete pavement shall be allowed to cure for a period of num calendar days before the application of the thermoplastic .
all preformed traffic markings and legends shall be a minimum uniform thickness of num inches nummm .
b .
surface preparation prior to the application of preformed thermoplastic .
areas to be striped shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt oil and other debris in a way that will not damage the pavement surface .
curing compound on concrete surfaces shall be removed by grinding wire brushing sand blasting or other effective means .
striping shall not begin until the engineer has inspected the pavement surface and has informed the contractor that striping may begin .
c. weather conditions for the application of preformed thermoplastic .
preformed thermoplastic shall not be placed during rain or mist or if the pavement surface is wet .
all preformed thermoplastic markings and legends shall be placed per the manufacturers recommended directions .
the engineer shall be furnished a copy of these recommendations for installation inspection purposes .
d. composition of preformed thermoplastic .
the preformed thermoplastic shall consist of high quality materials pigments and glass beads or other reflective material uniformly distributed throughout their cross sectional area with a reflective layer of spheres or other reflective material embedded in the top surface .
section num traffic control markings and legends num num .
specialty traffic markings and legends .
specialty traffic markings and legends shall be placed where indicated on the plans and in accordance with the special drawings or plan details .
specialty traffic markings and legends shall meet all of the requirements given in subarticle numa and item numcnum .
d retroreflectivity of traffic markings and legends .
the white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum .
all pedestrian crosswalks bike lane symbols and messages in a proposed bike lane shall attain initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum .
the engineer will measure the retroreflectivity of emplaced preform thermoplastic material for each color at num random locations throughout the project selected in accordance with the requirements given in aldot procedure num .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or greater the stripe will be accepted without a price adjustment for retroreflectivity .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is less than num and greater than num of the target retroreflectivity the stripe will be paid for at a percentage equal to the percentage determined from the measurements .
for example if the average of the measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity payment for the stripe will be num of the contract unit price .
if the average of the num retroreflectivity measurements is num of the target retroreflectivity or less the stripe shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
any portion of the stripe of the stripe that is determined by the engineer to be noticeably inconsistent with the overall striping and measures less than num of the target retroreflectivity shall be removed and replaced without extra compensation .
retroreflectivity measurements will be made in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum with the exception of the sampling frequency .
measurements will be made between num and num calendar days after the completion of the placement of all stripe .
e removing markings or legends .
the removal of traffic markings and legends shall be done in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num method of measurement .
the area of traffic control markings or legends items numa numb numh and numi complete in place and accepted will be the sum of the areas shown on the plans for each marking and legend constructed within the required placement tolerance .
the removal of traffic control markings or legends item numc shall be measured in the same manner as prescribed above except that it shall cover only the area from which the markings were actually removed .
the area of temporary traffic control markings or legends items numd and nume complete in place and accepted will be the sum of the areas shown on the plans for each marking and legend constructed within the required placement tolerance .
no measurement for payment will be made for the removal of temporary markings or legends the removal of such being classified as incidental to the items of temporary traffic control markings and temporary traffic control legends .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted square feet square meters of traffic control markings or legends items numa numb numh and numi measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the item complete in place and includes the cleaning of the pavement furnishing and applying the markings or legends and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the accepted square feet square meters of traffic control markings or legends removed item numc measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the item complete in place and includes traffic control for removal all necessary materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the accepted square feet square meters of temporary traffic control markings or legends items numd and nume measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the item complete in place and includes the cleaning of the pavement furnishing and applying the markings or legends traffic control for placing and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num pavement markers num b payment will be made under item no .
numa traffic control markings class ____ type ____ per square foot square meter numb traffic control legends class ____ type ____ per square foot square meter numc removal of traffic control markings or legends per square foot square meter numd temporary traffic control markings per square foot square meter nume temporary traffic control legends per square foot square meter numh specialty traffic control markings per square foot square meter numi specialty traffic control legends per square foot square meter section num pavement markers num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing pavement markers of the class and type specified by the plans or proposal at the locations designated on the plans or directed by the engineer all in conformity with the plans and these specifications .
pavement markers shall be divided into classes and types as noted .
class a reflective markers .
type num monodirectional .
numa .
num white reflector face with the marker body other than the reflector face shall be white silver white or a neutral color .
numb .
num yellow reflector face with the marker body other than the reflector face shall be yellow in color .
type num bidirectional .
numa .
num white reflector faces with marker body other than the reflector faces shall be of a white silver white or a neutral color .
numb .
num white reflector and num yellow face with marker body other than the reflector faces shall be of a white silver white or a neutral color or may be num yellow on the side with the yellow reflector and num white silver white or a neutral color on the side with the white reflector .
numc .
num white reflector and num red reflector face with the marker body other than the reflector faces shall be of a white silver white or a neutral color or may be num red on the side with the red reflector and num white silver white or a neutral color on the side with the white reflector .
numd .
num yellow reflector faces with the marker body other than the reflective faces yellow in color .
nume .
num yellow reflector and num red reflector face with the marker body other than the reflector faces shall be yellow in color or may be num red on the side with the red reflector and num yellow on the side with the yellow reflector .
class ah reflective markers with hard abrasionresistant lens surface .
type designations shall be as shown above for class a markers .
class b nonreflective markers .
type num ceramic .
numa .
white numb .
yellow numc .
black class c temporary markers .
type num monodirectional .
numa .
num white reflector face numb .
num yellow reflector face type num bidirectional .
numa .
num white reflector faces numb .
num white and num yellow reflector face section num pavement markers num numc .
num white and num red reflector face numd .
num yellow reflector faces nume .
num yellow and num red reflector num materials .
materials furnished for use shall comply with the appropriate requirements of division num materials with special attention directed to section num .
the department has established list vnum permanent pavement markers temporary pavement markers marker adhesive delineators and hazard markers .
this list is in the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
only the materials on these lists shall be furnished for use .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
num construction requirements .
a general .
equipment shall include an automatic mixing and metering machine capable of preparing a machine type adhesive meeting the requirements of article num and metering the amount of adhesive required to affix each marker to the pavement .
the procedure for installing the markers shall be that of the contractor provided such is within the scope of the installation procedure recommended by the manufacturer of the marker and such is demonstrated to be operable and that the markers are firmly affixed to the surface in such a manner that they will not be displaced under traffic the entire bottom surface shall be coated with adhesive .
the installation of the markers shall be such that the color of the marker housing is compatible with the color of the traffic stripes they are to supplement or replace .
reflective pavement markers shall be placed at the designated location in such a way that the color of the reflected light is in accordance with the plan details or as directed by the engineer .
the portions of the highway surface to which the marker is to be attached shall be free of dirt curing compound grease oil moisture loose or unsound pavement or any other material which might affect the attachment of the marker to the pavement with the area to which the marker is to be affixed prepared by sand blasting immediately prior to placement of the marker .
the general locations of the pavement markers will be indicated by the plan details or directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide all engineering services necessary to premark and lay out the markers in accordance with the plan details .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval three copies of a report of survey which clearly indicates the locations for the various types of markers to be used along with spacing pattern etc .
specified by the plan details .
said report shall be submitted at least two weeks prior to beginning placement operations .
upon acceptance and approval of the report data the engineer may waive the two week time period noted above .
note is made of the fact that obtaining approval of the above noted report is considered incidental to the work and no time extension or time delay will be considered due to failure to obtain approval of the report .
after placement of any temporary markers the contractor shall maintain them at his expense in such a manner as to provide good definite delineation during hours of both daylight and darkness until num they are overlaid by a subsequent pavement layer or num they are removed as directed by the plans or the engineer or num in case of a detour road until traffic is removed from the detour .
b public convenience and clean up .
the road may be fully open to public travel during the progress of work under this section .
hence when work is to be performed under traffic the contractor shall operate his equipment and store his materials and supplies in such a manner as to cause a minimum of inconvenience to the traveling public .
upon completion of the work under this section any damage to the pavement or other facilities caused by the operation or the contractors equipment shall be repaired by the contractor as directed without additional cost to the state .
section num delineators and hazard markers num num method of measurement .
pavement markers installed as directed and accepted will be measured by counting separately the number of various class and types of markers provided by the plans or proposal .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the number of pavement markers measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective contract unit price bid for each class and type specified by the plans or proposal .
said contract unit prices bid shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the pavement markers removing pavement markers if required and for all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa pavement markers class ____ type ____ per each section num delineators and hazard markers num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing delineators and hazard markers and the installation of such at the locations designated on the plans or directed in conformity with the plans and these specifications .
delineators will be classified by the type installation in accordance with plan details which set forth details of various types of delineator installation .
all delineators will be mounted on posts except as shown on the plans or detailed hereinafter .
at those locations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer delineators meeting the requirements specified hereinafter or on the plans shall be mounted on guardrail .
all old delineators shall be removed and disposed of in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
also at those locations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer delineators meeting the requirements specified hereinafter or on the plans shall be mounted on barrier rail .
hazard markers will be classified according to the type of installation in accordance with plan details .
hazard markers may be composed of sign panel andor reflectors with backing panel mounted on posts or highway structures .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall be new complying with the appropriate sections of division num materials .
special reference is made to section num .
if the hardware used to secure an old delineator is in a condition acceptable to the engineer the contractor at his option may use the old hardware in lieu of new hardware when mounting guardrail mounted delineators item numc .
the barrier rail mounted delineators and mounting hardware shall be new and shall be furnished and maintained in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
the delineators shall have a minimum rectangular reflective area of num inches wide by num inches tall num mm inches wide by num mm tall .
num construction requirements .
a delineator installations .
num .
erecting posts .
the posts for the delineators shall be set at the locations shown on the plans and as directed by the engineer .
posts shall be erected to a true vertical position .
any post damaged or otherwise unsuitable for the work shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at his expense .
posts shall be inserted into the ground to a depth of not less than num inches num mm .
posts may be driven where this can be done without damage to the posts or galvanization .
otherwise at the contractors election posts shall be set in a num inch num mm diameter drilled hole and backfilled with sand and thoroughly flooded with water to insure compaction .
this backfill shall extend up to the existing ground elevation or the contractor section num delineators and hazard markers num may use poured concrete in lieu of sand .
if solid rock is encountered holes shall be drilled and backfilled with concrete to the top of the rock or as directed .
concrete for setting posts shall be class a concrete complying with applicable portions of section num with the following modifications the concrete may be dry batched at a central mixing plant and delivered to the project .
before the concrete is placed water shall be added .
this may be done in small amounts as needed and mixed on a mixing board or in a mortar box .
after water is added the mix shall be used within sixty num minutes .
posts shall be held in proper position until the concrete hardens .
the concrete shall have cured for num hours before any strain is placed on the post .
test cylinders for the concrete will not be required .
where posts are required to be set in concrete medians holes approximately num inches num mm in diameter may be drilled or square holes approximately num inches by num inches num mm by num mm may be cut or formed during placing of the concrete median .
the posts shall be set by driving or other approved means to a depth of not less than num inches num mm below top of the median and to such greater depth as may be required to erect the delineator at the required elevation above the pavement .
after the post has been set the hole up to the bottom of the pavement shall be backfilled and compacted the hole for the depth of the median pavement shall then be filled with one of the appropriate bituminous plant mixes provided in the specifications .
num .
attaching delineators .
after erection of the delineator posts as noted the delineators shall be affixed to the post in the manner shown on the plans .
num .
guardrail mounted delineator .
the delineators shall be acceptably affixed to the guardrail in the manner shown on the plans .
old or reconditioned hardware may be used only with the approval of the engineer .
all delineators shall be new .
num .
barrier rail mounted delineator .
the delineators shall be acceptably affixed to the barrier rail in the manner shown on the plans .
the delineators shall be installed at a maximum spacing of num feet num meters between each delineator or at a closer spacing if shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
b hazard markers installations .
num .
erecting posts .
posts when required shall be installed in the same manner prescribed in subarticle a for delineator posts modified to cover embedment depth of posts shown by plan details .
num .
attachment of markers and panels .
after erection of posts when required markers and panels shall be affixed to posts or structures as required in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
c public convenience and final cleanup .
the road may be fully open to the public travel during the progress of work under this section .
hence when work is to be performed under traffic the contractor shall operate his equipment as well as store materials and supplies in such a manner as to cause a minimum of inconvenience to the traveling public .
special attention is directed to article num .
upon completion of the work under this section the contractor shall remove all surplus and waste material caused by this work and shall restore the area to at least the same condition as was existing prior to commencing of the work .
any damage to slopes pavement etc .
caused by the operation of the contractors equipment shall be repaired as directed without additional cost to the department .
prior to completion of the project the contractor shall clean the installed delineators when directed by the engineer without additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
delineator installations installed as directed and accepted will be measured by counting separately the number of a particular type or types of delineator installations provided by the plans or proposal .
section num object safety markings num guardrail mounted delineator installed as directed and accepted will be measured per each for the number installed .
barrier rail mounted delineator installed as directed and accepted will be measured per each for the number installed .
there will be no measurement of delineators that the contractor must install to replace damaged or missing delineators .
hazard marker installations installed as directed and accepted will be measured by counting separately the number of a particular type or types of hazard marker installations provided by the plans or the proposal .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the number of the particular type of delineator installations ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective unit prices bid for each type installation said unit price bid shall be full compensation for furnishing and installation of the delineators complete in place including posts hardware brackets braces and all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the number of guardrail mounted delineator installations ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective unit price bid for each delineator and shall be full compensation for furnishing installing and cleaning the delineators complete in place including all hardware delineators materials equipment tools labor including the removal of old delineators reconditioning of hardware and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the number of barrier rail mounted delineator installations ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective unit price bid for each delineator and shall be full compensation for furnishing installing and cleaning the delineators complete in place including all hardware delineators materials equipment tools labor and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the number of the particular type of hazard marker installations ordered and accepted measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective unit prices bid for each type installation .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the hazard marker installation complete in place including post or anchors as required by plan details hardware brackets braces and all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa type ____ color delineator installation per each numb type ____ hazard marker installation per each numc guardrail mounted delineator per each numg barrier rail mounted delineator per each specify monodirectional bidirectional etc .
section num object safety markings num description .
this section shall cover the work of providing reflective safety markings on roadway objects and bridges in accordance with the details shown on the plans or directed .
safety marking will be classified according to type in accordance with the following type num a type num marking shall consist of marking an area with alternate diagonal stripes of reflective yellow and a stripe of a nonreflective material .
the size of the area and the width and slope of the stripes along with the reflective color will be shown in the detailed plans or directed by the engineer .
type num a type num marking shall consist of marking an area with reflective white or silverwhite material .
the size and shape of the area of coverage will be shown in the detailed plans or directed by the engineer section num object safety markings num num materials .
a reflective material .
the reflective material furnished for use shall be capable of readily adhering to various types of material especially concrete steel and wood and capable of being applied by brush spray silk screen or other acceptable methods .
the reflective material shall be capable of being applied in one application that is the addition of another material such as beads to produce the required reflectivity will not be acceptable .
reflective requirements when tested by the procedure outlined in paragraph num of federal specifications lsnuma shall be as follows coefficient of retroreflectivity candlepowerfootcandlesquare foot candelasluxm color white or silverwhite num white or silverwhite num yellow incident angle divergence angle .num .num .num .num .num .num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num test panels of the materials shall be submitted for evaluation of the reflective capabilities by the testing engineer .
test panels shall be square num inches x num inches num mm by num mm and shall be made of aluminum prepared with a good quality of white exterior primer .
the reflective material shall be applied at the manufacturers recommended wet film application rate and such rate shall be noted on the back of the test panel .
drying time of the material shall be such that the surface treated shall be dust free within num minutes and dry to touch within num minutes after application .
durability of the material shall be such that no appreciable discoloration cracking crazing or blistering occurs and at least num of the specified reflective requirements is retained after exposed for num hours to atlas twin arc weathering in accordance with astm d num. b nonreflective material .
the nonreflective material furnished for use shall be a flat black color meeting one of the following requirements num .
comply with the requirements noted in subarticle a above except that there will be no reflective requirements and the material shall have a gloss reading of less than num units at an angle of num when measured with a photovoltmeter or a meter capable of giving equal results .
num .
comply with the following requirements a .
capability of readily adhering to a concrete surface .
b .
provide a uniform high degree of hiding power with one application .
c. tests total solids num min .
fssnum weight mass per gallon liter num pounds num kg min .
fssnum viscosity num ku min .
num ku max .
fssnum dry time num hrs .
max .
fssnum with num inches num mm wet film fineness of grind num min .
hegman scale gloss reading num units num max .
photovoltmeter or equivalent num construction requirements .
a preparation of surface .
the surface directed to be treated shall be clean dry and free of any loose laitance or foreign material .
cleaning may be accomplished by the use of soap and water cleaning solvent wire brushes or other acceptable means which will produce the desired results .
section num mile kilometer posts num b application of reflective and nonreflective material .
the material may be placed by brush spray silk screening or other means consistent with the recommendations of the manufacturer which will produce the desired results .
num method of measurement .
the actual area of the various types of object safety markings ordered and accepted will be computed in square feet square meters to the nearest square foot num m from measurements taken on the surface of the prepared area .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the area of object safety markings measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective contract unit price bid for the various types of markings complete in place .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials cleaning and preparation of the surface application of the materials and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa type _____ object safety marking per square foot square meter section num mile kilometer posts num description .
the work under this section shall cover furnishing and erection of mile kilometer post assemblies in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the following specifications .
the mile kilometer post consisting of a mile kilometer marker mounted on a suitable post shall be classified under one of the following types type a consists of a single post with one mile kilometer marker mounted on the post with the marker facing the oncoming traffic .
type b consists of a single post with two mile kilometer markers mounted back to back on the post so as to be seen by traffic in each direction .
in general the mile kilometer posts will be established for the federal and state highways beginning at the south or west state line or at junctions where routes begin .
the mile kilometer posts will then proceed continuously north and east along the routes through the state .
num materials .
materials furnished for use under this section shall comply with the requirements of article num the detailed plans and the following sign panels shall be limited to aluminum with reflective sheeting .
posts shall be of the type designated on the plans .
if the plans offer a choice and once this choice is made and erection begun the contractor will not be permitted to change to another type without written permission of the engineer .
reset units shall utilize existing material insofar as possible .
any replacement parts necessary shall comply with the requirements specified above in this article .
num construction details .
construction details shall be as follows all signs shall be erected and supported in accordance with these specifications and as shown on the plans .
horizontal edges of signs shall be level and faces of signs shall be vertical .
the engineer will mark the location and designate the numerical number for each mile kilometer post .
if manmade obstructions are encountered at the measured marker location such as underground obstructions the engineer may direct one of the following num .
shifting of the mile kilometer post location not to exceed num feet num m either forward or backward to a more suitable location .
section num mile kilometer posts num num .
if underground obstructions occur which can not be bypassed by the method noted next above the engineer may order the deletion of the mile kilometer post from the contract .
however regardless of which of the two methods noted above are used no more than one marker may be omitted and the succeeding mile kilometer post shall be located based on the established mile kilometer post location and not on any adjusted location .
if current construction in progress is at such a stage to warrant delaying installation the engineer may direct the delivery of the complete mile kilometer post assembly to the district engineers office .
under this condition payment for the mile kilometer posts will be made in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numb of the standard specifications .
as soon as the work begins it shall be prosecuted continuously until the work is complete .
positioning of the mile kilometer post relative to the pavement or shoulder edge shall be as shown on the plans .
after installation of the posts and checking for position horizontal and vertical the sign faces shall be secured to the posts in the manner provided by the plans .
no sign posts shall be left standing without a sign face after daylight hours unless warning markers reflectors etc .
are provided to warn the traveling public .
in the same manner no holes or other hazardous condition shall be left without proper warning markers and delineation .
the contractor shall be responsible for any damage done to the signs or posts which occur from any cause prior to acceptance as mentioned in article num .
signs and posts are to be stored under cover and protected from the weather and other damage until they are erected .
mile kilometer post assemblies designated to be reset shall be carefully removed and reinstalled at the designated new location .
removal methods will in general be at the option of the contractor provided such does not damage the assembly .
any damage caused by the contractors operation or on account of carelessness negligence loss of materials or failure to conduct the work properly shall require replacement in kind at no additional cost .
reinstallation shall be in the same manner as for new installation as noted above in this article .
num public convenience and safety .
the contractors attention is directed to article num and the following no highway will be closed to traffic for the purpose of erecting mile kilometer posts .
the contractor will be required without extra compensation to provide adequate and acceptable warning signs temporary guide markers andor flagmen for directing traffic during working hours .
all of the above shall be in accordance with part vi of the current mutcd .
traffic may be shifted to one num foot num m lane allowing the contractor temporary use of one num foot num m lane for the loading and unloading of materials .
no loading or unloading of any kind will be permitted along the lane or lanes designated for highway traffic nor will equipment be allowed to traverse roadways or lanes against normal traffic flow .
in addition should the contractors equipment damage the shoulders ditches slopes or pavement during the performance of this work he shall restore said areas to the original condition without cost to the state .
num acceptance of contracts for mile kilometer posts only .
as soon as the installation of all mile kilometer posts on a route to be marked has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications and to the satisfaction of the engineer the engineer may make final acceptance of such work .
after final acceptance of the mile kilometer posts on a particular route has been made the contractor will be relieved of any further maintenance of the mile kilometer posts for that particular route .
final acceptance of the entire contract will be made as soon as all work required by the contract has been completed and accepted .
num method of measurement .
the measurement of mile kilometer posts will be made for the actual number of complete mile kilometer post assemblies of each designated type installed complete in place .
the measurement of mile kilometer posts reset will be made for the actual number of complete mile kilometer post assemblies regardless of type removed and reinstalled complete in place .
section num roadway signs num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted mile kilometer posts furnished as directed and measured as noted above will be paid for at the respective contract unit price bid for each of the items of the contract which shall be full compensation for the furnishing and processing of all materials fabrication erection and assembling or assembly and delivery to the designated location transportation including excavation backfilling and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the accepted mile kilometer posts reset measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the removal and reinstallation of the mile kilometer post assembly which includes preparation of the new area restoration of the area disposal of any surplus or excess material and for all equipment tools labor and any miscellaneous hardware and materials or incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa mile kilometer post type ____ per each numb mile kilometer post reset ____ per each section num roadway signs num description .
a general this section shall cover the work of furnishing and erecting roadway signs of the various types sizes wording marking etc .
detailed by the plans in accordance with the latest edition of the mutcd except as modified herein or by the plan details .
the type and number of signs sign supports backing frames when required foundations and reflectorization to be furnished and installed shall be as detailed on the plans .
concrete foundations when required shall be constructed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
b types and classes of signs the items of work for roadway signs will indicate whether the sign is of a reflectorized or nonreflectorized type and the kind of backing material .
sheeting used in the fabrication of sign faces shall be one of the following types unless required otherwise on the plans or in the proposal section num roadway signs num types and descriptions of sign sheeting type i mediumintensity retroreflective sheeting engineering grade type in nonreflective sheeting type ii mediumhighintensity retroreflective sheeting super engineering grade type iii highintensity retroreflective sheeting type iv highintensity retroreflective sheeting microprismatic type v superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting microprismatic type vi elastomeric highintensity retroreflective sheeting without adhesive microprismatic type vii sheeting previously classified as type vii has been reclassified as type viii .
the designation of type vii has been discontinued .
astm d num type viii superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting astm d num table num microprismatic type ix veryhighintensity retroreflective sheeting microprismatic type x sheeting previously classified as type x has been reclassified as type viii .
the designation of type x has been discontinued .
astm d num type xi superhighintensity unmetalized cube corner microprismatic retroreflective sheeting .
astm d num table num classes and descriptions of signs class num nonreflectorized background with type iii reflectorized demountable copy class numa nonreflectorized background with nonreflectorized demountable copy class num type iii or iv reflectorized sheeting background with the same type reflectorized sheeting demountable or cutout copy class numa type iii or iv reflectorized sheeting background with nonreflectorized demountable or cutout copy for multiple extruded panels type xi reflectorized sheeting background with digital printing is also allowable .
class num nonreflectorized background with screen copy class num type iii or iv reflectorized background with screen copy class num type iv or viii reflectorized sheeting background with screen copy class num type iii or iv reflectorized sheeting background with type viii or ix reflectorized sheeting demountable or cutout copy for multiple extruded panels type xi reflectorized sheeting background with digital printing is also allowable .
class num type iv viii or ix reflectorized sheeting background with screen copy class num type viii or ix reflectorized sheeting background with screen copy when the contractor has the choice of selecting the sheeting type within a respective class the mixing of different sheeting types on signs on the same project will not be allowed unless shown otherwise on the plans or in the proposal .
c methods of fabrication .
in addition to the classes noted above signs will be designated by the method of fabrication as follows num .
flat panel .
section num roadway signs num a sign face which can be fabricated from a single sheet of material normally not in excess of num feet num mm in width .
num .
multiple flat panel .
a sign face which because of size can not be fabricated from a single sheet of material .
these panel sections shall be fabricated from sheets not less than num feet num mm in width except that only one sheet for any one sign may be cut to less than num feet num mm in width to fabricate signs which are not multiples of num feet num mm in width .
multiple flat panel sign sections shall run from top edge to bottom edge of sign face without horizontal joints except that signs greater than num feet num m in height may have a horizontal joint but no sign shall have more than one horizontal joint .
the use of material sheets of greater width than the minimum num feet num mm noted to form sign panels will be acceptable however the backing support etc .
must conform to the plan requirements for this classification of panel .
all panel joints shall be provided with backing strips firmly affixed to the sign to keep the panel sections in proper alignment as detailed on the plans .
num .
multiple extruded panels multiple panel signs may be made of extruded sections .
all extruded sections shall be num inches num mm wide mounted horizontally and shall have no vertical joints .
all panels shall be flat and straight .
multiple extruded panel signs shall be limited to class num and class numa signs .
exceptions will be made to allow num inch num mm wide extruded sections in cases where the height of a sign or exit panel dictates .
there shall not be more than one num inch num mm wide panel allowed per individual sign or exit panel .
num .
aluminum laminated panels .
these sign face panels shall consist of sheet aluminum laminated to a honeycomb core sealed completely around the perimeter with an extruded aluminum frame to form a surface of the length width and depth required .
num .
aluminum louvered panels .
these sign face panels shall consist of aluminum louvers assembled in such a manner as to provide a rigid sign panel which will have a wind loading normal to the face of the sign of at least num percent less than that of a solid panel of the same size and yet provide an opaque background when viewed from an angle of num or less below the horizontal line of sight .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall comply with the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the requirements noted herein in this section .
special reference is made to section num for sign materials section num for concrete section num for steel reinforcement and section num for structural steel .
sampling and inspection of sign materials will be done in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum procedures for sampling and inspection of roadway signs and overhead sign structures .
design drawings covering details for legend and message layouts for sign panels will be shown on the plans .
any deviation from details shown in the plans or furnished the successful bidder must be approved by the engineer .
letter series shall be the modified series e as approved by the u.s. department of transportation federal highway administration unless otherwise provided by plan details .
unless otherwise noted by plan details the corners of class num num and num signs may be square but the borders shall be rounded with radius as shown on the plans class num num num num and num signs shall have rounded corners in accordance plan details unless otherwise provided .
in the event the plans do not contain a detailed layout for a specific sign such as a route marker the layout shall be as approved by the engineer .
num construction requirements .
a general .
num .
all signs shall be erected and supported in accordance with these specifications and as shown on the plans .
horizontal edges of sign shall be level and faces of signs shall be vertical .
section num roadway signs num num .
after being authorized by the department to proceed with the work the sign contractor shall be required to begin with the erection of signs on that portion of the project that as determined by the engineer will best serve the traveling public .
in most instances sign work will of necessity be performed while the roadway is open to traffic .
it is not intended that any section of road be left unmarked or in a hazardous condition therefore the contractor shall plan his operation in such a manner as to accomplish the following all of which shall be considered an integral part of the work required under this section .
a .
work shall be performed in such a manner as not to be hazardous to the traveling public .
b .
existing signs shall not be removed until the new replacement signs are installed and completed .
c. no sign posts particularly adjacent to the shoulders shall be left standing without a sign face after daylight hours unless warning markers etc .
are provided to warn the traveling public .
in the same manner no holes or other hazardous condition shall be left without proper warning markers or delineation .
d. once the work of installation of a sign structure is begun the work shall be diligently prosecuted until its completion .
num .
when a section of a project is completed to the state of use the contractor may be required to begin erection of signs within ten days after receipt of notice from the engineer even though the work on the roadway may not be completed and accepted by the state .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for any damage done to signs or posts which may occur from any cause save an unavoidable natural cause until the work is complete and accepted by the state .
signs and posts are to be stored under cover and protected from the weather and other damage until they are erected .
num .
the plans indicate the extent and general arrangement of signs .
the plans are to be used for the general guidance of the contractor and any commission or omission shown or implied shall not be the cause for deviating from the intent of the plans and specifications .
if any departures from the plans and specifications are deemed necessary by the contractor details of such departures and the reasons therefore shall be submitted to the engineer for approval .
the decision of the engineer shall be final and mandatory .
b staking out signs .
the contractor shall not order posts until the length has been established in the field .
if geometric controls are not set up the engineer shall stake out the location of each sign along the work .
the contractor however will be required to check all dimensions and clearances measured from such stakes and shall thereafter become responsible for orientation elevation offset and level of all signs erected .
if geometric controls are set up the contractor shall stake out the location of each sign along the work .
the contractor shall not order posts until the engineer has reviewed the sign locations as staked .
the contractor will be required to provide all dimensions and clearances measured from such stakes and shall thereafter become responsible for orientation elevation offset and level of all signs erected c positioning of sign faces .
positioning of sign faces shall be such as to eliminate or minimize specular mirror like reflection and provide maximum readability .
ground mounted signs shall be erected so that the face is truly vertical and at an angle to the roadway centerline as detailed by the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
on curves sign faces shall be oriented so as to be most effective both day and night to avoid specular reflection .
overhead signs shall be erected so that the sign face is at the vertical angle with the roadway indicated by the plans or directed and is in the proper position over designated traffic lanes .
all sign panels shall be so mounted that the tops of panels or the messages on shaped panels are truly horizontal .
vertical and horizontal positioning of sign faces shall be as detailed by the plans or directed to provide the clearance and height required by mutcd or noted on the plans .
d installation of ground mounted sign supports .
num .
general .
the size number and type of supports shall be shown on the plans .
the support shall not extend above the sign panel but in no case shall the support be less than num inches num mm above the uppermost stringer mounting bolt .
cutting steel supports to length after they have section num roadway signs num been galvanized will be permitted provided the cutting is limited to sawing and the damaged area is regalvanized as shown on the plans or directed .
num .
erection of posts .
a .
general .
posts shall be installed as indicated by plans .
the length of the posts or supports shall be determined as noted in this section .
installation shall be accomplished in such a manner that the entire post is installed as one unit unless shown otherwise by the plans to insure proper alignment etc .
of the post .
all posts shall be checked with a spirit level for vertical alignment .
posts with breakaway features may be adjusted slightly by the use of special shims as indicated by plan details major adjustments shall require removal and resetting .
when breakaway features are incorporated into post assemblies the requirements noted in this item shall be complied with to insure their functioning properly under field conditions .
all tubular posts after installation shall be provided with a proper cap .
b .
foundations .
when foundations require the use of concrete encasements the posts shall be installed in predug holes and backfilled with class a concrete .
reinforcement if required shall be as detailed on the plans .
when plans and soil conditions permit the installation of posts by driving a method of driving will be required that will not damage the posts .
any damage in driving shall be cause for rejecting the post and requiring it to be replaced .
in lieu of driving the contractor may elect to install the posts by predug holes and backfilling with sand .
the sand backfill shall be thoroughly flooded with water to insure good compaction .
if solid rock is encountered the posts shall be placed in drilled holes and backfilled with concrete to the top of the rock as shown on the plans or directed and the remainder backfilled as noted above .
c. breakaway features .
num general .
unless otherwise noted in the detailed plans all bolts nuts and washers used in the breakaway features shall be high strength galvanized complying with the requirements of article num .
the functioning of the breakaway design is dependent upon the proper installation of these bolts so that the residual tension specified by the plans is obtained .
to accomplish this the following requirements shall apply all bolts nuts and washers of each diameter bolt required in the work shall be from the same manufacturer .
bolts used in each type connection hinge fuse or base shall be so sized that all bolts for a particular type connection in a support structure are of the same length .
said length shall be the minimum plan specified length plus any additional length necessary to provide at least two exposed threads on the bolt after the connection has been properly tightened .
the torque necessary to obtain the residual bolt tension required by the plans shall be determined by a bolttension calibrator .
the department will provide the bolttension calibrator for calibration of the contractors torque wrench for the various sizes of bolts .
the contractor shall supply five sets of bolts nuts and washers of each diameter to be used in the work for determination of the bolt torque necessary to obtain the residual bolt tension specified by the plans .
num setting of bolt tension .
all posts and sign panels shall be in place prior to setting of the bolt tension for the base connections and the post fuse and hinge plates .
after completion of the sign panel installation all bolts nuts and washers used in the hinge plates fuse plates and base connections during the shipping and installation of the support assembly shall be removed and replaced with approved high strength bolts nuts and washers .
section num roadway signs num prior to use of the h.s .
bolts etc .
they shall be checked to insure they are free turning and are lubricated with a bees wax based lubricant approved by the engineer some commercial wax products have proven satisfactory .
installation of the bolts etc .
may then proceed using the appropriate calibrated torque wrenches for the size bolt being installed .
all lubricating and torquing of the h.s .
bolts and nuts shall be performed in the presence of an inspector .
any bolt not installed in the presence of an inspector shall be removed and examined to insure the nut is free turning for the full thread length any binding shall be cause for rejection lubricated and reinstalled as noted .
e erection of framework and sign panels .
framework for erecting sign panels shall be assembled and attached to the ground supports as provided on the approved drawings .
all horizontal members of supporting frames shall be truly horizontal and at correct height so that the bottom of the sign shall be at the height above pavement specified and proper horizontal position .
erection of sign panels shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner .
sign panels shall be attached to the supporting frames in accordance with the recommendations of the sign panel manufacturer .
all nuts bolts screws and set screws shall be tightened securely .
signs shall be inspected at night by the engineer and if specular mirror like reflection is apparent on any signs its positioning shall be adjusted by the contractor .
when sign panels are noted to be reinstalled on another support assembly removal of the old panel from its supports shall be done in such a manner as to prevent damage to the panels remounting shall be accomplished in the same manner noted for new panels .
it is intended to allow the use of dismantled hardware in remounting of the old panels however if the old hardware is unusable the contractor shall provide the appropriate new hardware necessary to install the panel .
f removal of existing signs .
the contractor shall dismantle and remove all existing signs designated to be removed however when they are to be replaced with another sign the new sign shall be in place before the old sign is removed unless otherwise ordered by the engineer .
unless noted otherwise on the plans the contractor will be allowed to keep all sign panels that are designated for removal .
all materials to be retained by the state panels supports and hardware shall be removed in such a manner as to prevent undue damage and the materials stacked and stored at a site on the project designated by the engineer for later pickup by others .
care shall be taken during removal handling and storage to protect the treated surfaces especially sign faces hardware shall be bagged or boxed posts especially those with breakaway features shall be removed so that the bases are kept intact insofar as practical .
any damage to or loss of removed materials due to negligence on the part of the contractors removal methods shall be cause for ordering replacement in kind for the damaged or lost items .
any posts or mounting supports to be removed shall either be pulled or removed or at the discretion of the contractor cut off and removed to a depth of not less than num foot num m below the actual ground surface and the area backfilled with suitable material .
the area shall be cleaned and dressed out in a manner consistent with the surrounding area .
g cleanup of area .
the contractor shall be required to remove all rejected and unused materials and debris from the right of way .
he shall restore shoulders and slope including grass to the original condition .
excess excavation will be disposed of off the right of way at the contractors expense unless otherwise authorized by the engineer and other cleaning up as may be necessary to insure the effectiveness and neat appearance of the work .
h inspections .
attention is directed to the fact that sign panels as well as supports must be approved before installation will be permitted .
in addition to normal inspections particular attention will be directed to inspection of the unit after installation to insure that any damage caused by the installation operation or any defect which will affect the serviceability is promptly corrected .
attention is directed to the special inspection requirements noted in subitem numdnumc when setting base plate hinge plate and fuse plate bolt tensions .
section num roadway sign relocation and renovation num num method of measurement .
completed and accepted sign face panels will be measured in square feet square meters between the outside edges of the signs includes frame and border .
installed and accepted posts will be measured in feet meters which will be the entire length of the installed post from tip to tip and includes any breakaway feature .
unless a pay item is provided in the plans or proposal for the removal of existing roadway signs the removal etc .
of such signs will be considered incidental to the work and no measurement for pay purposes will be made .
however when the removal of existing signs is designated for pay purposes measurement will be made on a lump sum basis for all signs designated to be removed .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
sign panels measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square foot square meter which shall be full compensation for the sign face complete in place on its support assembly and includes all costs necessary for obtaining the material processing all copy symbols legend and the like and for all hardware necessary to furnish and install the sign on its supports in accordance with plan details and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
posts measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter which shall be full compensation for the particular size post involved completely installed in its proper position .
said unit price bid shall include all costs necessary to obtain materials fabrication processing excavation erecting backfilling backfill material concrete steel clearing all hardware and miscellaneous parts necessary to furnish and install the post in accordance with plan details and for all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
removal of existing signs under item numc measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid which shall be full compensation for the dismantling removal of the designated sign assemblies or portion of the sign assembly the salvaging of materials or reuse when designated the stacking or storage of the salvaged materials in a designated location on the project and for any materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa class sign panels per square foot square meter numb roadway sign post description size per linear foot meter numc removal of existing roadway signs per lump sum appropriate class aluminum flat steel flat aluminum multiple flat aluminum multiple extruded steel multiple flat aluminum laminated aluminum louvered approximate thickness of panel material desired .
section num roadway sign relocation and renovation num description .
this section shall cover the work of removing and relocating designated existing ground mounted roadway signs .
said work requires the satisfactory removal of the existing signs their supports and foundation and the reinstallation of the sign assembly on their supports and new foundations .
this section shall also cover the work of renovating designated existing ground mounted roadway signs .
the renovation may include but not be limited to cleaning the sign replacing the sign copy section num roadway sign relocation and renovation num replacing sign panels and reworking the support system .
the plans will show the extent of work to be performed under this item .
num materials .
materials involved in the work under this section will be basically the reuse of existing signs and their supports .
any replacement or new materials required shall comply with the appropriate requirements of article num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the relocation of existing signs shall in general require the removal of a complete sign assembly panel or panels and supports and the reinstallation of the assembly at a new designated location .
the method of removal shall be basically that of the contractor provided such does not damage the assembly any damage shall require replacement of the damaged parts using materials complying with the provisions of article num or repair of the parts as directed without additional compensation .
care shall be taken in removing the concrete from the support stubs so as to preclude undue damage to the stub .
any damage which will affect the reinstallation procedure shall be repaired as directed .
note is made of the fact that the shoe assemblies are matched plates and must be retained as such otherwise the unit will not function as designed .
in addition the shoe assembly shall be reinstalled in the same manner prescribed in subarticle numd .
any support foundation which can not be satisfactorily removed may be left in place provided it will not be in the way of construction and it is removed to a depth of not less than num foot num m below the actual ground surface and the area backfilled as directed with suitable material .
the renovation of existing roadway signs may include work to the existing sign sign structure or sign appurtenances .
the plans will show the signs and the work to be done to each sign included under the renovation item .
any dismantling of the sign assembly as well as reassembly to be done under either the relocation or renovation shall be performed in such a manner as to preclude damaging of the assembly materials .
the sign panels are essential for traffic control hence unless the road is closed to traffic they shall not be down more than eight hours and in no case overnight .
this may require the use of temporary supports during the relocation of the permanent supports .
any temporary support must be approved before use .
b installation of sign assemblies .
the installation of the relocated supports and panels shall be as prescribed in article num for new signs .
the existing supports may be reused provided they are not damaged during removal operations or the contractor may furnish new supports at his option .
after completion of the reinstallation the sign panels shall be cleaned with approved cleaning material .
num method of measurement .
measurement of relocated ground mounted roadway signs will be on a lump sum basis for all signs designated to be relocated .
measurement of renovated ground mounted roadway signs will be on a lump sum basis for all signs designated on the plans to be renovated .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
complete and accepted relocated ground mounted roadway sign assemblies measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid which shall be full compensation for the removal and relocation of the sign assembly panel and supports complete in place on its supports at the designated locations for the cleaning of the panels for furnishing all hardware or other material necessary for the reinstallation of the sign assembly for the satisfactory removal and reinstallation of the supports including the excavation and backfill of the areas old area and section num permanent barricade num new area of the installation disposal of excess materials for new foundations for supports and for all other materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
complete and accepted renovated ground mounted roadway sign assemblies measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid which shall be full compensation for renovating the sign assembly according to plan details and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa roadway sign relocation per lump sum numb roadway sign renovation per lump sum section num permanent barricade num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing a complete permanent barricade system at the location shown on the plans or designated and in conformity with plan requirements and these specifications .
num materials .
materials furnished for use shall be new complying with the requirements specified on the plans and with the appropriate sections of division num materials with special reference made to sections num num and num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all the work performed in the installation of the permanent barricade system shall be performed in a competent workmanlike manner .
b erecting posts .
posts shall be erected as specified in item numanum unless shown otherwise on the plans .
c attaching panels and hazard markers .
panels and hazard markers for the barricade shall be fastened to the rails in the manner shown on the plans .
the reflectorized type iii sheeting may be affixed to the panels either before or after the panels have been fastened to the rails .
num method of measurement .
permanent barricades installed as directed and accepted will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num foot num m from end to end of each continuous installation .
no separate payment will be made for any item or part of the barricade system .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
accepted permanent barricade installed measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract bid price per linear foot meter for permanent barricade which shall be payment in full for the furnishing and installing of the barricade complete in place including posts rails hardware panels reflectorized sheeting and hazard markers and all equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa permanent barricades per linear foot meter section num overhead roadway sign structures num section num overhead roadway sign structures num description a general .
this section shall cover the work of designing furnishing fabricating and erecting a complete permanent overhead sign supporting structure less sign panels complete in place ready for attachment of sign panels and includes such auxiliary equipment as maintenance walkways and illumination system and equipment for lighting of sign faces when such is specified by plan details .
such structures shall be designed in accordance with requirements noted hereinafter and plan details to the lines grades and dimensions designated on the plans .
the total length and upright height of the structures shall be verified by the contractor before submitting the designs and details .
the contractor shall prepare and submit as soon as possible after issuance of the notice to proceed all required design drawings design computations and other necessary supporting data for approval .
b design fabrication and installation .
the overhead roadway sign structures shall be designed fabricated and installed in accordance with the requirements given in section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting .
illuminating systems when required by the plans shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of section num and the plan details .
drawings for electrical details shall be incorporated into the structural detail sheets .
num materials .
materials shall comply in general with the requirements given in the applicable sections of division num materials and in particular to the following section num sign materials .
section num sign lighting materials and services .
section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting .
materials shall also comply with requirements that may be given on the plans .
six sets of lists for all electrical items proposed for use shall be submitted for approval .
where the contractor proposes to use materials other than those specified he shall furnish complete descriptive data including their performance capacities lighting curves and such other information as may be pertinent or required by the engineer .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall submit for inspection and comparison samples of the proposed substitute items at no cost to the state .
materials and equipment installed or used without approval of the engineer shall be at the risk of subsequent rejection .
the state will not be liable for materials purchased work performed or any delay incurred due to failure of the contractor to secure prior approval .
failure of the electrical engineer to note unsatisfactory material as received will not relieve the contractor of responsibility .
manufacturers guarantees or warranties on materials customarily provided shall be delivered to the engineer upon receipt of materials .
num construction requirements .
a structures .
the overhead roadway sign structures shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting .
the special brackets braces etc .
which support the auxiliary equipment light fixtures and catwalks and to which the sign panels are affixed are classified as an integral part of the structure and shall be installed as noted in this article or detailed on the plans or approved drawings .
section num overhead roadway sign structures num b electrical .
num .
scope .
the electrical work shall consist of furnishing and installing electrical equipment as shown on the detail plans and required by section num so as to provide a complete sign lighting system ready for operation and connected to the utility companys service .
num .
excavation .
excavation for underground conduit runs shall include removal and satisfactory disposal of all surplus or unused material .
the excavation required for the installation of conduit and other appliances shall be performed in such a manner as to cause the least possible injury to the streets sidewalks and other improvements .
the trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper installation of the electrical appliances and foundations .
excavating shall not be performed until immediately before installation of conduit and other appliances .
the material from the excavation shall be placed in a position where the least damage and obstruction to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the least interference with the surface drainage will occur .
excavations after backfilling shall be kept well filled and maintained in a smooth and well drained condition until permanent repairs are made .
improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavement bituminous surfacing base material and any other improvements removed broken or damaged by the contractor shall be replaced or reconstructed with the same kind of materials as found on the work or with materials of equal quality .
the new work shall be left in a serviceable condition satisfactory to the engineer .
the contractor shall not allow any water to accumulate in any excavated areas .
where large rocks are encountered in conduit trenches they shall be removed to a depth of at least three inches num mm below bottom of trench and a three inch num mm layer of sand or earth shall be placed in the bottom of the trench .
num .
backfilling of excavations .
all suitable material removed for conduit trenches shall be used in backfill .
aggregate larger than three inches num mm shall not be in contact with conduit .
compaction shall be in accordance with standard specifications for backfill material .
num .
insulation testing .
a test of all lighting secondary circuits to ground shall be made at the servicelighting control units on the load side of the contactors or circuit breakers for each lighting circuit .
these shall be made with a num volt dc megger tester .
any reading of num ohms to ground or higher is satisfactory .
any reading of less than num ohms to ground will require the contractor to isolate and identify the source of the low reading and correct the problem .
a record shall be made at the time of the testing showing the type tester actually used the serial number of the particular tester the circuit identification and the insulation readings obtained .
this report shall be forwarded to the engineer for review .
the report shall be signed by an electrical contractor that has a licensee issued by the alabama board of electrical contractors .
num .
ground resistance testing a test shall be made of the ground rods using a null balance earth tester with auxiliary ground rods placed no closer than num feet and num feet num m and num m respectively from the tested ground rod .
a reading of num ohms or less is satisfactory .
any reading over num ohms will require the installation of additional ground rods to be placed in a pattern as directed by the engineer .
a report shall be made at the time of testing showing an identification of the circuit and the resistance obtained .
this report shall be forwarded to the engineer for review .
the report shall be signed by an electrical contractor that has a licensee issued by the alabama board of electrical contractors .
num method of measurement .
overhead roadway sign structures will be measured separately by individual structures complete in place and fully operational .
sign panels will be measured and paid for under section num with the installation mounting etc .
performed as provided therein .
section num overhead roadway sign structure renovation and relocation num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
complete and accepted overhead roadway sign structures measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid for each structure .
this payment shall be full compensation for all work and materials except sign panels necessary for an operational sign complete in place on its supports at the designated locations .
the contract lump sum price shall also include all costs for designing the sign structure constructing foundations and furnishing and installing all other materials including electrical materials for the completion of the sign .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa overhead roadway sign structure no .
___ per lump sum section num overhead roadway sign structure renovation and relocation num description .
this section shall cover the work of renovating designated existing overhead roadway sign structures .
the renovation may include but not be limited to refurbishing the sign panels reworking or replacing the electrical system and reworking the support system .
the plans will show the extent of work to be performed under this item .
this section shall also cover the work of relocating or partially relocating designated existing overhead roadway sign structures .
the relocation may include but not be limited to removal or relocation of the existing signs their supports and foundations and the reinstallation of the sign assemblies on their supports with new foundations as detailed on the plans .
the plans will show the extent of work to be performed under this item .
if new supports or foundations are required the contractor shall be responsible for the same design requirements as specified in article num .
num materials .
materials involved in the work under this section will be basically the reuse of existing signs and their supports .
no bolts nuts or washers which are removed shall be reused new materials shall be equal to or better in design than the old materials .
any replacement or new materials required shall comply with the appropriate requirements of article num .
num construction requirements .
a renovation .
the renovation of existing overhead roadway sign structures may include work to the existing sign sign structure or sign appurtenances .
the plans will show the work to be done under the renovation item .
after completion of the renovation the sign panels shall be cleaned with approved cleaning material .
b relocation .
the relocation of existing overhead roadway sign structures shall in general require the removal of a complete sign assembly panels lights walkway and supports the construction of a new foundation and the reinstallation of the assembly at a new designated location .
the contractor shall notify the project manager by letter with a copy to the bridge engineer of the date of the relocation of a sign structure .
this notification shall be given no later than two weeks before the removal of the structure .
the contractor shall arrange for the welds of relocated structures to be inspected and tested by an aws certified welding inspector in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
the inspection and testing of the welds shall be done after the installation of the sign structure .
the method of removal shall be that of the contractor however any damage to the sign structure caused by improper removal procedures shall be repaired by the contractor without section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num additional compensation .
damaged members or parts shall be repaired using materials complying with the provisions of article num or as directed .
any dismantling of the sign assembly as well as reassembly shall be performed in such a manner as to preclude damaging the assembly materials .
structure foundations being abandoned shall be removed to a depth of not less than one foot below the existing ground surface and the area backfilled as directed with suitable material .
the installation of the relocated overhead sign structures shall be as prescribed in article num for new structures .
after completion of the reinstallation the sign panels shall be cleaned with approved cleaning material .
num method of measurement .
measurement of renovated overhead roadway sign structures will be on a lump sum basis for each individual structure renovated complete in place and fully operational .
measurement of relocated overhead roadway sign structures will be on a lump sum basis for each individual structure relocated complete in place and fully operational .
any new sign panels needed will be measured and paid for under section num with the installation mounting etc .
performed as outlined therein .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
complete and accepted renovated overhead roadway sign structures measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum bid for each sign structure which shall be full compensation for renovating the sign structure according to plan details and for all materials except sign panel equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
complete and accepted relocated overhead roadway sign structures measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price bid for each sign structure which shall be full compensation for all work and materials except sign panels necessary for the removal and relocation of the sign structure panel lights walkway and supports complete in place on its supports at the designated locations for the cleaning of the panels for furnishing all hardware or other material necessary for the reinstallation of the sign structure for the satisfactory removal of the existing footings if necessary including the excavation and backfill of the areas old area and new area of the installation disposal of excess materials for new foundations for supports for inspection and testing of welds and for all other materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa overhead roadway sign structure no .
_____ renovation per lump sum numb overhead roadway sign structure no .
_____ relocation per lump sum section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num description .
this section shall cover the design fabrication and construction of overhead roadway sign luminaire traffic signal and traffic surveillance support structures .
all designs and details shall be approved before actual fabrication of a structure is started .
within num days after the award of the contract the contractor shall notify the project manager by letterof the names addresses and telephone numbers of all structural fabricators along with the fabricators proposed fabrication schedule .
the notification shall be furnished for all structural fabricators that are subcontractors to a structural fabricator .
section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num num materials .
a general .
materials shall comply in general with the requirements given in the applicable sections of division num materials .
particular structural material and fabrication requirements are given in section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting .
materials shall also comply with requirements that may be given on the plans .
concrete for foundations shall comply with the requirements of section num for class a concrete concrete .
reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of section num steel reinforcement and shall be gradenum num billet steel .
b overhead roadway sign structures .
overhead sign structures shall be constructed of steel only .
c traffic signal poles .
unless otherwise shown on the plans traffic signal poles shall be steel poles .
d luminaire and traffic surveillance poles .
unless otherwise shown on the plans luminaire and surveillance poles may be constructed of steel concrete glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp or aluminum .
num design .
a general .
num .
design data .
the details of pole foundations for traffic signals section num and roadway lighting section num are shown on the plans .
when details of a structure or foundation are not shown on the plans or if the contractor proposes alternate structure or foundation details the contractor shall submit complete designs and details .
geotechnical borings may be shown on the plans .
these borings may not be representative of the actual conditions encountered throughout the project .
the contractor shall be responsible for any assumptions made from these borings .
the contractor shall obtain any additional geotechnical data that is necessary for determining the actual subsurface conditions .
num .
design requirements .
all structures shall be designed in accordance with the requirements given in the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num edition and the requirements given in this section .
fatigue importance factors shall be as follows structure fatigue importance factor category strain poles no fatigue mast arm poles lighting poles less than num ft. in height category ii with num year service life high mast poles sign structures overhead sign bridges lighting poles num ft. or greater in height category i wind pressures shall be calculated in accordance with appendix c alternate method for wind pressures .
minimum design wind speed shall be num miles per hour num kmhr for mobile and baldwin counties and num miles per hour num kmhr elsewhere in the state .
the combined stress ratio csr shall be less than or equal to num for all load cases .
num .
foundations .
foundations shall be located to avoid damaging existing underground installations and avoid conflicting with known future installations such as pipes conduits guardrail posts lighting standards etc .
the design shall be sufficient to provide a minimum factor of safety of num against overturning and torsion induced displacement .
section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num b submittal of designs and details .
details shall be submitted on six sets of prints of drawings including foundation details for sign structures when required .
each sheet shall be stamped and signed with the original signature of a professional engineer licensed in the state of alabama and not employed by the state of alabama .
the details shall include fabrication requirements such as the welding requirements for sign frames and tensioning and detensioning procedures for prestressed concrete poles .
design computations shall be submitted in duplicate .
each set of design computations shall be prepared stamped and signed by a professional engineer registered in the state of alabama and not employed by the state of alabama .
the design computations shall address all members connections welds bolts etc .
anchor bolts and foundations .
the designer shall note on the design computations where the design of each member meets the design requirements and deflection tolerances .
design computations shall include all formulas used and a copy of all calculations andor computer printouts for each structure that cover all members connections welds etc .
footings and details necessary for a complete structure design .
where computer generated designs are used the printouts shall consist of the applied loadings structure geometry effective wind area and location of attachments sign panels signals and light fixtures component sizes moments shears reactions component forces component stresses allowable component stresses combined stress ratios and deflections for each group loading specified in the aashto sign specifications .
the method of solution used by the computer program including all formulas used shall be submitted .
for overhead roadway sign structures only the contractor shall furnish one set of reproducible drawings mylar or equal on standard size plan sheets num x num mm x num mm for record and distribution purposes after final approval .
c drilled shaft foundations .
drilled shaft foundations shall be placed only in undisturbed material or in fill made by controlled compaction .
drilled shaft foundations for cantilever structures shall be designed to resist the torsional effects of the wind loads .
d concrete spread footings .
footings shall be placed only in undisturbed material or in fill areas constructed by controlled compaction .
footings for cantilever structures shall be designed to resist the torsional effects of the wind loads .
e direct embedment of support .
prestressed concrete poles shall be installed by direct embedment in the ground .
gfrp poles may be installed by direct embedment in the ground .
the design and details of the direct embedment shall be submitted as working drawings for structures .
the required embedment is the responsibility of the contractor however the minimum depth of embedment shall not be less than lnum where l is the above ground length of the upright member or pole .
f pile foundations .
pile foundations may be required in areas where the upper soil layers will not support a drilled shaft or spread footing .
the foundations may be designed with steel piles or prestressed concrete piles .
however steel piles shall not be used in brackish or salt water locations in mobile or baldwin counties or other locations with corrosive environments .
piles shall meet the requirements of section num piling .
g anchor bolts .
foundation anchor bolts for overhead highway sign structures and high mast lighting assemblies shall be charpy vnotch tested in accordance with the requirement provided in section num .
anchor bolts shall be a minimum one inch in diameter .
overhead sign structures with single pole uprights shall be anchored with at least eight anchor bolts in each base plate .
overhead sign structures with double pole truss type uprights shall be anchored with at least four anchor bolts in each base plate .
traffic signal poles and luminaire poles shall be anchored with at least four anchor bolts .
high mast lighting assembly poles shall be anchored with at least eight anchor bolts .
section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num h base plates .
all base plates shall be designed by calculating the bending moment about a line that is taken at the edge of the upright and is the shortest diagonal across the plate .
the required thickness of the plate shall be based on the section modulus at the diagonal line using num of the width of that line .
the allowable stresses for a base plate shall be num of the yield strength of the base plate for plates that are designed for the yield moment of the upright or num of the allowable stresses for the group loading for plates that are designed for the actual upright service load moment .
i overhead roadway sign structures .
all overhead sign structures shall be supported by a reinforced concrete footing .
the overhead portion of the structure shall be attached to the footing by means of base plates and anchor bolts .
the vertical dead load deflection of cantilever sign structures shall not exceed lnum where l is the cantilever length in inches millimeters .
the vertical support for a cantilever structure shall be a round uniform diameter tube which has adequate moment of inertia without additional reinforcement to limit the dead load deflection of the arm including the deflection caused by bending in the vertical support to lnum and to a maximum angular deflection of the centerline of the upright at the top in relation to the centerline at its base of num .
horizontal trusses span type shall be limited to a vertical dead plus ice load deflection of lnum where l is the total truss length center to center of supports in inches millimeters .
a uniform camber in accordance with the requirements of section num of the aashto sign specifications shall be provided for all horizontal portions of a structure .
the use of full penetration circumferential welds on upright poles is not allowed .
horizontal trusses of triangular crosssection are not allowed .
flange plates that are used for splicing overhead truss chords and uprights shall be designed using the requirements given for base plates .
design and basic member shape once selected shall be used throughout the project .
the detail drawings shall list all astm or aashto material specifications to be used for all the structural elements .
brackets shall be provided for the mounting of the required flat panel signs .
these brackets shall permit mounting the sign faces at an angle of five num degrees from vertical except for louvered panels which shall be mounted vertically .
this five degree angle shall be obtained by rotating the front top edge of the sign away from the vertical position .
all brackets shall be of lengths sufficient for the heights of the signs being supported .
where required by the contract plans tubular structures shall have electrical outlets provided on a front chord member and shall have hand holes within twelve inches of the base of vertical supports .
if necessary in order to comply with design requirements compensation for loss in section shall be accomplished by reinforcement .
maintenance walkways when required by the plans shall be provided in front of the lower front chord.no part of the walkway shall be located so as to obstruct normal viewing of the lower portion of the sign .
j traffic signal poles .
the structural analysis of a pole shall be made at the base of the pole and at every tenth point interval up the pole .
the maximum deflection of the centerline at the top of the pole in relation to the centerline at its base due to the moment load of the signal and support bracket shall not exceed two and one half percent of the pole height .
calculations shall be submitted to verify this deflection .
at intersections involving four traffic signal poles each pole shall be designed equally for the most severe loading condition at the intersection .
the pole base design shall conform to the following table of standard parameters if the maximum bending moment in the pole is less than or equal to num kipft .
section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num traffic signal pole base standard parameters pole type moment range kipft .
bolt circle diameter inches bolt diameter inches bolt quantity base plate thickness inches pnum up to num num num num num pnum num num num num num num pnum num num num num num num pnum num num num num num num if the bending moment is greater than num kipft the bolt circle or bolt quantity or both shall be different from that given in the table for the standard parameters .
if the proposed difference is in the diameter of the bolt circle the diameter shall be a minimum of num inches .
k luminaire poles .
high mast lighting assembly poles shall be supported by a reinforced concrete footing .
a luminaire pole shall be analyzed at the base of the pole at every tenth point interval up the pole at section changes and at the points above and below each slip joint splice .
design calculations shall be submitted to verify that the maximum allowable deflections will not be exceeded .
l traffic surveillance poles .
poles used for mounting traffic surveillance devices or other similar devices shall be designed in accordance with the requirements given for luminaire poles and any additional criteria i.e .
more stringent deflection vibration damping etc .
provided on the contract plans .
num construction .
a general .
the overhead roadway sign structures luminaire supports and traffic signal supports shall be constructed in accordance with the plans specifications foundation design calculations and approved shop drawings .
all parts of a structure unit shall be assembled on the project and the engineer shall be provided with adequate field erection details before permission will be given to erect the structure .
once the installation of structure is started the work shall be diligently prosecuted until its completion .
b concrete foundations .
excavation for foundations shall conform to the neat lines shown on the plans .
the contractor shall inform the project manager when the excavation is complete and no concrete shall be poured until the project manager has approved the excavation for each individual footing .
the foundations may be cast directly against earth or cast with forms .
when forms are used they shall be true to line and grade and securely braced in place .
both forms and ground which will be in contact with the concrete shall be thoroughly moistened before placing concrete .
forms shall not be removed until the concrete has thoroughly set .
tops of foundations shall be finished to the elevations shown on the plans .
ordinary surface finish shall be applied to the exposed surfaces of concrete .
exposed edges shall be chamfered .
all concrete foundations and bases shall reach a compressive strength of num psi num mpa before any structures are installed thereon .
all embedded items shall be installed securely and inspected by the project manager before concrete is poured .
c direct burial .
excavation shall be to the depth and diameter determined from the design calculations .
the pole shall be placed in position and temporarily braced prior to backfilling .
the backfill material shall be limestone screenings or washed sand .
the backfill shall be saturated with water to consolidate the backfill material during placement .
d anchor bolts .
a temporary template shall be installed approximately num inches num mm from the top and a permanent steel template shall be installed num inches num mm from the bottom of anchor bolts so that the anchor bolts remain plumb after the placement of concrete .
the template shall be fabricated with openings to facilitate the placement of concrete above and below the template .
care shall be taken to ensure that the anchor bolt threads are not damaged prior to installation of the support structure .
outofposition anchor bolts and anchor bolts greater than num section num structures for traffic control devices and highway lighting num outofplumb are cause for rejection of the base .
bending of the anchor bolts to straighten or move into position will not be permitted .
the number and configuration of the nuts and washers required for anchor bolts shall be in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
anchor bolts for slip bases shall have the nuts installed in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
anchor bolts for non slip bases shall have their top nuts tightened by the turn of the nut method as follows all leveling nuts bottom nuts and washers shall be brought to full bearing on the bottom of the base plate .
the bottom of a leveling nut must be kept as close to the concrete base as practical and shall not be greater than num inch num mm away from the top of the concrete base .
a leveling nut shall be adjusted on the anchor bolt so that after the installation of all plates and nuts there is at least a num inch num mm projection of the anchor bolt above the top or lock nut when in its final position .
tighten all top nuts to a snug condition defined as the tightness that exists when the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
this may be attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a man using an ordinary spud wrench .
at this point the nuts and washers above the base plate and below the base plate must be in full bearing on the base plate .
if any gap exists between the nuts washers and the base plate a beveled washer shall be added to eliminate the gap .
the beveled washer shall be stainless steel type num shall be the same diameter as the other washers and shall be beveled as required to eliminate the gap between the nuts washers and the base plate .
using an extension on the nut wrench as required rotate all top nuts an additional one third turn .
there shall be no rotation of the leveling nut during top nut tightening .
tightness of the nuts shall be checked in the presence of department personnel a minimum of forty eight hours after the nuts have been rotated the additional one third turn .
any nuts found loose shall be tightened in accordance with the above procedure .
lock nuts shall be brought to a snug condition as previously described .
e overhead roadway sign structures attention is directed to the fact that the structure design as well as shop drawings for the fabrication of the structure must be approved before actual fabrication of a structure is started .
all parts of a structural unit shall be assembled on the project and the engineer provided with adequate field erection details before permission will be given to erect the structure .
the contractor shall temporarily brace the structure as needed .
f traffic signal poles strain and mast arm poles shall be installed with the proper vertical offset or rake as recommended by the manufacturers so as to assure a substantially vertical set when the load is applied .
threaded adjusting nuts shall be used to establish the rake in accordance with the requirements for the installation of leveling nuts on anchor bolts .
the use of shims or other leveling devices will not be permitted .
hardware and fittings shall be installed as shown on the contract plans and approved shop drawings .
messenger cable supporting traffic signal heads shall not be sagged to a vertical distance greater than five percent of the length of the span between strain poles .
messenger cable supporting signal control cable only shall be sagged to a vertical distance not greater than two percent of the length of the span between strain poles .
tether cables shall not be sagged to a vertical distance greater than five percent of the length of the span between strain poles .
g luminaire and traffic surveillance poles extreme care shall be taken during installation of the luminaire assembly and surveillance devices to ensure that no damage occurs to these devices .
double nuts and washers shall be used to plumb the pole about its center axis if a twin bracket is used .
when a single arm type is used the back side of the pole shall be plumbed after the luminaire and surveillance devices and hardware have been installed thus providing a slight rake from the traveled way .
section num vehicular impact attenuator assembly num section num vehicular impact attenuator assembly num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing vehicular impact attenuator assemblies of the design shown in the detailed plans at the locations designated by the plans the proposals or directed .
num materials .
materials furnished for use in the manufacture of the assemblies shall comply with the requirements noted in the detailed plans .
materials used in the actual installation of the attenuation in the work shall comply with appropriate provisions of these specifications .
num construction requirements .
any installation which is to be performed under traffic shall be provided with adequate warning and protective devices until such time as the assembly becomes usable .
once work is begun it shall be prosecuted diligently and continuously until the assembly is completely installed .
num method of measurement .
vehicular impact attenuators of the design designated by the plans or proposal will be measured in assembly installations complete in place at the designated locations .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted impact attenuator assemblies measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract price bid for each assembly .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for the furnishing of all materials and the installation of the designated assembly on its foundation in its designated location and includes furnishing of all equipment tools labor and other incidentals necessary to complete the work and provide an operational assembly complete in place .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa vehicular impact attenuator assembly per each description and model of attenuator assembly section num portable concrete safety barriers and impact attenuators num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing a portable concrete safety barrier and impact attenuators at the locations shown on the plans designated in the proposal or directed along with the satisfactory removal thereof if so directed .
this section shall also cover the work of picking up state furnished portable concrete barrier units at a designated state storage yard their installation at the designated location shown on the plans and the returning of the units to the state storage yard .
portable safety barriers shall be classified as to type which will designate the size shape height etc .
all in accordance with details shown in the plans .
unless specified otherwise the type shall be optional but once a type is selected it shall be used throughout the contract unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
portable impact attenuators shall be in accordance with details shown in the plans .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall conform to the appropriate requirements of division num materials the details shown on the plans and the following concrete safety barriers shall be manufactured by an approved producer in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
section num portable concrete safety barriers and impact attenuators num concrete unless otherwise provided by plan details shall meet the requirements for class a concrete given in section num .
steel reinforcement shall meet the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the construction of barrier units shall be in accordance with the appropriate provisions of section num unless otherwise noted on the plans or directed .
the finished concrete shall be within reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or directed .
the barrier unit shall present a smooth uniform appearance free of objectionable cavities or projections .
where a num foot num m straightedge is placed horizontally on the exposed faces of the unit the surface shall not vary more than num feet num mm from the edge of the straightedge .
the exposed concrete surfaces shall be finished in accordance with the requirements given in section num for a class num finish on exposed surfaces unless otherwise specified by plan details .
portable impact attenuators shall be constructed in accordance with plan details .
the contractor shall inspect the attenuators for damage periodically at least weekly and immediately after a known impact .
the contractor shall notify the engineer of the results of the inspection in writing immediately after every inspection .
damaged attenuators shall immediately be repaired or replaced in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b handling storage transporting and installation .
the contractor shall be responsible for the proper handling transporting and installation of the barrier units and impact attenuators complete in place at the designated locations .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the units shall be lifted and supported at the points shown on the plans or directed .
damage to any unit caused by improper handling transporting or installation on the part of the contractor shall be cause for the engineer to order it to be repaired or replaced at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
the portable concrete safety barriers of the type designated will be measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num feet num m along the top surface of the barrier .
the portable impact attenuators will be measured per each in accordance with the plan details for one complete attenuator and its accessories .
state furnished portable impact attenuators will be measured per each .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
item numa .
the ordered and accepted portable concrete safety barrier of the designated type measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the fabrication and furnishing of the complete barrier unit and its exclusive use for the duration of the contract all handling hauling installation relocation maintenance removal and satisfactory disposal of the units when deemed of no further use on the project by the engineer includes all tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
item numb .
the ordered and accepted portable concrete safety barrier of the designated type measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the fabrication and furnishing of the complete barrier unit and its exclusive use for the duration of the contract all handling hauling installation relocation maintenance and when deemed of no further use on the project by the engineer the removal repair if necessary and delivery of the units to the departments local storage yard and includes all materials tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
item numc .
section num truck mounted impact attenuator num the ordered and accepted state furnished portable safety barrier units measured as noted above shall be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the pickup of barrier units from departmental storage sites all handling hauling installation relocation maintenance and when deemed of no further use on the project by the engineer the satisfactory removal and delivery of the units to the departments local storage yard including all materials tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
item numd .
the ordered and accepted portable impact attenuators of the designated design measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the fabrication and furnishing of the complete impact attenuator unit and its exclusive use for the duration of the contract all handling hauling installation relocation maintenance removal and satisfactory disposal of the units when deemed of no further use on the project by the engineer and includes all tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num .
item nume .
the ordered and accepted state furnished portable impact attenuators measured as noted above shall be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the pickup of attenuator units from departmental storage sites all handling hauling installation relocation maintenance and when deemed of no further use on the project by the engineer the satisfactory removal and delivery of the units to the departments local storage yard including all materials tools equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa portable concrete safety barriers type per linear foot meter numb portable concrete safety barriers type per linear foot meter numc state furnished portable concrete safety barriers per linear foot meter numd portable impact attenuator per each nume state furnished portable impact attenuator per each show specific type if required .
description and model of attenuator assembly section num truck mounted impact attenuator num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing truck mounted impact attenuator units and all services and operational supplies necessary to provide a functional unit during the life of the contract .
impact attenuator units that attach by a trailer will also be considered as truck mounted .
the contractor shall retain ownership of the truck and impact attenuator unit including all hardware and attachments after their use on the project is complete .
num materials .
all truck mounted impact attenuator units furnished for use under this section shall be new or acceptable used units which include all of the latest modifications to manufacturers current production models .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer a copy of the certification by the testing agency that the attenuator meets the performance standards given in nchrp report num tlnum for a work zone speed limit of num miles per hour and tlnum for a work zone speed limit of num mph or greater .
truck mounted attenuators shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations including the support truck weight and roll ahead distance .
the impact attenuator shall have a standard trailer lighting system including brake lights tail lights and turn signals .
section num traffic signals num num construction requirements .
a general .
the truck mounted attenuator unit furnished under this section shall be used when work is performed under traffic .
b maintenance .
all truck mounted impact attenuator units shall be maintained in such a manner as to provide continuous service during their use on the project .
units which become nonoperational during use will require the contractor to suspend work until the units can be repaired or replaced .
the truck mounted impact attenuator units shall be stored in an approved secure storage area when not in use .
num method of measurement .
measurement of truck mounted impact attenuator units will be made in complete functional units .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the ordered and accepted truck mounted impact attenuator units under this item measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the unit complete with truck and its exclusive use on the project for providing all equipment supplies services labor and incidentals necessary to operate and to maintain the units in good serviceable condition during the life of the contract .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa truck mounted impact attenuator unit per each section num traffic signals num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing of traffic signal control equipment .
these requirements may be supplemented or amended by the requirements given elsewhere in the specifications or on the plans and special and standard highway drawings .
descriptions and definitions of the equipment words and terminology used in the furnishing and installing of traffic signal control equipment are given in the manual of uniform traffic control devices mutcd publications of the institute of transportation engineers ite the national electrical manufactures association nema the national electrical code nec and the international municipal signal association imsa .
num materials .
all materials furnished for use shall conform to the requirements given in section num shown on the plans or listed in the aldot materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual msdsar .
all furnished materials and equipment shall be new and free from defects .
existing equipment shall only be used if shown on the plans to be reused .
num construction .
a design and construction codes and coordination of the work .
num .
codes .
all installations shall comply with the regulations of the latest edition of the national electrical code and the latest edition of the national electrical safety code and with the service rules of the utility company providing the electricity .
num .
structure design and construction .
structures for the support of traffic signal control equipment shall be designed furnished and installed in accordance with the requirements given in sections num and num .
num .
coordination of the work .
section num traffic signals num coordination of the work with roadway and bridge work will be of prime importance to prevent undue damage to completed items of work and existing facilities .
any damage to existing facilities caused by the installation of the material or equipment required under this section shall be repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num .
electrical power .
the entity that will be responsible for the eventual operation and maintenance of the traffic signal unit and intersection lighting will make application for electrical service upon notification that power service will be required .
the contractor shall inform the engineer when power service is required at least num calendar days prior to the need of the power service .
this same entity will be responsible for the cost of the service connection and the monthly service billings thereafter .
power shall be single phase num volt provided through a transformer that is not tapped to provide power to any other equipment .
b traffic signal technician .
technicians responsible for the performance of the work shall be certified by the imsa as an imsa traffic signal level ii field technician .
the contractor shall submit a copy of the imsa certification to the engineer with the first material submittal that is submitted for approval .
the technicians shall be in possession of the certification at all times and show this certification as often as asked by the engineer .
certified traffic signal technicians shall be present and shall have direct involvement with all work required for the installation and operational testing of electrical materials and equipment conduit boxes conductors etc .. at least one out of every three persons in a crew shall be a certified imsa traffic signal level ii field technician .
c drawings and specifications .
omissions from the plans and specifications or errors in the details of work which are evidently necessary to carry out the intent of the plans and specifications or which are customarily performed shall not relieve the contractor from performing such omissions and details of work .
in any case of discrepancy in descriptions on the plans or in these specifications the matter shall be promptly submitted to the engineer who will make a determination in writing .
any adjustments in the plans details specifications and proposal by the contractor without written permission of the engineer shall be at the contractors own risk and expense .
d material and equipment lists shop drawing and approval .
material and equipment listings shall be submitted to the design bureaus traffic design section for approval within num days after the issuance of the notice to proceed .
partial listings and shop drawings will not be accepted for consideration and shall be returned for correction without review .
five copies of each submittal shall be furnished for review .
material and equipment lists shall include catalog cutouts or published data sheets and shall be completed on the departments material submittal form the submittal form shall have each item sequentially numbered a reference to the specification section andor plan sheet and a description of the material .
the description shall include the type model number catalog number and manufacturer and shall include a legible manufacturers catalog cut sheet with each item being submitted clearly identified .
all individual components of assembled equipment cabinets controllers etc .
shall be itemized on the submittal form .
submittals shall be clear and complete .
pay items are not to be referenced on the form .
unacceptable items on the submittal form will be returned for corrective action .
a copy of the approved material and equipment listings will be returned to the contractor .
any changes to the approved material and equipment lists must be requested in writing through proper channels .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall submit for inspection and approval samples of both the specified and proposed substitute items at no cost to the department .
the department will not be liable for any materials purchased or work done or any delay incurred before such approval .
failure of the engineer to note unsatisfactory material as received will not relieve the contractor from responsibility .
manufacturers warranties and guaranties furnished on equipment used in the work shall be delivered to the engineer likewise instruction sheets and parts lists shall be delivered to the engineer upon receipt of the equipment .
throughout the entire project the same manufacturer shall make all units of any one item such as poles signal heads detectors controllers cabinets etc .
section num traffic signals num reference to a particular product by manufacturer trade name or catalog number establishes the quality standards of material and equipment required for this installation and is not intended to exclude products equal in quality and similar in design .
whenever any article material or equipment is defined by using the name of a manufacturer or vendor the term or approved equal if not inserted shall be implied .
e approved traffic control devices and materials .
some materials and equipment required to be furnished under this section will be standard production type products .
acceptance will be made by the engineer based on selected confirmation tests the manufacturers certification of the materials and equipment and visual inspection at the job site .
the manufacturer shall make available to the department test data and material samples from the production runs for use in evaluation of these items .
title num chapter numa subsection num of the code of alabama states that all traffic control devices shall be approved by the transportation director before they can be used sold or offered for sale .
approved devices are shown on the departments msdsar .
f asbuilt drawings .
after all equipment has been installed and the operational check has been initiated the contractor shall submit a set of plans showing in detail all changes on construction from the original plan details with special notation given to conduit location and elevation and schematic circuit diagrams .
g operational manuals .
operation manuals and asbuilt wiring diagrams shall be furnished for all equipment and accessories required in the controller cabinet .
these manuals and wiring diagrams shall be mounted to the cabinet in an appropriate manner .
in addition two copies of these manuals and wiring diagrams shall be transmitted to the departments area traffic engineer .
h preinstallation test bench test .
before the installation of the traffic control systems or units the contractor shall perform an equipment bench test .
this test shall include all controllers monitors and other cabinet equipment as required under signal load conditions for a minimum of seven consecutive days .
the contractor shall secure an acceptable site approved by the engineer for the bench test and shall perform all work required in the performance of the test .
the contractor shall notify the engineer of the date that the test is to begin a minimum of seven days before that date .
the engineer will schedule an inspection of the equipment with the area maintenance engineer in coordination with the state signal shop .
the bench test shall not begin until the area maintenance engineer has given approval after the state signal shop has verified and inspected the equipment to be used .
none of the equipment shall be installed on the project until the bench test has been completed and the contractor has submitted a letter to the engineer certifying that the equipment performed satisfactorily during the test .
any equipment failure during this time shall be corrected and the bench test time shall be restarted .
there will be no direct payment to the contractor for the cost of the preinstallation test including the cost of a suitable test site and the setting up of equipment for the test .
i removal of equipment .
all equipment designated or directed to be removed shall be removed in such a manner that the removed equipment will not be damaged .
any damage due to negligence on the part of the contractor because of lack of proper care of equipment shall be cause for the engineer to order its replacement .
the cost of replacement shall be borne fully by the contractor .
any equipment or materials not authorized by the engineer for reuse into a new facility shall be stored by the contractor until the engineer directs that they be delivered by the contractor to the department at the time and location designated by the engineer .
storage facilities shall be provided so that the equipment will be protected from the elements and damage by vandalism .
j concrete foundations .
the engineer will inform the contractor of the exact diameter and depth of concrete foundation required at each signal pole foundation .
the engineer will also inform the contractor of any changes that are required to the size and number of reinforcing bars required at each signal pole foundation .
this information will be given to the contractor at the completion of the review of the contractors submittal of designs and details of the signal pole structures .
section num traffic signals num all conduit systems elbows etc .
shall be installed securely and inspected by the project manager before concrete is poured .
the contractor shall contact the utility companies to determine the location of underground utilities in the area where the foundations are to be located and shall be responsible for repairing to the satisfaction of the utility company any damaged utilities .
k abandoning foundations .
all foundations when abandoned the top of the foundation anchor bolts frame and conduit shall be removed to a depth of not less than num inches num mm or as directed below the surface of existing pavement .
the resulting hole shall be backfilled with material to match the existing surface .
l interconnect cable .
num .
general .
interconnect cable wire shall be installed at locations as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
splices shall be made only where shown on the plans or in the controller cabinet .
a minimum of num feet num m or as directed of slack shall be provided at each cabinet .
num .
underground interconnect cable .
underground interconnect cable shall be run in conduit .
num .
aerial interconnect cable .
aerial interconnect cable shall be supported on new or existing utility poles andor signal poles as shown on the plans .
interconnect support cable wire supporting signal control cable only will be sagged to a vertical distance not greater than num percent of the length of the span between poles .
when support cable is not an integral part of the interconnect cable interconnect cable shall be attached to a support wire .
m electrical power service assembly .
the location of the utility service point and power source shown on the signalization plans is approximate .
the contractor shall determine the exact location .
when the service equipment is to be installed on a utilityowned pole the contractor shall furnish and install conduit photoelectric control unit conductors and other necessary material to complete the installation of the service .
the position of the riser and equipment will be determined by the utility .
when a lateral drop is required from the power source to the service pole the contractor shall arrange with the serving utility to complete the service connections .
the contractor shall install the conduit conductors enclosure and accessories and service pole .
as a minimum the electrical power service equipment shall consist of a weatherhead num inch num mm metallic conduit from weatherhead to a disconnect switch a disconnect switch installed num feet num m high including but not limited to the enclosure load center complete with circuit breaker in a nema type num enclosure masterlock size num key num for statewide uniform access num inch num mm metallic conduit from disconnect switch to a designated depth below the ground line attachment hardware ground rod and related equipment service cables no .
num awg service cable for any required luminaires attachment to local utility all incidentals required to provide power service to the controller assembly and luminaires .
n span wire .
the installation of span wire shall meet all provisions of the national electric safety code ansicnum regarding clearance from electric lines .
section num traffic signals num the length of the messenger wire shall be adjusted under the load of traffic control equipment so that the sag at the lowest point shall not be greater than the requirements in section num. o vehicular and pedestrian signal heads .
vehicular or pedestrian signal heads shall not be installed until all other signal equipment including the controller is in place and ready for operation except that signal heads may be installed if no face of the head is directed toward traffic or if the entire assembly is hooded .
each signal face shall be so adjusted vertically and horizontally in order that its beams will be of maximum effectiveness to the approaching traffic for which it is intended .
p traffic detection systems .
num .
inductive loop .
a .
installation of loop wire .
before cutting required loops into the pavement any existing loops that are not quadrupole loops shall be sawed in two locations and quadrupole loops shall be sawed in three locations on the long side to prevent false readings when the required loops are placed into the pavement .
loop wire outside the sawcut shall be twisted num turns per foot .
loop wire shall be one continuous run without splices .
loop wire shall be pushed to the bottom of the saw cut with a nonmetallic tool that will not damage the insulation .
each loop wire shall be placed in its own individual sawcut to the edge of pavement .
no portion of the loop shall be located within num feet num m of any conductive material in the pavement such as manhole covers water valves and grates etc .
after installation of the loops the slots shall be sealed with an approved sealant manufactured specifically for embedding loop detector wire in concrete or bituminous pavements .
all loop connectors shall be connected to a shielded homerun cable located in junction box or when so directed or shown on plans at base of traffic signal strain pole .
b. sawcuts for loops .
slots for installing the loops shall be formed by sawing with approved equipment designed for sawing pavement to the width and depth indicated by the plan details or directed .
the slot shall be cleaned of all foreign loose debris using compressed air or other approved means before installation of the loop wires .
sawcut corners shall be cut at a diagonal .
no sharp bends shall be accepted .
loops shall be tested prior to sealing sawcuts .
loop sealant shall be placed in sawcuts in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
loop sealant will not be permitted when there is moisture on the surface the air temperature is below num f num c or other conditions exist that in the opinion of the engineer would affect the bonding of the material .
c. loop detector leadin .
a separate run of shielded homerun cable shall be provided for each loop unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
leadin cable installed underground shall be in conduit .
the leadin shall be one continuous run from controller to loop connection with no splices .
d. testing loops .
the contractor shall perform a leakage to ground test on all loops using a megohm meter with num v applied .
the loops shall also be tested after the leadins are pulled to the amplifier to detect any damage done during installation .
a state inspector will perform this same test to check for leakage .
any loop failing to read num megs or better shall be replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the project .
num .
video detection system vds .
the contractor shall furnish and install all equipment materials software and other miscellaneous items that are required to provide a fully functional video detection system for the control of vehicular and pedestrian traffic signals .
section num traffic signals num the contractor shall establish the configuration of the required traffic detection zones within each controller cabinet up to a maximum of num detection zones per controller .
the contractor shall notify the engineer prior to software configuration and detector zone setup in ample time to allow the engineer to observe this work .
there will be no additional payment made for the relocation of cameras that may be required to achieve the required configuration .
the vds shall detect the presence of a vehicle in the zones with at least num accuracy at any time during the day .
the contractor shall have a qualified representative of the supplier of the vds to be present at the site of the installation to verify that all equipment and materials are being installed correctly .
the representative of the vds supplier shall be available to address all issues of concern that the engineer may have .
all coaxial cable and power cable shall be one continuous pull without splices between the camera mounting location and the traffic controller cabinet .
num .
radar detection system .
the contractor shall establish the configuration of the required traffic detection zones within each controller cabinet .
the contractor shall notify the engineer prior to software configuration and detector zone setup in ample time to allow the engineer to observe this work .
there will be no additional payment made for the relocation of the microwave sensors that may be required to achieve the required configuration .
all communication data and power cabling shall be one continuous pull without splices between the radar mounting location and the traffic controller cabinet or wireless relay point .
num .
magnetometer detection system .
the contractor shall install the required traffic sensors in the roadway to produce the required vehicular detection for each locationzone .
sensors that communicate via a hard wire connection shall be spliced in the junction box using an approved water tight splice kit to the homerun cable without splices back to the cabinet .
for wireless sensors the contractor shall verify the communication of the sensors to the system to ensure the sensors are setup properly before connecting the system to the controller .
the contractor shall notify the engineer prior to software configuration and detector setup in ample time to allow the engineer to observe this work .
there will be no additional payment made for the relocation or addition of sensors that may be required to achieve the required detection .
num .
pedestrian pushbutton system .
the contractor shall install the required pedestrian pushbuttons in accordance with the locations shown on the plans .
these devices shall be tested to ensure that they are working properly before connecting them to the controller .
num .
priority control detection system traffic signal preemption .
a priority control detection system shall provide communication to the traffic signal controller that will allow the controller to run a modified signal timing plan to allow an emergency vehicle or another priority vehicle to pass through a roadway intersection with as little delay as possible .
the priority control system shall be either acoustically sound activated optically activated or gps global positioning system activated .
the system shall include all mounting hardware wiring detection sensors signal control devices and miscellaneous materials required to provide a fully functional priority control system for traffic signal preemption .
the system shall be capable of providing preemption information to the standard nema tsnum nema tsnum type num and type num traffic controllers used by aldot .
a four hour training session shall be provided for as many as ten attendees .
the contractor shall arrange for the training to be provided by a representative of the manufacturer of the priority control detection system .
training shall be instruction in the proper installation operation maintenance and programming of the priority control detection system .
a training course outline shall be submitted to the engineer for approval by aldot maintenance bureau traffic operations engineer .
training will not be scheduled by the engineer until the course outline is approved .
training shall be performed both in the field and in the office .
the contractor shall schedule the training during the time frame designated section num traffic signals num by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide a minimum of a seven calendar day advance written notice of the scheduling of the training to allow the engineer to arrange attendance .
a training notebook shall be provided to each trainee in a labeled threering binder .
q installation of conduit .
metallic conduit shall be used above ground and may be used below ground .
nonmetallic conduit shall only be used underground .
where nonmetallic conduits join metal conduits connection shall be made using appropriate couplings to form a watertight raceway .
all conduits entering concrete foundations shall be provided with appropriate bushings at the ends .
conduits shall be stubbed approximately num inch num mm above concrete and shall be provided grounding type bushings on conduit ends in base of poles with copper bonding jumpers .
bends and offsets shall be avoided where possible but where necessary shall be made with a proper hickey pipe bender or conduit bending machine .
conduit that has been crushed or deformed due to improper bending or handling shall not be installed .
conduits shall be installed in a manner to insure against trouble from collection of trapped condensation where possible .
conduits shall be capped to prevent entrance of deleterious materials during construction .
for underground conduit adjacent to gasoline service stations or other installations of underground gasoline or diesel storage piping or pumps and which lead to a cabinet circuit breaker panel service or any enclosure where an arc may occur during normal operation the contractor shall refer to the national electrical code nec for class num hazardous locations .
conduit for future use shall be threaded and capped .
all conduit installed under paved areas shall be encased .
encasement shall meet the requirements of section num and shall be a type num type num or type num installation as shown on the plans .
if the contractor should encounter extraordinary circumstances such as major utilities under existing pavement which the location can not be accurately determined he may request in writing permission to open cut a trench in lieu of jacking or boring .
this request shall also include detailed proposed sequence of excavating backfilling method of handling traffic etc .
for the engineers consideration .
no such work shall be performed without written permission of the engineer .
all conduit systems shall be completely installed before the conductors are installed .
r luminaires .
the light control surfaces and lens shall be cleaned after installation .
cleaning shall be performed in accordance with luminaire manufactures recommendations .
luminaires shall be leveled plumbed and installed as per the manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer to achieve the most suitable light pattern .
s wiring installation requirements .
wiring within junction boxes shall be neatly arranged and laced .
powdered soapstone talc or other approved lubricant may be used in pulling cable in conduit .
all cables within a single conduit shall be pulled at the same time .
all ends of cable shall be taped to exclude moisture and shall be so kept until splices are made and terminal appliances attached .
the ends of spare conductors shall be taped .
all conductor splices that will be direct buried in earth and all loop detection conductor splices shall be soldered and encased in an approved splicing kit and with sealing tape .
all other signal conductor splices shall be spliced using a twisted connection made by a suitable wire nut or crimp and then properly covered by insulating tape or other insulating materials .
t grounding enclosures .
all metal enclosures containing electric wires andor equipment shall be bonded to the chassis ground .
ground rods shall be installed at all service equipment and traffic signal pole foundations .
single ground rods shall be driven vertically until the top of the rod is at least num inches num mm below the finished grade .
section num traffic signals num where a grounding conductor passes through a metal conduit a suitable grounding bushing shall be placed on each end of the conduit and connected to a ground wire .
each messenger cable shall be attached to the supporting structure with separate span wire clamps .
u excavating and backfilling .
all excavation required for the installation and placement of conduits foundations junction boxes poles and other appliances shall be performed in such manner as to cause the least possible injury to pavement curbs or other improvements .
all conduits required under pavement sidewalks etc .
shall be in place prior to commencing of base and paving operations .
the trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper installation of the electrical appliance and foundations .
excavating shall not be performed until immediately before installation of conduit and other appliances .
the material from the excavation shall be placed in a position where the least interference with the surface drainage will occur .
should large rocks be encountered in conduit trenches they shall be removed to a depth of num inches num mm below the proposed elevation and replaced with a num inch num mm layer of suitable material .
all suitable material removed from the conduit trenches shall be used in backfilling of the trenches however no stone larger than num inches num mm shall be in contact with any conduit .
all surplus excavated material shall be removed from and disposed of by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
excavations after backfilling shall be kept well filled and maintained in a smooth and well drained condition until permanent repairs are made .
compaction shall be accomplished to the extent necessary to prevent future settlement of the backfill .
the contractor will be required to restore any areas disturbed by his work to their original condition without additional cost to the state .
v insulation circuit continuity and ground resistance testing .
num .
insulation testing .
isolation test for testing insulation resistance shall be preformed for each conductor in the cable .
testing shall be made using article num of the nec as a guide .
if resistance measured with all protective devices in place is less than num the contractor shall remove the defective cable install new cable and repeat the test .
for interconnect cable upon completion of run from one controller installation to the next controller installation the contractor shall conduct a test for insulation resistance in the presence of the engineer .
num .
circuit continuity test .
each circuit branch shall be temporarily jumpered at its termination and the temporarily loop circuit measured for continuity to assure that no open circuits exist that the circuit branch is according to plan that no high resistance connections exist and that each circuit is properly identified .
each circuit shall be marked with typed labels .
leadin cable for loop detector wire shall be tested before and after the cable is spliced to the loop wire .
as an alternative circuit continuity testing of signal head cable may be done by applying num v to each outgoing circuit and observing that only the proper lamps are lighted .
num .
ground resistance test .
at each ground rod location a test shall be made .
the effectiveness of the ground rod shall be determined by measuring resistance from the pole enclosure to a convenient underground water line with a num ohm megger where a water line is available and with auxiliary ground method where the water line is not available .
the two auxiliary ground rods shall be not less than num feet and num feet num m and num m respectively from the tested rod .
if reading is greater than num ohms additional rods shall be installed until a reading of num ohms or less is obtained .
w operational check and adjustment of equipment .
a full operational check of the installed traffic control system shall be performed under actual traffic conditions .
before the operational check is allowed to begin the engineer will arrange for an inspection of the installed traffic control equipment by the maintenance engineer in coordination with the state signal shop .
the engineer will obtain the approval of the maintenance engineer to begin the operational check .
section num traffic signals num the period of operational check shall cover num calendar days .
during the test period the contractor shall expeditiously perform any necessary adjustment and replace any malfunctioning parts of the equipment required to place the system in an acceptable operational condition .
once repairs have been started the contractor shall have the traffic control equipment in an acceptable operational condition before leaving the project site .
no extra compensation will be allowed for any work so required such being considered incidental to furnishing and installing a complete operational signal system .
during the test period time charges shall be suspended if all other work has been completed and acceptance of the work is dependent upon the results of the operational check .
the period of the test shall cover num continuous calendar days .
in case of emergency or failure on the contractors part to expeditiously pursue repairs the department reserves the right to make such repairs as it deems necessary .
the cost for this work will be deducted from the contract bid amount for the project .
the department will not assume responsibility for the repairs or alter any of the requirements of the test period because of the repairs .
the aforementioned shall in no way relieve the contractor of his liability or responsibility related to maintaining the traffic signal as required by these specifications .
num method of measurement .
a removal of traffic control unit .
the removal of all traffic control equipment at an intersection or other location designated on the plans will be measured as a lump sum removal of traffic control unit .
removal of only some of the equipment will be measured as a lump sum removal of traffic control unit partial .
removal of a temporary installation of traffic control equipment will be measured as a lump sum removal of traffic control unit temporary .
pay item numa b furnishing and installing traffic control unit .
where separate pay items are not listed for the traffic control equipment required at a single intersection or other location designated on the plans all of the traffic control equipment including the electrical power service equipment will be measured for payment as a lump sum furnishing and installing traffic control unit .
c summary of traffic control equipment pay items .
traffic control items of work will be measured for payment in accordance with the following pay items numa c s u and y will be measured per lump sum .
pay items nume f g j k n o p q r and t will be measured per each .
pay items numh i l and m will be measured per linear foot meter .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
item numa .
the accepted work for the removal of existing traffic control units will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for the satisfactory removal and storage of the equipment and materials ordered removed and shall include all equipment tools labor services storage facilities and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
item numc .
the furnishing and installing the traffic control unit will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the equipment installation in accordance with these specifications plans proposal and details and for all tools equipment labor materials operational facility connected to the local utility .
item nume .
a metal traffic signal pole foundation will be paid for at the contract unit price adjusted to account for changes in size and reinforcement which shall be full compensation for excavation backfilling forming concrete reinforcing steel anchor bolts ground rods seeding and mulching of disturbed areas disposal of debris and for all materials labor equipment tools testing services and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
the bid price shall be for a num num mm diameter by num num m deep foundation .
a larger foundation may be required .
the reinforcing steel required for a larger foundation is shown on the plans .
compensation for a larger foundation will be made in accordance with the following cost adjustments .
section num traffic signals num cost adjustment made to bid price for change in foundation size plus figures are price increases foundation depth foundation diameter num num mm num num m num num m num num m num num num num num m num num num num num m num num num num num m num num num num num m num num num num num m num num num num num m num num num num num m num num num num num m num num num adjustments include compensation for changes to the reinforcing steel that are shown on the plans for larger foundations .
the bid price adjustment shown above includes compensation for all work and materials including reinforcing steel necessary to construct the required foundation in accordance with the plan details .
the engineer may increase the amount of reinforcing steel from what is shown in the plan details .
when the amount of reinforcing steel is increased from what is shown in the plan details the bid price will be adjusted .
the adjustment will be num per pound num per kg for the amount of reinforcing steel that is increased .
item numf .
a metal traffic signal pole with mast arm assembly will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the metal traffic signal pole and mast arm assembly and for all materials equipment tools labor services and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
the required foundation shall be measured separately with payment being made under item nume .
item numg .
a traffic signal strain pole will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the traffic signal strain pole and for all materials equipment tools labor services and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
the required foundation shall be measured separately with payment being made under item nume .
item numh .
loop wire will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for the saw cutting loop wire loop sealant trenching backfilling electrical connections splicing and for all materials labor equipment and tools to provide a complete and operational loop detector .
item numi .
loop detector leadin cable will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the shielded homerun cable including electrical connections and for all materials equipment tools labor testing and incidentals necessary to provide a complete and operational detector loop .
item numj .
a vehicle loop detector will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the loop detector amplifier electrical connections and for all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational loop detector amplifier .
item numk .
a traffic signal junction box will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the junction box excavation concrete .
backfilling and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
item numl .
conduit will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the conduit including fittings trenching placing joining attaching to structure backfilling seeding and mulching of disturbed areas disposal of debris and all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
item numm .
interconnect cable will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the interconnect cable with the number of conductors and type as designated by the plans including all hardware for aerial installation connecting to section num traffic signals num controller assemblies splicing electrical connections and for all materials testing labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for a complete and functional interconnect cable .
item numn .
a luminaire extension assembly will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the luminaire arm sodium vapor or led luminaire surge arrestor connections ground rod no .
num awg cable and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational luminaire .
item numo .
illuminated school zone speed limit signs will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the illuminated school zone sign including all attachment hardware connections and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for a complete operational illuminated school zone speed limit sign .
item nump .
a vehicular signal head will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the vehicular signal head trunnions brackets attachment hardware connections splicing and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational vehicular signal head .
item numq .
a pedestrian signal head will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the pedestrian signal head including attachment hardware electrical connections splicing and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational pedestrian signal head .
item numr .
a controller assembly will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the cabinet controller unit auxiliary devices electrical devices surge protection terminals concrete foundation or side mounting hardware mounting and wiring of controller assembly and for all materials labor equipment tools testing and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational controller assembly .
item nums .
traffic signal preemption will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing all mounting hardware wiring detection sensors signal control devices software when required testing and miscellaneous materials required to provide a fully functional priority control system for traffic signal preemption .
if software and training is required it will be shown in the pay item description .
payment for training shall be full compensation for training personnel supplies equipment materials user manuals handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
item numt .
a wood pole will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the wood pole excavating backfilling attachment hardware grounding weatherhead guy wire and for all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
item numu .
detection systems will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for the following systems num .
video detection system .
cameras lenses enclosures mounting brackets video communication and power cabling power supplies lightning protection manuals and documentation and for all labor materials tools equipment transportation and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational vehicle detection system .
the contract unit price shall also be full compensation for furnishing and installing the vehicle detection system processor interface panel and for all integration including software setup and programming and adjusting detection zones .
num .
radar detection system .
radar units enclosures mounting brackets communication and power cabling power supplies lightning protection manuals and documentation and for all labor materials tools equipment transportation and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational vehicle detection system .
the contract unit price shall also be full compensation for furnishing and installing the vehicle detection system processor interface panel and for all integration including software setup and programming and adjusting detection zones .
num .
magnetometer detection system .
magnetometers communication equipment enclosures mounting brackets communication and power cabling power supplies lightning protection manuals and documentation and for all labor materials tools equipment transportation and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational vehicle detection system .
the contract unit price shall also be full compensation for furnishing and installing the vehicle detection system processor interface panel and for section num traffic signals num all integration including software setup and programming and adjusting detection zones .
num .
hybrid detection system .
combination videoradar units enclosures mounting brackets communication and power cabling power supplies lightning protection manuals and documentation and for all labor materials tools equipment transportation and incidentals necessary for a complete and operational vehicle detection system .
the contract unit price shall also be full compensation for furnishing and installing the vehicle detection system processor interface panel and for all integration including software setup and programming and adjusting detection zones .
item numy .
pedestal pole and foundation will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for the following num .
installation .
furnishing fabricating galvanizing assembling and erecting a complete and operational roadside flashing beacon or a complete and operational illuminated school zone sign including sign and vehicular signal head or illuminated school zone sign installing foundations furnishing and placing anchor bolts and hardware controller wiring power source connection to local utility and equipment materials labor tools and incidentals to provide a complete and operational flashing beacon or illuminated school zone sign assembly .
num .
relocation .
removing the flashing beacon assembly or illuminated school zone assembly removing existing foundations installing new foundations furnishing and placing anchors hardware excavation and surface placement furnishing fabricating and installing new components as required and replacing the assembly on its new foundation with all manipulations and electrical work controller power source connection to local utility loading and hauling and equipment materials labor tools and incidentals .
num .
removal .
removing the roadside assembly components including the power service equipment removing the foundations storing the component to be reused or salvaged backfilling and surface placement loading and hauling and equipment materials tools labor and incidentals .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa removal of existing traffic control unit num num per lump sum numc furnishing and installing traffic control unit num per lump sum nume metal traffic signal pole foundation per each numf metal traffic signal pole with num mast arm assembly per each numg num traffic signal strain pole per each numh loop wire per linear foot meter numi loop detector leadin cable per linear foot meter numj vehicle loop detector per each numk traffic signal junction box per each numl num num conduit per linear foot meter numm interconnect cable num num awg num num per linear foot meter numn luminaire extension assembly num feet meters num per each num illuminated school zone speed limit sign per each nump vehicular signal head num inch mm num section type num per each numq pedestrian signal head type num per each numr controller assembly type num num phase per each nums num traffic signal preemption num num num per lump sum numt wood pole per each numu num detection system num per lump sum numy num pedestal pole and foundation with num per lump sum num specify partial or temporary if required num specify intersection location num specify length of mast arm num specify type metal or concrete num specify size num inch num inch or num inch num mm num mm or num mm num specify type metallic or nonmetallic num specify type aerial selfsupporting aerial lashed or underground num specify cable size no .
num awg or no .
num awg num specify number of conductors or pairs num conductors or num pairs section num traffic counting equipment num num specify imsa num imsa num rea penum rea penum or rea penum num specify arm length in feet meters num specify led if required num specify lens size num inch num mm num specify number of sections num num num num or num num specify type incandescent optically programmed or led num specify type incandescent or led num specify type ii or iii num specify number of phases num num num or master num specify type acoustical optical or gps num specify whether or not software is required with software or without software num specify whether or not training is required with training or without training num specify type video radar magnetometer or hybrid videoradar num specify furnishing and installing removal of or relocation of num specify flashing beacon led pedestrian signal head or illuminated school zone sign section num traffic counting equipment num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing complete in place traffic counting equipment as shown on the plans at locations shown on the plans all in accordance with the details shown on the plans and these specifications .
for the purpose of these specifications traffic counting equipment will be classified as operational units .
traffic counting units shall be classified by type which will designate the number and design of the loops etc .
in accordance with details shown in the plans .
for the definition of equipment words and terminology used in the furnishing and installing of traffic counting equipment refer to the appropriate publications of the institute of transportation engineers i.t.e .
and to the manual of uniform traffic control mutcd .
num materials .
a general .
material and equipment listings shall be furnished to the engineer within thirty days after the issuance of the notice to proceed .
the contractor shall submit to the transportation planning bureaus traffic monitoring section for approval five copies of a complete list of all materials and equipment .
partial listings will not be accepted for consideration .
material and equipment lists shall include catalog cutouts or published data sheets and a completed material submittal form .
unacceptable submittal data will be returned for corrective action .
three copies of the approved material and equipment listings will be returned to the contractor and one approved copy will be sent to the construction bureau .
any changes to the approved material or equipment lists shall be requested in writing through proper channels .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall submit for inspection and approval samples of both the specified and proposed substitute item at no cost to the department .
materials and equipment installed or used without prior approval of the engineer shall be at the risk of subsequent rejection .
the state shall not be liable for materials purchased work performed or any delay incurred due to the failure of the contractor to secure prior approval .
failure of the engineer to note unsatisfactory material as received will not relieve the contractor of responsibility .
manufacturers warranties and guaranties furnished on material and equipment used in the work shall be delivered to the engineer likewise instruction sheets and parts listed supplied shall be delivered to the engineer upon receipt of the equipment .
reference to a particular product by manufacturer trade name or catalog number establishes the quality standards of material and equipment required for this installation and is not intended to exclude products equal in quality and similar in design .
whenever any article section num traffic counting equipment num material or equipment is defined by describing a proprietary product or by using the name of a manufacturer or vendor the term or approved equal if not inserted shall be implied .
electrical materials shall conform to the standards of the national electrical manufactures association nema andor the underwriters laboratories inc. ul in every case where a standard has been established for that particular article material or equipment .
all material and equipment shall be of the best quality and workmanship and shall be new unless otherwise noted on the plans .
throughout the entire project all units of any one item such as enclosures and associated equipment etc .
shall be made by the same manufacturer .
inasmuch as certain materials and equipment furnished for use under this section will be standard production type products acceptance will be made by the engineer based on selected confirmation tests the manufacturers certification of the material andor design conformance to the requirements noted in this section details shown on the plans and visual inspection at the job site .
the manufacturer shall make available to the department test data and material samples from the production runs for use in evaluation of their product .
title num chapter numa subsection num of the code of alabama states that all traffic control devices shall be approved by the transportation director before they can be used sold or offered for sale .
approved products can be found in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
the contractor may choose from any of these products unless otherwise noted .
refer to subarticle numf and bmtpnum concerning this list .
b terminal strip enclosure .
terminal strip enclosure shall include but not limited to the enclosure terminal strips pin connectors ground rod ground rod clamp ground wire and ground lug .
terminal strip enclosure and associated equipment shall conform to the detailed plans .
c loop wire .
loop wire conductors shall be stranded soft annealed stranded wire of not less than num percent conductivity and shall be insulated for num volts or more with a crosslinked polyethylene insulation .
conductors shall be type rhh or rhw or use or xhhw .
d conduit systems .
num .
nonmetallic conduit .
nonmetallic conduits shall be type ii schedule num pvc unless otherwise noted on the plans .
all nonmetallic conduits and fittings shall conform to ul standard num or nema tcnum latest edition .
num .
liquidtight flexible metal conduit .
liquidtight flexible metal conduits shall conform to ul listed type ua for the intended use .
e terminal strip enclosure support .
the terminal support enclosure support structure shall be in accordance with the details shown on the plans and meet the requirements of article num. f pole for mounting traffic detection equipment .
the structural design submittal material and fabrication requirements given in sections num num and num shall be applicable to the furnishing and installation of a pole that is required for the mounting of traffic detection equipment .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all required material and equipment shall be installed in accordance with the manufactures recommendations details shown in the plans and as designated in the proposal .
all installations shall comply with the regulations of the latest edition of the national electrical code nec and the latest edition of the national electrical safety code .
coordination of this work with regular roadway or bridge work will be of prime importance to prevent undue damage to completed items of work or existing facilities .
any damage to existing facilities caused by the installation of the material andor equipment required under this section of work shall be repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
after all equipment has been installed and an operational check has been instigated the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a corrected set of plans showing in detail all changes on construction from the original plan details .
section num traffic counting equipment num b grounding .
all metal enclosures containing electric wires andor equipment shall be grounded .
ground rods shall be installed at all the terminal strip enclosure .
single ground rods shall be driven vertically until the top of the rod is at least num inches num mm below the finished grade .
a length of no .
num bare soft drawn copper shall be attached to the ground rod clamp as shown on the plan details .
where a grounding conductor passes through a metal conduit a suitable grounding bushing shall be placed on each end of the conduit and connected to the ground wire .
where nonmetallic conduit is used a separate continuous grounding conductor shall be extended from the service ground to all equipment and shall be used for grounding purposes only .
testing of grounding system the effectiveness of the ground rod shall be determined by measuring resistance from the pole enclosure to a convenient underground water line with a num ohm megger j.h .
biddle company or equal where a water line is available and with auxiliary ground method where the water line is not available .
the two auxiliary ground rods shall be not less than num feet and num feet num m and num m respectively from the tested rod .
if reading is greater than num ohms additional rods shall be installed until a reading of num ohms is obtained .
c wiring .
all wiring shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner .
wiring within enclosure cabinet shall be neatly arranged and laced .
loop wire shall be one continuous run without splicing .
all ends of cable shall be taped to exclude moisture and shall be so kept until terminal strips are attached .
d loop wire installation .
a conduit run shall be completely installed before the installation of wire .
wires in conduits shall be carefully pulled into place using approved methods so that the cable will be installed free from any electrical or mechanical injury .
powdered soapstone talc or other inert lubricant specifically designed for the purpose shall be used .
a conduit run shall be completely installed before the installation of wire .
wires in conduits shall be carefully pulled into place using approved methods so that the cable will be installed free from any electrical or mechanical injury .
conductors shall be handled and installed in such a manner as to prevent kinks bends or other distortion which could damage the conductor or outer covering .
all cables within a single conduit shall be pulled at the same time .
loop wire shall be installed in slots cut in the pavement at locations designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the slot shall be formed by sawing pavement with approved equipment designed for sawing pavement to the width and depth indicated by the plan details or directed .
the slot shall be cleaned of all foreign loose debris using compressed air or other approved means before installation of the loop wire .
after installation of the loops the slots shall be sealed with an approved sealant manufactured specifically for embedding loop detector wire in concrete or bituminous pavements .
all conductors installed under paved areas shall be encased .
installation of the casing shall be made either prior to placement of the pavement with thick wall rigid metallic or rigid casing or it shall be jacked or bored through the roadbed under the pavement using thick wall rigid metallic casing providing a minimum cover of num inches num mm .
the sealant proposed for use shall be shown in the proposed list of materials to be used .
e conduit system installation .
conduits shall be joined by approved fittings using methods prescribed the manufacturer of the conduit .
where nonmetallic conduit join metal conduits connection shall be made using appropriate couplings to form a watertight raceway .
bushings shall be installed as shown on the plan details .
underground conduit shall be installed as shown on the plans with a minimum cover of num inches num mm .
when rock is encountered is encountered in the in the bottom of the trench the conduit shall be installed in a bed of well compacted fine grained soil at least num inches num mm thick .
if num inches num mm can not be attained convert the conduit to asphaltum painted metallic conduit installed as deep as practical but no less than num inches num mm .
seeding and mulching of disturbed areas shall be backfilled and compacted to prevent future settling .
seeding and mulching of disturbed areas shall be as directed by the engineer as a subsidiary obligation of the conduit installation .
precautions shall be taken to be sure that the conduit will be located to avoid conflict with proposed guardrail signpost etc .
where possible a minimum of num inches num mm shall be section num traffic counting equipment num provided between the finished lines of conduit runs and utility facilities such as gas lines water mains or other underground facilities not associated with the electrical system .
where the conduit run is adjacent to concrete walls piers footings etc .
a minimum of num inches num mm of undisturbed earth or firmly compacted soil shall be maintained between the conduit and the adjacent concrete .
unless specified on the plans trenches shall not be excavated in existing pavement or paved shoulders to install conduit .
when it is necessary to place conduit under an existing pavement the conduit shall be installed in accordance with section num .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer no trenches shall remain open after normal work hours each day .
all trenches shall be protected from the accumulation of water which might cause an undermining of adjacent structures or utilities .
the contractor shall adequately support all pipes and other structures exposed in trenches .
f excavating and backfilling .
before beginning any excavation the contractor shall determine the location of any electrical drainage or utility lines in the vicinity and shall conduct his work in such a manner as to avoid damage to the same .
all excavation required for the installation and placement of conduits and other materials shall be performed in such manner as to cause the least possible injury to pavement curbs or other improvements .
all conduits required to be under pavement sidewalks etc .
shall be in place prior to commencing of base and paving operations .
the trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper installation of the material .
excavating shall not be performed until immediately before installation of conduit and other appliances .
the material from the excavation shall be placed in a position where the least interference with the surface drainage will occur .
should large rocks be encountered in conduit trenches they shall be removed to a depth of num inches num mm below the proposed elevation and replaced with num inches num mm layer of suitable material .
all suitable material removed from the conduit trenches shall be used in backfilling of the trenches however no stone larger than num inches num mm shall be in contact with any conduit .
all surplus excavated material shall be removed from and disposed of by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
excavations after backfilling shall be kept well filled and maintained in a smooth and well drained condition until permanent repairs are made .
the contractor will be required to restore any areas disturbed by his work to their original condition without additional cost to the state .
g encasement .
all encasement shall meet the requirements of section num and the requirements set forth in this proposal .
if the contractor should encounter extraordinary circumstances such as major utilities under existing pavement which the location can not be accurately determined he may request in writing permission to open cut a trench in lieu of jacking or boring .
this request shall also include a detailed proposed sequence of excavating backfilling method of handling of traffic etc .
for the engineers consideration .
no such work shall be performed without written permission of the engineer .
h installation of a pole for mounting traffic detection equipment .
a pole required for mounting traffic detection equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in section num and the details shown on the plans .
num guarantee .
the contractor shall guarantee all work performed under this section against defective materials and workmanship for a period of six num months after the final acceptance of the project .
the contractor shall replace materials and workmanship found defective during the guarantee period at no cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
furnishing and installing of traffic counting equipment when so scheduled on the plans or proposal shall be measured in complete units in accordance with the following each complete operational traffic counting facility will be measured separately with single locations classified as units .
poles for mounting traffic detection equipment will be measured per each pole .
section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted work of furnishing and installing the traffic counting units measured as noted above shall be paid for at the contract price bid per each which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of the traffic counting unit terminal strip enclosure conduit encasing grounding materials loop wire and sealant and all incidentals necessary for furnishing in accordance with plan details and for all tools equipment labor to complete the installation .
each pole for mounting traffic detection equipment will be paid for at the contract unit price which shall be full compensation for all materials tools and labor required for the design fabrication and installation of the pole .
the contract unit price shall also be full compensation for the foundation and all appurtenances shown to be required on the plans .
compensation for the pole will be adjusted in accordance with the cost adjustments listed in section num for changes to the size of the pole foundation .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa traffic counting units type ____ per each numb pole for mounting traffic detection equipment per each section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing erecting lighting as directed handling and maintaining all construction signs warning regulatory and guide barricades and other traffic control devices installed at locations specified by plan details directed or approved by the engineer for the purpose of handling traffic safely through construction work zones .
the traffic control devices covered by this section shall meet the requirements specified in the mutcd and as detailed on the plans .
in case of conflict or discrepancy the plans shall govern over the mutcd .
this section shall also cover the work of furnishing and operating pilot cars and furnishing flaggers to control traffic at such locations and for such periods as are necessary to handle traffic safely through construction work zones .
num materials .
a approval of devices .
all signs barricades markers lights and otherdevices shall beapproved for use in highway construction under the provisions of section numanum of the alabama code prior to their installation .
the department has established list ivnum work zone traffic control devices .
devices shown on this list and devices shown on the plans will be the only devices accepted for use .
the list is in the departments manual material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
b crashworthiness of devices .
the contractor shall be responsible for insuring that all devices that are used for work zone traffic control meet crashworthy requirements given in the national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num for the appropriate category of device .
c categories of devices .
num .
category num devices .
category num work zone devices are small lightweight devices including cones plastic drums flexible delineators etc .
that are known to be crashworthy either by crash testing or by years of demonstrable safe performance .
num .
category num devices .
section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num category num work zone devices are small lightweight devices including barricades sign supports etc .
that will not produce significant velocity change when struck but may otherwise be potentially hazardous .
all category num devices manufactured or purchased on or after october num num shall be crashworthy .
all category num devices manufactured or purchased before october num num shall not be used after october num num .
num .
category num devices .
category num work zone devices are truck mounted impact attenuators work zone impact attenuators and portable concrete barriers .
all impact attenuators shall be crashworthy .
portable concrete barriers that were fabricated in accordance with the details shown on sheet num of aldot special drawing pnjbnum and have aldot numtl cast into the top of the rails are crashworthy and are acceptable for installation .
other types of portable concrete barrier rails may be used with the written approval of the construction engineer .
num .
category num devices .
category num work zone devices are large trailer mounted devices such as sequential arrow boards and changeable message signs .
standards for rating category num devices as crashworthy have not been developed .
d materials for fabrication construction and installation .
materials used in the fabrication construction and installation of the construction signs barricades and other devices shall conform to the requirements of article num plan details the mutcd and the details noted in this section sign panels may be fabricated from one of the types of material shown below material min .
panel thickness sign face area aluminum flat sheets num inches num mm all sizes steel flat sheets num inches num mm all sizes plastic flat sheets num inches num mm all sizes exterior plywood sheets grade ac num inches num mm num inches num mm up to num square feet num m over num square feet num m note any sign panel installation using standard mounting procedures which in the opinion of the engineer does not provide a reasonably rigid sign installation shall be strengthened by the use of additional supports andor backing stringers .
sign background and messages shall be formed using materials noted for such in articles num and num .
to permit visual verification of proper use each type sheeting shall display an identifiable symbol on the face of the sheeting in a repeat pattern .
when no prerequirements are specified for units they shall comply with the manufacturers specifications as approved by the department under the provisions of section num of the alabama code .
items are not required to be new .
used items may be acceptable provided the following conditions are met units are in good repair clean and structurally sound .
reflective sheeting on any unit is clean and in good repair .
all legends and messages are sharp clean and legible .
reflectivity of said units during the hours of darkness shall provide acceptable clear and uniform delineation without dead spots .
no test reports are required but the engineer shall visually inspect all units and accessories for compliance with the various dimensional and material stipulations noted before approving their use in the work .
the approval of any unit for use is subject to satisfactory field performance and does not preclude the engineer ordering replacements of units said replacements for these previously approved units shall be without additional compensation .
e pilot car flaggers and flagging equipment .
the pilot car flaggers and all flagging equipment shall meet the requirements of the mutcd .
the pilot car shall be a registered motor vehicle designed for use upon a highway .
offroad type vehicles will not be allowed .
section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num num construction requirements .
a traffic control personnel devices equipment and training .
num .
contractors employees responsible for traffic control .
the contractor shall assign an employee to have the primary responsibility and sufficient authority for the implementation and maintenance of traffic control operations .
this employee shall have the responsibility of making modifications to the traffic control that may be necessary because of changing circumstances during construction .
the contractor shall also assign an employee to be available during nonwork hours to respond to calls involving the maintenance of traffic control devices .
the contractor shall provide the department with the contact information in writing for these employees at the preconstruction conference .
the contractor shall also notify the local law enforcement agency in writing with a copy to the project manager of the contact information for these employees .
num .
installation of traffic control devices and equipment .
all traffic control devices necessary for the first stage of construction shall be properly placed and in operation before any construction is allowed to start .
when work of a progressive nature is involved such as resurfacing a road under traffic the necessary signs shall be moved concurrently with the advancing operation .
all construction signs shall be erected in a workmanlike manner such that all supports are vertical sign panels generally perpendicular to the travelway and legends horizontal so that they effectively convey the intended message .
these signs shall be mounted on stationary or temporary supports as directed by the engineer and dependent on the type work being performed .
in general work being performed at spot locations and of short duration will necessitate the use of temporary supports properly ballasted for stability .
if the construction signs are not to be lighted the supports shall not extend above the top edge of the sign panel .
the location legends sheeting dimensions spacing of supports and horizontal and vertical placement with respect to the pavement of warning signs barricades and other traffic control devices shall be as required by plan details mutcd and as directed or approved by the engineer .
the contractor must advise and have the approval of the engineer prior to installing or removing traffic control devices from the project .
num .
moving and covering traffic control signs and other devices while not in use .
during periods when signs and other devices are not being used for traffic control they shall be removed from the work area covered with the specified material or otherwise positioned so they do not convey their message to the traveling public .
if covered the covering material shall be num inch num mm nominal size exterior plywood cut to fit the shape of the sign panel .
the covering material shall be installed in accordance with the plan details and in such manner that no damage will occur to the sign panel during installation .
covering material shall be maintained in a neat and workmanlike manner during its use .
num .
lighting for traffic control signs and other devices .
all construction signs barricades and other devices which require lighting as designated by plan details or directed by the engineer shall be provided with warning lights or electric incandescent or fluorescent lighting .
it will be the contractors responsibility to install electric lighting in a safe workmanlike manner and in accordance with the latest edition of the national electrical code national electrical safety code andor all local codes .
the contractor will be responsible for investigating procuring and bearing the expense of a continuous power source whether by battery generator or commercial a.c. supply .
num .
flaggers flaggers with proper attire and flags shall be provided when ordered by the engineer or when the contractor deems flaggers necessary to safely handle traffic through the construction zone .
flaggers are considered a general requirement of all traffic control schemes and no direct payment will be made for such .
num .
engineers actions to address inadequate traffic control .
if the engineer determines that the proper provisions for safe traffic control are not being provided and maintained by the contractor the engineer will order suspension of the work until the proper level is achieved .
in cases of serious or willful disregard for safety of section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num the public by the contractor the engineer may restore the traffic control measures to proper condition and deduct all costs of this work from monies due or becoming due the contractor .
num .
training requirements .
the contractors personnel involved in the implementation operation and inspection of traffic control shall be trained appropriate to the decisions each individual is required to make in accordance with num cfr num subpart j .
the contractors personnel shall have completed the training prior to performing the traffic control work .
the contractor shall furnish a written certification at the preconstruction conference that is worded as follows i do hereby certify that all personnel who are involved in the implementation operation and inspection of traffic control on the referenced project are trained or will be trained prior to beginning work appropriate to the decisions each individual is required to make in accordance with num cfr num subpart j .
this wording shall be followed by the signature of an authorized representative of the contractor .
employees shall receive periodic training updates that reflect changing industry practices .
the contractor shall maintain records of the training .
the records shall include dates of training name of instructor name of attendee length of course and topics covered .
the records shall be available for auditing by the engineer .
b supplementary items .
num .
area lighting .
area lighting is designated for use at locations where standard delineation devices are not considered sufficient to properly guide the traveling public through the construction work nor advise them of the hazardous conditions which exist .
the primary use will be in the areas of crossovers and intersections which are not clearly distinguishable during hours of darkness .
area lighting may consist of one or more area lights .
an area light shall consist of a num watt mercury vapor light or equivalent mounted on a num foot num m mast arm attached to a class num wood pole of sufficient length to provide a num foot num m luminaire mounting height above the elevation of the outside edge of paving unless otherwise shown by plan details .
these lights will be placed at locations designated by the engineer .
if possible the locations should be such that the lights will adequately light the area but not present a hazard to the traveling public .
bracing or guying of poles which is unsightly or presents a hazard will not be allowed .
it will be the contractors responsibility to investigate procure and bear the expense of the power source for these lights whether by commercial a.c. current or generator and to insure that these light sources are installed in a safe workmanlike manner and in accordance with the latest editions of the national electrical code national electrical safety code andor all local codes .
num .
special construction signs .
special construction signs shall consist of signs which require special fabricated sign panels or special mounting requirements such signs will be designated as special on the construction plans .
num .
pilot car operation .
pilot car operation and associated flagging shall be performed as described in the mutcd .
flagmen and flagging devices are considered a necessary requirement of the pilot car operation and no direct payment will be made for such .
c maintenance .
the contractor shall assume full responsibility for the continuous and expeditious maintenance of all construction warning signs barricades and other traffic control devices .
maintenance shall include but shall not be limited to replacement of sign panels barricades and other devices which in the opinion of the engineer are damaged or deteriorated beyond effective use replacement of broken supports plumbing of leaning signs cleaning of dirty signs barricades and other devices repair of defaced signs replacement of stolen items etc .
all items used for traffic control shall be generally maintained in its original placement condition and such maintenance will be considered a part of the original installation cost .
failure to maintain all traffic control devices in such manner as to provide adequate continuous safety to the public will be cause for action by the engineer as noted in the last paragraph of subarticle numa .
section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num d liability .
reference is made to section num of the specifications which covers the legal responsibilities of the contractor to the traveling public .
although the department will be designating and directing the placement of certain traffic control devices the contractor is not relieved of his responsibility to continuously review and maintain all traffic handling measures and insure himself that adequate provisions have been made for the safety of the public and workmen .
construction signs and other traffic control devices specified by plan details are considered the necessary requirements for satisfactory traffic control .
this does not preclude the engineer from ordering or the contractor from requesting for approval additional signs or traffic control devices to safely handle unforeseen traffic situations in which case they would be paid for .
the contractor may with the approval of the engineer furnish additional traffic control devices at no cost to the department to protect his work andor workmen .
num method of measurement .
the various items used in the handling of traffic through construction zones will be measured for payment as follows construction signs and special construction signs which are specified by plan details or ordered by the engineer and approved for use will be measured in square feet square meters computed from measurements of the actual sign panel installed no deductions will be made for corner radii .
the sign supports and mounting hardware are considered incidental to the use of these sign units hence no separate measurement or payment will be made for the supports and hardware .
measurement for payment under the item of special construction signs will only be made on signs designated as special by plan details or ordered as special by the engineer .
drums will be measured individually for the number ordered and furnished .
cones will be measured per each and shall be num inches num mm high with a ballasted base .
cones of smaller height may be used for operations such as pavement striping and marking but no direct payment will be made .
ballasts for cones will be measured per each for each weight mass ordered accepted and used .
barricades will be measured individually for the type designated and furnished .
delineators will be measured per each which includes a num inches num mm in diameter reflector of designated color mounted on a num num kgm steel post or equivalent aluminum post as specified by part vi of the mutcd .
warning lights will be measured per each for the type furnished .
electrical incandescent or fluorescent lights will be measured individually for each light installed .
area lights will be measured individually for each light assembly installed .
vertical panels will be measured per each installation for the number of installations ordered and furnished which shall include the panel or panels post and hardware .
a singlesided installation shall be an installation requiring a panel on only one side of the post .
a doublesided installation shall be an installation requiring a panel on each side of the post .
the construction plans may contain traffic handling schemes detailing the signs barricades and other traffic control devices to be installed at certain locations or in some cases for the entire project .
if specified on these traffic handling schemes and a lump sum pay item is provided payment shall be made on a lump sum basis for all signs and devices detailed on these schemes .
signs barricades and other traffic control devices included in this lump sum measurement shall meet all requirements as outlined in this section .
other traffic control items such as traffic control stripes legends and markings portable concrete barriers sequential chevron and arrow boards and pavement markers when so required will be measured and paid for under the appropriate section for such provided in the specifications .
measurement of item numo pilot car will be the actual number of units per each ordered and accepted .
no direct measurement or payment will be made for a pilot car unless it is listed in the pay items of the contract .
section num traffic control devices for construction work zones num num basis of payment .
a general .
payment for construction signs and special construction signs measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for fabrication of sign panel with proper sheeting and legend furnishing and erecting on proper supports furnishing all mounting hardware covering when not in use handling and maintaining until project completion .
payment for drums barricades cones delineators warning lights vertical panels and ballasts for cones measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for fabrication erection at designated locations whenever required furnishing continuous power source for lights handling and maintenance until project completion .
electric incandescent or fluorescent lights measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials and mounting hardware wiring erecting maintaining and investigating procuring and bearing the expense of continuous power supply .
area lights measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials and mounting hardware including num watt mercury vapor lamp or equivalent luminaire and luminaire mounting arm and class num wood pole wiring erecting maintaining and investigating procuring and bearing the expense of continuous power supply .
item numo pilot car measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for furnishing and operating the pilot car for furnishing the pilot car driver and flaggers for all equipment and materials necessary to complete the work .
payment for items numb m will further include all costs in relocating removing and returning these items to the project when required to provide a complete traffic control system throughout the life of the project .
no payment will be made beyond the maximum quantity of signs barricades or other traffic control devices provided at any one time except when alternate sign panels are required for proper handling of the traffic in such case both alternate panels will be measured for payment .
the lump sum payment for traffic control devices specified by plan details shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials power sources and mounting hardware erecting handling relocating signs and devices within the indicated traffic handling scheme and maintaining all traffic control devices until project completion .
if traffic control devices are deleted from the traffic handling scheme that is to be paid on a lump sum basis deductions for the items deleted will be made from the lump sum cost in the amount of the contract unit prices bid for the quantity of individual traffic control items so deleted .
traffic control items which are added to the lump sum traffic handling scheme will be paid for at the contract unit price for the item added .
a lump sum payment will be considered as full compensation for traffic handling scheme .
once construction signs or other warning devices are no longer needed within the designated limits of the lump sum traffic handling scheme they may be used in other areas of traffic control and payment will be made under the appropriate pay item .
unless otherwise designated on the construction plans all signs barricades and other traffic control devices covered by this section shall become the property of the contractor at the completion of the project .
the salvage value for these items shall be reflected in the contract unit prices bid .
no payment will be made for stored materials under this section unless the material in storage was either manufactured or purchased new for specific use on the project .
no payment will be made for devices installed solely for the protection of the contractors work and which serve no useful purpose in protecting the safety of the public or workmen such as traffic cones for paint protection devices installed to protect fresh concrete presenting no hazard etc .
the contractor will be expected to submit a balanced bid for all traffic control items .
the submission of unbalanced bid prices may result in loss of contract award .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa traffic control scheme per lump sum numb construction signs per square foot square meter numc special construction signs per square foot square meter section num portable sequential arrow and chevron sign unit num numd channelizing drums per each nume cones num inches num mm high per each numf barricades type ____ per each numg barricades type i portable num inches num mm wide per each numh delineators per each numi warning lights type ____ per each numj electric incandescent or fluorescent light per each numk area light per each numl vertical panel type sided per each numm ballast for cone per each numo pilot car per each specify either i or ii specify either single or double section num portable sequential arrow and chevron sign unit num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing portable sequential arrow and chevron sign units and all services and operational supplies necessary to provide a functional sign unit during the life of the contract .
three categories of furnishing and use of these type sign units are covered by this section .
these categories are as follows pay item numa the furnishing of a new sign unit its use during the contract its reconditioning and title transfer to the department upon completion of the project .
pay item numb the use of department furnished units during the contract the reconditioning of the unit after completion of the project and its return to the departments storage yard .
pay item numc the furnishing and use of units during the contract with the title remaining with the contractor .
num materials .
a item numa .
all sign units furnished by the contractor for use under this item shall be listed on list ivnum work zone traffic control devices of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
all sign units furnished for use under this item shall be new units which include all of the latest modifications to manufacturers current production models .
each sign unit shall be self contained and include message board power supply and trailer .
b item numb .
these units will generally meet the requirements of subarticle a above and will be made available to the contractor by the alabama department of transportation for use during the course of the project .
these units will have automatic dimming of lamp intensity for day andor night operation .
operation manuals for these units will be furnished .
c item numc .
all sign units furnished for use under this item may be new or reconditioned units which were designed and manufactured specifically for use in traffic control which provide at least the following num .
a minimum num foot x num foot num m x num m message board of an appropriate design capable of producing a left or right hand mode for a sequential chevron min .
of num section num portable sequential arrow and chevron sign unit num chevrons flashing arrow sequential arrow or sequential stem arrow using num inch num mm diameter sealed beam lamps .
num .
electronic controls for operating messages at num fpm with automatic dimming of lamp intensity for day andor night operation capability .
num .
power source shall be capable of providing an adequate continuous power supply for at least num hours without refueling .
num .
a trailer of substantial design for transporting the sign unit from one location to another and to provide a stable setup at location of use .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the portable sign unit furnished or provided under this section is to be used in conjunction with the handling of traffic through the work .
the use thereof is shown on the plan details for traffic handling .
b maintenance .
all sign units shall be maintained in such a manner as to provide continuous service during their use on the project .
units which become nonoperational during use will require the contractor to provide flagmen or other approved traffic handling methods until the units can be repaired or replaced .
in addition to the above the maintenance of units furnished by the alabama department of transportation or which are to become the property of the alabama department of transportation upon project completion shall include the following num .
the sign units shall be stored in an approved secured storage area when not in use .
num .
the contractor will be required to perform all maintenance operations recommended by the manufacturer of the units keeping adequate records of such operation .
the units shall be kept in good repair at all times .
this includes cleaning of the unit and maintenance of the exposed protective coatings on the unit .
c return or transfer of title to the department .
prior to completion of the project and when the units are deemed of no further use in handling of traffic each unit shall be cleaned checked and repaired as necessary to place the unit in good operation condition prior to transfer of title or return of the unit to the department .
after inspection by departmental personnel and the units are found to be in good operational condition with all working parts functioning the units along with a copy of the units operating manual maintenance records and title transfer if required shall be delivered to the designated department storage yard .
num method of measurement .
measurement of sign units will be made in complete functional units .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
num .
item numa .
the ordered and accepted sign units under this item measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of a new sign unit and its exclusive use on the project for providing all equipment supplies services labor and incidentals necessary to operate and to maintain the units in good serviceable condition during the life of the contract for transporting of the units as necessary and upon completion of the project the reconditioning of the units and the transfer of title of the unit to the department along with its service records and operating manuals .
num .
item numb .
the ordered and accepted sign units under this item measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the handling of the unit for providing all equipment supplies services labor and incidentals necessary to operate and to maintain the units in a good serviceable condition during the life of the contract and upon completion of the project the reconditioning of the unit to the same section num portable changeable message signs num condition they were in upon their receipt and the return of the unit its service records and operating manuals to the departments storage facility .
num .
item numc .
the ordered and accepted sign units under this item measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for the furnishing of acceptable new or reconditioned sign units and its exclusive use during the life of the contract for the handling of the unit and for providing all equipment supplies services tools labor and incidentals necessary to operate and to maintain the units in a good serviceable condition during the life of the contract .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa state retained portable sequential arrow and chevron sign unit per each numb state furnished portable sequential arrow and chevron sign unit per each numc portable sequential arrow and chevron sign unit per each section num portable changeable message signs num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing new portable changeable message signs or utilizing state furnished portable changeable message signs .
the furnishing of new signs includes all services and operational supplies necessary to provide a functional sign unit .
all changeable message signs shall be in compliance with the current edition of the mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices .
num materials .
a general .
all changeable message signs shall be designated according to type with a type num having a oneline message display panel a type num having a threeline message display panel and a type num having a full matrix display panel .
if ownership of the sign is to be retained by the state and the sign is vehicle mounted the sign unit shall be suitably adaptable including all connections for mounting onto a standard size numton pickup truck .
the sign framework and installation shall be structurally adequate to allow complete sign operation including raising and lowering the sign panel at sustained highway speeds of num miles per hour num km per hour .
b type num message sign .
a type num sign shall be a portable oneline changeable message sign suitable for mounting on either a truck or on a twowheeled trailer .
the sign system shall consist of a single line sign panel assembly controller power supply structural support system all applicable software and manuals .
c type num message sign .
a type num sign shall be a portable threeline changeable message sign mounted on a twowheeled trailer .
the sign system shall consist of a threeline sign panel assembly controller power supply and structural support system all mounted on a twowheeled trailer .
the sign unit shall be furnished with all necessary cabling software and manuals .
d type num message sign .
a type num sign shall be a portable full matrix variable letter graphic and symbols changeable message sign .
the system shall consist of a full matrix sign panel assembly capable of producing an inverse display with a programmable controller capable of displaying standard traffic safety and custom symbols .
the sign and power plant shall be trailer mounted .
the sign shall be furnished with all necessary cabling software and manuals .
num construction requirements .
a general .
the contractor shall utilize to the fullest extent the changeable message sign whenever any potential hazardous condition exists that would require extra emphasis in warning the driver of section num portable changeable message signs num any emergencies that might arise during the construction or at any location directed by the engineer .
any message used on the sign shall be approved by the engineer .
b pay item numa .
the contractor shall furnish a new or used sign unit and shall be totally responsible for the required performance of the sign .
an acceptable sign unit shall be one of the units listed on list ivnum work zone traffic control devices subheading message signs of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list can also be found in subarticle numf .
the contractor shall retain ownership of the sign unit when the engineer determines that the sign is no longer needed .
c pay item numb .
the contractor shall furnish a new and fully functional sign unit .
an acceptable sign unit shall be one of the units listed on list ivnum work zone traffic control devices subheading message signs of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
when the engineer determines that the sign unit is no longer needed ownership shall be transferred to the department .
d pay item numc .
the contractor shall use a department furnished sign unit .
the contractor shall clean service and repair the sign unit when the engineer determines that the sign unit is no longer needed and shall return the sign unit to the department and transfer the title of the unit to the department .
num maintenance requirements .
the sign unit shall be kept in good repair at all times .
failure malfunction or damage to the unit for any reason shall require the contractor to expedite the repair or replacement and furnish adequate flagmen or other approved means at his expense to provide a safe means for the control of traffic until the unit is put back into service .
maintenance shall include the periodic cleaning of the unit along with the repair of damage to the protective coating of the unit .
sign units furnished under pay items numb contractor furnished and numc state furnished shall be stored in an approved secure storage area when not in use .
the contractor shall perform all maintenance operations recommended by the manufacturer of the sign and keep complete records of this maintenance .
num delivery of unit and transfer of title pay items numb and numc .
prior to the completion of the project and when the engineer determines that the sign unit is no longer needed the contractor shall clean and service the unit to insure that the unit is in good operational condition .
after departmental personnel inspect the sign unit and find it to be in good operational condition with all working parts functioning the unit along with a copy of the units operating manual maintenance records and title transfer title transfer required under pay item numb shall be delivered to the location designated by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
measurement of portable changeable message signs will be by complete individual sign units for the type sign furnished .
there will be no overrun of this item without written permission of the construction engineer .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the ordered and accepted sign units measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit prices which shall be full compensation for fabricating and furnishing the unit to the project if required for the exclusive use during the project for maintenance and operation of the unit during the life of the contract and includes all equipment tools labor services supplies and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
the contract price for pay items numa and numb shall also include the reconditioning of the unit transfer of the title of the unit if required and delivery to the designated storage location .
section num uniformed police officers num b payment will be made under item no .
numa portable changeable message signs type ____ per each numb state retained portable changeable message signs type ____ per each numc state furnished portable changeable message signs type ____ per each section num uniformed police officers num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing uniformed police officers to assist in directing traffic through work zones .
officers furnished and paid for under this section will be allowed only at the direction of or with the approval of the engineer .
the officers shall be employed by and paid by the contractor .
num qualifications and training .
officers furnished under this section shall be employees of the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the location where they are performing the duties covered by this section .
officers shall have arrest powers for the location in which they are working and shall wear their complete police uniform while working .
officers shall be trained in accordance with the requirements given in num cfr num subpart j .
any course meeting the requirements of num cfr num subpart j will be acceptable .
a dvd copy of one such course alabama department of public safety construction zone safety training may be obtained by contacting the project manager .
other courses may also be available through the atssa american traffic safety services association .
officers shall certify in writing prior to the officer beginning work that they have completed the training .
the certification shall read as follows i do hereby certify that i have completed training appropriate to the job decisions i am required to make in accordance with the requirements given in num cfr num subpart j ..
this wording shall be followed by the officers signature .
the contractor shall provide a copy of this certification to the project manager prior to the officer beginning work .
num duties .
the duties of police officers under this section shall consist of assisting in the directing of public traffic through construction work zones and the enforcement of traffic laws .
this shall be done at such locations and for such periods as deemed necessary and appropriate by the engineer for the control and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in accordance with the mutcd .
num method of measurement .
the item of uniformed police officer measured for payment will be the number of hours this item was ordered and acceptably performed .
the number of hours measured for payment will be the total number of hours for each officer performing work under this item .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the number of hours this item of work was ordered and acceptably performed measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid which shall be full compensation for furnishing all personnel materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this item of work .
payment will not be made for an officer for whom the contractor has not submitted the signed statement certifying that the officer has completed the required training .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa uniformed police officer per hour section num roadway lighting num section num roadway lighting num description .
this work shall consist of furnishing and installing roadway lighting systems or the modification of roadway lighting .
the structural requirements design and materials for roadway lighting are addressed in section num .
num materials .
materials shall meet the requirements given in section num .
prior to purchasing materials and within num days after the issuance of the notice to proceed the contractor shall submit seven copies of a complete descriptive list of all materials wiring conduits boxes mounting hardware power control devices luminaires luminaire poles etc .
to the engineer for approval .
the requirement for the submittal of structural designs and details is given in section num .
this information shall be submitted on the departments material submittal form furnished to the contractor for this purpose .
the submittal shall also include seven copies of catalog cutouts or published data sheets for each item on the list .
incomplete or inaccurate submittals will be returned to the contractor for revision and resubmittal .
partial lists may be considered if prior approval for the submittal of a partial list is approved in writing by the engineer .
materials shall not be installed prior to approval .
the department will not be liable for materials purchased work performed or any delay incurred due to the failure of the contractor to secure prior approval .
failure of the engineer to note unsatisfactory material as received at the job site will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility of furnishing the required material .
num construction requirements .
a code .
all work shall be done in accordance with the requirements given in the current edition of the national fire protection association nfpa num national electrical code nec and the regulations and standards of the power company providing service .
b license .
the contractor responsible for the performance of the work shall be licensed as a general contractor authorized to perform electrical work by the alabama state licensing board for general contractors at least one out of every three persons in each work crew shall be a journeyman licensed by the alabama electrical contractors board .
journeymen shall be present and shall have direct involvement with all work required for the installation and operational testing of electrical materials and equipment .
the journeymen shall also possess an imsa international municipal signal association roadway lighting level num certification .
the contractor shall submit copies of the general contractor license journeyman licenses and imsa certifications to the engineer as a part of the submittal of the list of materials proposed for installation .
work shall not begin on the installation of electrical materials or equipment until copies of the licenses and certifications have been approved by the engineer .
c electrical power .
the entity city county state etc .
that will be responsible for the eventual operation and maintenance of the roadway lighting system will make application for electrical service upon notification that power service will be required .
the contractor shall inform the engineer when power service is required at least num calendar days prior to the need of the power service .
this same entity will be responsible for the cost of the service connection and the monthly service billings thereafter .
electrical power shall be the power system shown on the plans which will usually be a single phase numwire num voltac system .
power shall be provided by a transformer that does not provide power to any other equipment .
section num roadway lighting num d general conduit system installation requirements .
conduit shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
rigid nonmetallic conduit rnc may be installed as a substitute for nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors nucc if it is the same size and schedule as the nucc .
conduit routing shown on the plans is diagrammatic only .
actual routing shall be in the most prudent manner as approved by the engineer .
underground conduit depth shall benum inches num mm minimum unless shown otherwise on the plans .
all conduit ends except nucc and hdpe shall be put together in couplings to form a smooth raceway for cables .
bushings and duct sealant shall be installed at all conduit terminations to protect the insulation of the conductors and to prevent debris from entering the conduit .
conduits shall be joined by approved methodsprescribed by the manufacturer of the conduit .
when conduit is installed for future use the ends of the conduit shall becapped with a fitting listed for this purpose to prevent water and other foreign matter from entering the conduit system .
the contractor shall seed and mulch disturbed areas as directed by the engineer .
the seeding and mulching of disturbed areas shall be a subsidiary obligation of the conduit installation .
before beginning excavation the contractor shall determine the location of all utilities in the vicinity .
utilities shall not be damaged during construction .
conduit shall be located to avoid potential conflict with the future installation of guardrail signposts and other equipment and devices .
a minimum of num inches num mm clearance shall be provided between the finished lines of conduit runs and existing underground utilities .
where the underground conduit run is adjacent to concrete walls piers footings etc .
a minimum of num inches num mm of undisturbed earth or firmly compacted soil shall be maintained between the conduit and the adjacent concrete .
unless shown otherwise on the plans trenches shall not be excavated in existing pavement or paved shoulders to install conduit .
when it is necessary to place conduit under an existing pavement the conduit shall be installed in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer trenches shall not remain open after normal work hours each day .
liquid tight flexible metal conduit lfmc or liquid tight flexible nonmetallic conduit lfnc as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer shall be installed where conduits cross an expansion or open joint on bridges barrier rails or structure .
the lfmc or lfnc shall be num inches num mm in length and shall have a sag of notmore than num inches num mm between the fixed ends of the rigid conduit .
e junction boxes .
the types of junction box shall be type installation location box material type num installed flush with grade .
nonmetallic type num installed on the surface of a structure .
metal type num installed flush with surface of a structure .
nonmetallic type num as shown on the plans as shown on the plans f nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors .
nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors nucc shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if plowing is proposed for the installation of the nucc the manufacturers recommended installation practices shall be submitted to the engineer prior to beginning the installation .
if the engineer is not satisfied with the contractors performance and knowledge once installation begins the contractor shall arrange for a manufacturers representative experienced in plowing methods to be at the jobsite until the engineer determines that the contractor is capable of properly installing the nucc .
if rock or other obstructions hinder plowing operations the engineer may require that conductor routes be preripped to locate rock or hidden obstructions .
obstructions may be removed or the conductors routed around them as approved by the engineer .
if the plow pulling method is used the plow operator shall have an acceptable method to insure that the manufacturers recommended maximum tensile force on the nucc is not exceeded .
section num roadway lighting num if at any time the engineer determines the installation is not in full compliance with the intent of the manufacturers recommended practices the operation shall stop until a manufacturers representative can further instruct the contractors personnel in the deficient areas .
if the chute plowing method is used special attention shall be given to the conductor feed chute dimensions .
g conductor installation .
num .
splices and taps in conductors .
splices and taps in conductors shall only be made in junction boxes and pole bases .
they shall be made with solderless split bolt connectors .
splices and taps shall be protected in sealed in silicone gel filled enclosures to provide a waterproof connection and to ensure the required electrical insulation .
silicone gel filled enclosures shall be reenterable shall be uv resistant listed for temperatures from num c to num c and shall be impact and abrasion resistant .
the enclosure shall be sized as shown in the following table conductor size gel enclosure size num awg and smaller num num awg num or miniwedge larger than num awg num num .
pulling conductors into conduit .
conductors shall not be pulled into a conduit until the installation of the conduit is complete .
conductors in conduits shall be carefully pulled into place using approved methods so that the conductors will not be damaged .
powdered soapstone talc or other inert lubricant specifically designed for the purpose shall be used when pulling conductors through the conduit .
all conductors within a single conduit shall be pulled at the same time and shall be handled and installed in such a manner as to prevent kinks bends or other distortion which could damage the conductor and outer covering .
when conductors are pulled through hand holes pole shafts etc .
a pad of firm rubber or other suitable materials shall be placed between the conductors and the edges of the opening to prevent damage to the conductors .
h grounding .
all metal poles and metal enclosures containing electric wires andor equipment shall be grounded.exothermic welds or other approved connectors shall be used to connect the grounding conductor to the ground rods .
a continuous grounding conductor either bare or having a green colored insulation shall be extended from the service ground to all equipment and shall be used for grounding purposes only .
i lightning protection .
lightning protection shall be installed as shown on the plans at all poles greater than or equal to num feet num m in height .
j foundations .
for bidding purposes the size and configuration of reinforced concrete foundations will be shown on the plans for the designated ranges of pole heights the engineer will inform the contractor if changes are required to the depth of concrete foundation required at each pole .
changes in the depth of foundations may be made based on a review the contractors design submittal .
the contractor will be notified of any such changes upon completion of this review .
if no changes are required the contractor shall install the asbid sizes of foundations .
care shall be taken to properly orient the anchor bolts of concrete foundations so that the luminaire assembly will be in proper alignment with the roadway .
conduits shall be accurately placed oriented in the proper direction to accommodate future extension and securely held in place to prevent movement .
concrete shall then be placed in the excavated area against undisturbed earthbelow the finished ground line .
the concrete shall be placed in an approved form above ground line to the top of the foundation .
all exposed edges of the concrete shall have a num inch num mm chamfer .
the top of the foundation shall be level and shall be placed to properly orient the luminaire assembly with the roadway .
for breakaway poles the finished foundation shall have a maximum num section num roadway lighting num inch num mm breakaway support stub height measurement as defined in the aashto roadside design guide chapter num. k installation of luminaire poles .
luminaire polesshall be installed in a vertical position .
erection shall be accomplished carefully to prevent marring the finish or otherwise damaging the pole .
when lighting is to be installed on a bridge the contractor shall before ordering the poles examine the bridge plans or the completed bridge whichever is applicable to determine the exact nature of the proposed or existing details which will accommodate the luminaire poles .
any discrepancies between the plans and an existing bridge structureshall be immediately reported to the engineer .
the contractor shall verify that the pole anchor bolts base plate bolt pattern and pole assembly including tenon mounting holes multiple pole sections and handhole orientation are coordinated for proper orientation of lowering devices and luminaires to the roadway as shown on the plans .
a screen made from num inch num mm mesh galvanized wire cloth shall be fabricated and inserted in the pole base to prevent rodents etc .
from entering the pole .
backfill for direct burial fiberglass poles shall be as recommended by the pole manufacturer .
care shall be taken to assure the bracket arm is properly aligned .
l installation of luminaires .
the light control surfaces and glassware shall be cleaned after installation .
cleaning shall be performed in accordance with the luminaire manufacturers recommendations .
luminaires shall be leveled plumbed and installed as per the manufacturers recommendations to achieve the most suitable light pattern .
the contractor shall verify that the lamp socket is in the proper position to produce the optimum lighting pattern for each luminaire not to just meet minimum .
each luminaire shall be adjusted to provide the most effective light pattern as directed by the engineer after installation .
m testing insulation .
the insulation of all lighting circuits will be tested by the engineer atthe load side of the contactors or circuit breakers .
these tests shall be made with a numvolt dc megger tester .
any reading of num ohms to ground or higher is satisfactory .
any reading of less than num ohms to ground is unacceptable and shall be corrected .
the engineer mayconduct additional insulation testing after the completion of the operational testing .
nground resistance testing .
the resistance to ground will be tested by the engineer at each lighting control center .
the test will be conducted using a null balance earth tester with auxiliary ground rods placednum feet num m and num feet num m respectively from the tested ground rod .
a reading of num ohms or less is satisfactory .
any reading over num ohms will require the installation of additional ground rods to be placed in a pattern as directed by the engineer .
the engineer may conduct additional ground resistance testing after the completion of the operational testing .
o testing luminaire lowering devices .
the contractor shall perform a functional test on all luminaire lowering devices .
tests shall be performed in the presence of the engineer .
the test shall be performed on the final completed lighting assembly with all luminaires and other components installed .
the test shall be performed as follows start with the device in the latched position on top of the pole .
unlatch and lower the device support to ground level for inspection .
raise device to top and latch .
unlatch and lower the device num to num feet num to num m. raise the device and confirm that secure latching has occurred .
repeat unlatching lowering raising and latching three times .
if latching or unlatching failures occur or if any other problems occur during the test the contractor shall make corrections and repeat the complete test in the presence of the engineer .
p operational testing of the system .
the contractor shall perform full operational testing of the completed lighting system after the completion of the installation of all equipment and materials including all miscellaneous section num roadway lighting num items of work required for the complete lighting system .
the operational testing will not begin until the testing of the insulation resistance to ground and luminaire lowering devices has been completed and accepted by the engineer .
the engineer will set the date that the operational testing will begin .
the contractor shall provide all installation and operational instructions for all lowering devices before the operational testing of the system will be allowed to begin .
anoperational test shall be the full operation of all components of the lighting system for a period of num calendar days .
during thistest period the contractor shall perform all necessary adjustments including reaiming of luminaires and replace all malfunctioning parts of the equipment required to place the system in a fully operational condition .
extra compensation will not be given for adjustments maintenance repairs and replacements during the test period .
the initial test period will be suspended as directed by the engineer during the time that the entire lighting system is not in full operation .
the num calendar day operational test period shall be restarted or repeated if required by the engineer due to repeated failure of the lighting system .
the engineer will perform a final inspection of the lighting system at the completion of the operational testing .
if all items of work in the contract have been completed the engineer will suspend contract time charges during the operational testing .
upon completion of the operational testing field tests may be conducted by the engineer to verify that the required lighting levels and uniformity ratios are being provided.any adjustments to the lighting system necessary to meet the design criteria shall be done at the contractors expense .
q warranties guarantee and maintenance .
the state shall be protected from any defect in the lighting system by the following the contractor shall provide the manufacturers warranties to the state for all electrical and mechanical equipment .
the contractor warrants equipment and guarantees workmanship for satisfactory in service operation of the electrical and mechanical equipment and related components for a period of one year following the date of completion of the operational check period .
maintenance repair work may be required for long duration contracts .
in the case of long duration contracts the contractor shall perform maintenance repair work on the lighting system equipment devices structures and hardware from the end of the one year warranty period until the end of contract time charges .
maintenance repair work during this time period will be paid for as extra work in accordance with the requirements given in article num .
the department will not make the final payment for work under this section until the warranties guaranties and contact information are furnished to the engineer .
r modification of roadway lighting .
the modification of roadway lighting shall consist of any amount of preparation restoration relocation rehabilitation demolition or salvage work designated on the plans for modification .
new materials shall be furnished when required for the modification work unless noted otherwise on the plans .
s lump sum roadway lighting .
the work of furnishing and installing lump sum roadway lighting shall consist of the construction of partial or complete roadway lighting as shown to be required on the plans .
it may be work that is limited to no more than the installation of lamps or fuses for luminaires to a complete roadway lighting system with multiple lighting structures luminaires and lighting control equipment .
num method of measurement .
pay items numa b c d h i and l will be measured per each item .
pay items nume f and g will be measured in linear feet meters .
pay items numj k and z will be measured as lump sum units .
section num roadway lighting num num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the contract unit price for each pay item shall be full compensation for all materials tools labor equipment and miscellaneous items required to compete the item of work .
this will include excavation foundations conduits conductors pole assemblies luminaires junction boxes lighting control centers power service equipment and materials as designated for each pay item .
pay items are as follows num .
item numa high mast luminaire assembly .
a high mast luminaire assembly shall be the pole lowering device electric motor pole wiring system luminaires lamps fuses circuit breaker surge arrester lightning protection system pole numbers equipment grounding system and miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item numb roadway luminaire assembly .
a roadway luminaire assembly shall be the pole pole numbers pole wiring system state furnished when applicable surge arrester lightning protection system type num junction box equipment and pole grounding systems fuses luminaires lamps and miscellaneous hardware .
a breakaway device and luminaire lowering device shall be a part of this pay item when shown to be required on the plans .
when a luminaire assembly is shown on the plans to be a breakaway assembly the state will furnish pole wiring system which includes a surge arrestor .
num .
item numc pole foundation .
a pole foundation shall be a reinforced concrete foundation including the excavation disposal of excavated material concrete backfill concrete pad reinforcing steel conduit and elbows anchor bolts and mulching and seeding the disturbed ground .
the compensation for a reinforced concrete foundation may be adjusted if the size of the foundation is required to be changed .
bid prices shall be given for the construction of a foundation to the depth and at the diameter shown on the plans .
a deeper foundation may be required based on the results of the departments review of the contractors submittal of the design of the pole structure .
the compensation for a foundation will be adjusted if changes are required to be made to the depth of the foundation .
the adjustments shall be in accordance with the following requirements num num mm diameter the compensation for num num mm diameter foundation shall be increased by num for each foot num for each num mm of depth that the foundation increases from what is shown on the plans .
num num mm diameter the compensation for num num mm diameter foundation shall be increased by num for each foot num for each num mm of depth that the foundation increases from what is shown on the plans .
num num mm diameter the compensation for num num mm diameter foundation shall be increased by num for each foot num for each num mm of depth that the foundation increases from what is shown on the plans .
num num m diameter the compensation for num num m diameter foundation shall be increased by num for each foot num for each num mm of depth that the foundation increases from what is shown on the plans .
reinforcing steel the adjustments to compensation because of changes in foundation depth shall also cover compensation for providing the reinforcing steel shown on the plans for the deeper foundations .
the number and size of longitudinal reinforcing steel and the size and spacing of hoops will be the same regardless of any change in depth .
num .
item numd electrical junction box .
an electrical junction box shall be the junction box concrete and mounting hardware .
num .
item nume conduit .
conduit rmc lfmc lfnc or rnc shall be the conduit tubing including fittings trenching backfilling attachment to structure and miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item numf conductor .
this shall be individual conductors and includes pulling splicing terminating testing and miscellaneous hardware .
section num roadway lighting num num .
item numg combined duct and conductors combined duct and conductors nucc shall be the complete assembly of polyethylene duct and the size and number of required conductors .
it shall include fittings trenching backfilling splicing terminating testing and all miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item numh service pole .
a service pole shall consist of the pole switch fuses ground rod onespool clevis down guy and guy rod if required and miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item numi lighting control center .
a lighting control center shall include switches circuit breakers contactors fuses enclosures photocontrols ground rods incoming service conductors and conduit concrete slab anchor bolts and miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item numj preparation work for utility company equipment .
this work shall include the installation of concrete pads pull boxes conduit grounding equipment conductor vaults and other equipment and materials as shown on the plans .
num .
item numk modification of roadway lighting .
the modification of roadway lighting shall consist of the work shown on the plans to be included in this pay item .
it may include any kind and amount of preparation restoration relocation rehabilitation demolition and salvage work detailed on the plans .
num .
item numl landscape luminaire assembly .
landscape luminaire assemblies shall be furnished and installed by the contractor in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
each landscape luminaire shall be connected to the electrical power service to become a fully functional part of the required lighting system .
num .
item numz roadway lighting .
roadway lighting lump sum shall include all equipment materials tools labor and miscellaneous items required for roadway lighting as shown to be required on the plans .
this shall include all excavation foundations conduits conductors pole assemblies luminaires junction boxes lighting control centers power service equipment and materials and all miscellaneous items required to complete the work shown on the plans that is included in this item of work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa high mast luminaire assembly with per each numb roadway luminaire assembly with per each numc pole foundation per each numd electrical junction box type ____ per each nume conduit per linear foot meter numf conductor per linear foot meter numg combined duct and conductors per linear foot meter numh service pole per each numi lighting control center per each numj preparation work for utility company equipment per lump sum numk modification of roadway lighting per lump sum numl landscape luminaire assembly per each numz roadway lighting per lump sum number type and wattage of luminaires as required either roadway or high mast conduit size and type size of conductors number and size of conductors either bollard canopy recessed light up light or down light section num rehabilitation of existing roadway lighting num section num rehabilitation of existing roadway lighting num description .
this work shall consist of rehabilitating existing roadway lighting systems to the extent indicated on the plans .
all work shall be performed with the requirements of section num and as shown on the plans .
the structural requirements design and materials for roadway lighting are addressed in section num .
num materials .
all material requirements given in article num including submittals shall apply to the rehabilitation work unless noted otherwise on the plans .
num construction requirements .
the requirements for the rehabilitation of a roadway lighting system will be shown on the plans .
all of the construction requirements given in article num including the requirements for submittals testing and guarantees shall be applicable to the rehabilitation work unless noted otherwise on the plans .
num method of measurement .
all rehabilitation of existing roadway lighting system items with the exception of numm will be measured per each by the appropriate items complete in place acceptably installed and operational .
for pay item numc testing circuit insulation each circuit shall be separate and be measured per each .
pay item numm will be measured per lump sum .
num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted rehabilitation of existing roadway lighting measured as noted above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid .
this price will be full compensation for furnishing all materials installation labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete these items of work in accordance with the following num .
item numa relocate existing lighting control center .
this work includes the removal of a lighting control center and installation at a new location .
a lighting control center shall include switches circuit breakers contactors fuses enclosure photoelectric controller control transformer interior light interior receptacle ground rod incoming service conductors conduit anchor bolts terminal strips and miscellaneous hardware .
this work also includes the removal of an existing concrete pad and installation of a new concrete pad for the lighting control center and installation of a new aluminum identification plate .
num .
item numb replace lighting control center interior components .
the lighting control center interior components shall include switches circuit breakers contactors control transformer fuses photoelectric controller control transformer interior light interior receptacle ground rod terminal strips and miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item numc testing circuit insulation .
circuit insulation testing shall include providing test instruments test preparation test measurements recording test readings locating and identifying causes for low readings report preparation and other related miscellaneous services .
num .
item numd replace luminaire components .
luminaire components shall include poles luminaires luminaire support arms pole base breakaway devices individual lowering devices roadway luminaire lowering device system a complete lowering device assembly or any individual component of the lowering device surge arresters ballasts igniters lamps fuse holders fuses pole wiring cables and connectors portable power units power cord sets and miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item nume replace high mast lighting components .
high mast lighting components shall include the high mast lowering device system a complete lowering device assembly or any individual component of the lowering device pole wiring cables and connectors luminaires ballasts lamps igniters portable power units power cord sets and miscellaneous hardware .
section num rehabilitation of existing roadway lighting num num .
item numf renumber luminaire poles .
the renumbering of a luminaire pole shall include the removal of the existing numbers and the installation of a new eight num place holder with eight num alphanumeric characters .
num .
item numg remove and store state lighting system equipment .
this is state property and shall include loading transporting unloading and uninstalling poles luminaires luminaire support arms pole base breakaway devices high mast lowering devices roadway luminaire lowering devices individual lowering devices lighting control centers surge arresters ballasts igniters lamps fuse holders fuses pole wiring cables and connectors or miscellaneous hardware owned by the state .
num .
item numh install state lighting system equipment .
this is state property and shall include loading transporting unloading and installing poles luminaires luminaire support arms pole base breakaway devices high mast lowering devices roadway luminaire lowering devices individual lowering devices lighting control centers surge arresters ballasts igniters lamps fuse holders fuses pole wiring cables and connectors or miscellaneous hardware owned by the state .
num .
item numi install state luminaire or high mast assembly this is state property and shall include the loading transporting unloading and installation of complete luminaire assemblies or high mast luminaire assemblies .
the complete assemblies shall the pole luminaires luminaire support arms high mast roadway luminaire or individual lowering devices pole base breakaway devices lamps pole wiring cables and connectors and miscellaneous hardware .
num .
item numj remove luminaire pole foundation .
a luminaire pole foundation shall be a reinforced concrete foundation or an augerbase with drilling and backfilling concrete pad reinforcing steel conduit and elbows anchor bolts and mulching and seeding the disturbed ground .
num .
item numk replace luminaire .
a luminaire shall be a complete high mast offset cobra head or other manufactured single luminaire unit and shall include any hardware required to mount the luminaire to the pole or lowering device .
num .
item numl remove state lighting system equipment .
this is state property and shall include loading transporting unloading and uninstalling poles luminaires luminaire support arms pole base breakaway devices lighting control centers high mast lowering devices roadway luminaire lowering devices individual lowering devices surge arresters ballasts igniters lamps fuse holders fuses pole wiring cables and connectors or miscellaneous hardware owned by the state .
num .
item numm remove conductors andor conduits .
remove and dispose of unused or abandoned electrical conductors andor conduits including wire splices couplings and terminations as indicated on the plans including labor equipment services transportation and all appurtenances .
num .
item numn modification of existing state lighting system equipment .
this is state property shall include lighting poles luminaires luminaire support arms pole base breakaway devices lighting control centers high mast lowering devices roadway luminaire lowering devices individual lowering devices surge arresters ballasts igniters lamps fuse holders fuses pole wiring cables and connectors or miscellaneous hardware owned by the state .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa relocate existing lighting control center num per each numb replace num per each numc testing circuit insulation per each numd replace num per each nume replace high mast num per each numf renumber luminaire poles per each numg remove and store num per each numh install state property num per each numi install state num per each numj remove luminaire pole foundation num per each numk replace num per each numl remove num per each numm remove num per lump sum numn modification of existing num per each num number of circuits type wp de a g nt or special section num electrical conduits under roadways num num high mast concrete auger base or special num lighting control center interior circuit breakers contactor control transformer photo electric cell test switch terminal strip or ground rod num luminaire support arm lighting pole transformer base transformer base cover surge arrester breakaway fuse holder fuse in pole base roadway luminaire num amp fuse igniter h.p.s .
lamp fusible plug distribution block pole cable submersible splice kit ballast or starter num lowering device head frame assembly with cover mounting ring assembly portable power unit clevis plate with hoisting cable winch and mounting plate motor mounting bracket head frame roller assembly latch barrel assembly latch pin power cord luminaire ballast or lamp num lighting control center circuit breaker contactor control transformer test switch terminal strip photo electric receptacle service pole lighting pole luminaire support arm transformer base surge arrester fuse holder roadway luminaire roadway luminaire assembly high mast luminaire high mast luminaire assembly h.p.s .
lamp roadway luminaire lowering device system high mast head frame assembly high mast mounting ring assembly high mast clevis plate with hoisting cables winch and mounting plate power cord electrical junction box etc .
num roadway luminaire assembly or high mast luminaire assembly num high mast roadway cobra head modified cobra head offset or segmented reflector num conductors conduits conductors and conduits section num electrical conduits under roadways num description .
this section shall cover the work of furnishing and installing electrical conduits as detailed by the plans and these specifications .
the installation shall include placement of the conduit at the location shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
all electrical conduits installed under this section shall be encased with the kind of encasement depending on the type of installation as follows type num installation conduit installed by open trench method and having a concrete encasement .
type num installation conduit installed by an approved jacking or boring procedure and having a steel pipe encasement .
type num installation conduit installed by open trench method and having a bituminous plant mix backfill and surface treatment when required .
type num installation conduit installed by open trench method having a pipe encasement as shown on the plans and backfilled as shown on the plans .
type num installation conduit installed by a precision directional boring method and having a highdensity polyethylene hdpe encasement .
num materials .
materials shall meet the appropriate requirements of division num materials and the requirements noted in this article .
conduit shall meet the requirements of article num .
metal encasement pipe shall meet the requirements of section num .
concrete used to encase conduit in a type num installation shall be class a concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
all electrical equipment shall conform to the standards of the national electrical manufacturers association n.e.m.a .
or underwriters laboratory whichever is applicable .
workmanship and materials shall conform to the requirements of the national electrical codes national electrical safety code and with any local codes or ordinances governing electrical installations .
all materials and equipment shall be new except where the plans specifically provide for reusing existing equipment .
section num electrical conduits under roadways num within num days after execution of the contract the contractor shall submit to the engineer a list of materials which he proposes to use .
the list shall show the name of the manufacturer size name and identifying catalog number of each item .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall submit for inspection and approval samples of the proposed substitute item and bear any extra costs of evaluating the quality of the materials .
all lists shall be submitted in quintuplicate for checking and approval .
the department will not be liable for any materials purchased or work done or any delay incurred prior to such approval .
failure of the engineer to note unsatisfactory material as received will not relieve the contractor from responsibility .
omissions from the drawings and specifications or the misdescription of details of work which are evidently necessary to carry out the intent of the drawings and specifications or which are customarily performed shall not relieve the contractor from performing such omissions and details of work but they shall be performed as if fully and correctly set forth and described in the drawings and specifications .
in any case of discrepancy in figures catalog numbers descriptions in the drawings or in the specifications the matter shall be promptly submitted to the engineer who shall promptly make a determination in writing .
any adjustment by the contractor shall be at the contractors own risk and expense .
for a type num installation the trench backfill shall be aldot num concrete sand and bituminous concrete plant mix aldot num as shown on the plans .
for a type num installation the trench backfill shall be as shown on the plans .
for a type num installation the encasement conduit shall be highdensity polyethylene hdpe .
the conduit shall meet the requirements given in astm f num standard specification for solid wall high density polyethylene hdpe conduit based on controlled outside diameter od .
the conduit shall be schedule num or dr num .
the color of all conduits shall be in compliance with the recommendations of the american public works association for the use of the ulcc uniform color code .
the color of conduits for electrical power shall be black with longitudinal red striping .
the color of conduits for communication media including traffic signals shall be orange or black with longitudinal orange striping .
the red or orange longitudinal striping on each conduit shall be at least three stripes spaced at equal distances apart on the circumference of the conduit .
the stripes shall be an integral part of the conduit material .
tape and paint stripes will not be accepted for installation .
num construction requirements .
a general .
all construction and installation of electrical conduits shall be done under direction of specially qualified supervisors .
all workmanship shall be in accordance with the latest accepted standard of the industry as determined by the engineer .
upon completion of the contract the contractor shall deliver to the engineer a corrected plan showing in detail the actual location and depth of conduits .
improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavement bituminous surfacing base material and any other improvements broken or damaged by the contractor shall be replaced or reconstructed with the same kind of materials as found on the work or with materials of equal quality .
the new work shall be left in a serviceable condition satisfactory to the engineer .
whenever a part of a square or slab of existing concrete sidewalk or driveway is broken or damaged the entire square or slab shall be removed and the concrete reconstructed as above specified .
the outline of all areas to be removed in portland cement concrete sidewalks and pavements shall be cut to a minimum depth of num inches num mm with a saw prior to removing the sidewalk and pavement materials .
cut for the remainder of the required depth may be made by a method satisfactory to the engineer .
cuts shall be neat and true with no shatter outside the removal area .
b open trench method .
the excavations required for the installation of conduits shall be performed in such a manner as to cause the least possible injury to the street sidewalks and other improvements .
the trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper installation of the electrical appliances and foundations .
excavating shall not be performed until immediately before installation of conduit and other appliances .
the material from the excavation shall be placed in a position where the least damage and obstruction to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the least interference with the surface will occur .
section num electrical conduits under roadways num all surplus excavated material shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
excavations after backfilling shall be kept well filled and maintained in a smooth and well drained condition until permanent repairs are made .
at the end of each days work and at all other times when construction operations are suspended all equipment and other obstructions shall be removed from that portion of the roadway open for public travel .
coordination of this type work with regular roadway or bridge work will be of prime importance to prevent undue damage to completed items of work or existing facilities .
any damage to existing facilities caused by the installation of the ducts shall be repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
c jacking or boring method .
all conduits installed under paved areas shall be encased in steel pipe .
installation of the casing shall be made prior to placement of the pavement or it shall be jacked or bored through the roadbed under the pavement providing a minimum cover of num inches num mm .
the jacking or boring procedure and equipment shall be such that placement of the casement shall be accomplished without producing an unsupported opening through the roadbed between the established ends of the required length of casing .
in no event should casing lengths be less than the distance between shoulder limits of a roadway .
the drilling and mud bore method will be acceptable provided the requirements noted in subarticle numa are complied with .
d precision directional boring method .
all conduits installed under paved areas shall be encased in hdpe duct .
installation of the casing shall be made prior to placement of the pavement or it shall be precision directional bored through the roadbed under the pavement at the depth shown on the plans or as approved by the engineer .
the precision directional boring procedure and equipment shall be such that placement of the casement shall be accomplished without producing an unsupported opening through the roadbed between the established ends of the required length of casing .
in no event should casing lengths be less than the distance between shoulder limits of a roadway .
the casing shall be installed by drilling a hole with an open type bit that leaves the cuttings in place .
a gelforming colloidal drilling fluid consisting of at least num high grade carefully processed bentonite may be used to consolidate cuttings of the cutting bit seal the walls of the hole and furnish lubrication for subsequent removal of cuttings and installations of the casing immediately thereafter .
in this method when drilling through a dense formation cuttings may be partially removed from the hole in num foot num m plugs by use of compressed air as drilling progresses .
however in low density soils of a sandy or silty nature a plug shall be installed in the mouth of the bore hole to prevent the movement of any cuttings from the hole until immediately before installation of the casing .
no bit larger than num inches num mm in diameter shall have holes therein larger than num inches num mm in diameter through which drilling fluid is forced during boring .
the casing shall be installed immediately after the casing hole is completed .
in no case will water be used to flush cuttings from the drill hole .
the cuttings shall remain in the bore hole except as previously provided for as drilling progresses so as to consolidate them to support the bore wall .
the filter cake which is formed by the cuttings and drilling fluid prevents cavein or sloughing of the drill hole .
on completion of the boring the hole will be swabbed out by pulling through the hole the casing attached to a suitable swab .
violation of any of the above provisions by the contractor will result in the suspension of work .
note by volume .
for instance num gallons num l bentonite to num gallons num l of water .
num method of measurement .
the accepted amount of electrical conduit of the type installation required shall be measured by the linear foot meter to the nearest foot num m. num basis of payment .
a unit price coverage .
the accepted electrical conduit measured as noted above will be paid at the contract unit price bid for the type installation involved .
said unit price bid shall be full compensation for the furnishing and installation of the electrical conduit for the specified pipe or concrete section num electrical conduits under roadways num encasement for any required backfill material for all excavation and backfill jacking or boring disposal of excess material and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b payment will be made under item no .
numa ___ inch mm electrical conduit lines type installation per linear foot meter specify number of lines in installation specify type of installation section num materials num division num materials section num materials num general .
all materials used in the work shall be new unused material that will meet the requirements described in this division unless the same are altered by specific requirements of any section of these specifications supplemental specifications special provisions or by modifying notes on the plans .
all materials shall also meet the requirements of applicable portions of section num which will supplement the requirements of this section .
all tests shall be in accordance with the current departmental testing schedule .
num inspection arrangements .
a contractors notification .
it shall be the duty of the contractor to notify the engineer of the source of the various materials required for each project .
this notice shall be received sufficiently in advance of any shipment of materials so that inspection may be arranged at the producing plant if the engineer so elects .
b plant inspection .
whenever the quantity of materials warrants such an arrangement andor it is economically advantageous to the department the inspection of materials at the original or immediate source of supply will be made .
however the department is under no obligation to the contractor to inspect materials until it arrives at the site of the work .
in general all aggregates soil brick reinforcing and structural steel bituminous materials timber lumber piling and posts which are to become a part of the completed work will be inspected at the point of production .
for timber lumber piling and posts which are to be given preservation treatment this inspection will be performed at the treating plant in conjunction with inspection of the treating process .
c general details .
num .
for lumber and timber products the producer shall have sorted his stock and shall have separated a sufficient quantity of material to insure that all of each item for inspection is available before the inspector is called .
in the event that part of the shipment is rejected because of failure to meet the specification requirements the producer shall furnish other stock to replace the rejected items .
num .
should the quantity of any material rejected for failure to meet specification requirements amount to num percent or more of the material inspected and tested at that time the inspection operation will be suspended until the producer shall have regraded his stock or revised his production methods to produce material uniformly conforming with the specifications .
when sampling stockpiles of aggregates base materials etc .
the average of all samples must be within the gradation band required for the size aggregate specified .
in no case will stockpiles be acceptable if more than num of the total samples fall outside the gradation band .
in addition any failing sample must be within num of the range specified for any designated sieve .
num .
in case the stock has not been properly prepared or separated before calling an inspector or in case of delay in replacement of rejected material the extra inspection cost occasioned by such delay will be charged against the contractor for whom the material is being produced and will be deducted from any sums due or which may become due the contractor .
num .
where a contractors producer or jobber requests inspection of material for warehouse stock or for use in plants where stocks of materials inspected and accepted for use in highway construction or maintenance can not be kept separated from materials which are section num materials num to be used on other work the cost of inspection of those materials which have been approved for highway work but are later diverted to other uses not connected with the departments highway construction or maintenance will be charged to the contractor who requested such inspections .
num testing general .
where maximum and minimum specification limits are given it is intended and expected that materials having approximately mean values will be furnished under the respective specifications .
the established allowances for variations in the determination of these values are considered in establishing the limits and no tolerances in excess of the established variation allowances will be permitted unless so specifically stated in the proposal or on the plans .
unless otherwise specified in the test procedure or material specification all test results will be rounded off in accordance with astm e num and reported to the same number of places as the specification .
where material is fabricated of or treated with another material or any combination of materials is assembled to form a product any or all of which are covered by these specifications the failure of any of the components of the product to comply with the designated specifications shall be deemed sufficient cause for the rejection of the whole .
the sieves used for testing materials shall be woven wire cloth conforming to astm e num .
num tests for concrete materials .
preliminary samples of fine aggregate water and cement shall be subject to both num and num day tests or their equivalent and acceptance based thereon .
during the progress of the work these materials may be accepted on the basis of the num day test except that type iii cement may be accepted on the basis of the num day test .
num bituminous mixture stability and density test .
these tests shall conform to the current methods as described in aldotnum or aldotnum depending on the maximum aggregate size .
num measurement of liquid bituminous materials .
a measurement .
actual measurement shall be in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numa andor b. b procedure .
unless otherwise provided in the proposal form the procedure in conjunction with all shipments in tank cars or trucks shall be as follows num .
the producer or supplier shall furnish to the engineer in charge of the project a shipping notice form bmtnum for each shipment containing the following information tank number and initials if any .
type grade and weight mass of bituminous material contained .
date of shipment .
shipping point .
destination .
consignee .
project number .
temperature of bituminous materials degrees fahrenheit celsius at time truck tank was measured .
failure to furnish data will be cause for rejecting the shipment .
num .
before each shipment of bituminous material is unloaded the engineer shall be given opportunity to make such measurement as necessary to determine the net quantity of materials delivered .
num .
conversion of verified weight to gallons mass to liters may be used for measurement purposes provided prior written approval is obtained from the engineer .
section num coarse aggregate num num soil analysis test .
a mechanical analysis .
this test shall be performed in accordance with aashto t num. b elutriation test for clay .
this test shall be performed in accordance with aashto t num. c california bearing test .
the california bearing test shall be performed in conformity with aashto t num as modified by aldotnum .
d liquid limit .
this test shall be performed in accordance with aashto t num as modified by aldotnum .
num field performance test .
in addition to specifications and tests specified it may be necessary to have certain materials undergo field performance testing for a prescribed period .
the materials involved and the specified field performance testing will be determined by the departments product evaluation board peb .
the peb will determine which type of material will require this field performance testing and the duration thereof .
in general this will include materials such as pavement markers concrete joint fillers and sealants concrete patching materials epoxies reflective material for object safety markings membranes for waterproofing joints and certain pavement marking materials .
section num coarse aggregate num description .
a general .
coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed or uncrushed gravel crushed stone or crushed slag having hard strong durable pieces free from adherent coatings and conforming to the requirements provided in this section .
gravel aggregate for use in bituminous plant mixes and bridge superstructure concrete except prestressed concrete shall have a bulk specific gravity greater than num aashto t num. b acceptance .
the department has established a list of qualified producers of coarse aggregates .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
all coarse aggregates furnished shall come from an approved producer who is participating in and meeting the requirements of aldotnum quality control program for acceptance of fine and coarse aggregates .
the producers name shall be listed in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list inum .
num deleterious substances .
material suspected of containing deleterious substances will be examined in the laboratory and will be rejected if the amount is considered objectionable .
coarse aggregate for portland cement concrete and cover aggregate for bituminous treatment shall be washed and shall be free from adherent coatings .
coating on crushed stone shall be dust of fracture as determined by washing the material passing the no .
num num m sieve in accordance with aashto t num or visual inspection using a petrographic microscope .
adherent coating will be checked by washing in a large container without scrubbing or applying water pressure .
the aggregate will then be checked for adherent coating by visual inspection .
aggregate that has an adherent coating will not be acceptable .
the amount of deleterious substances shall not exceed the limits shown in the following table .
section num coarse aggregate num maximum allowable deleterious materials in coarse aggregate type of deleterious material bituminous surface treatments and concrete classes a b and d all other uses coal and lignite visual num num clay lumps aashto t num num num material passing the no .
num num m sieve aashto t num num num flat or elongated particles num ratio astm d num by weight mass num num flat or elongated particles num ratio astm d num by weight mass num num other local deleterious substances shale mica marcasite etc .
visual num num reactive silica via astm c num restrictions apply to the use of limestone in portland cement concrete num num absorption see note num following this table .
see note num following this table .
see note num following this table .
note num one of the three following options shall be used for the design of concrete mixes with limestone aggregates that contain more than num silica .
the submittal of a concrete mix design using limestone aggregate with more than num silica will not be approved if it does not include one of the following three options .
option num class f fly ash shall be substituted for cement at a fixed rate of num replacement by weight .
option num ground granulate blast furnace slag ggbfs shall be substituted for cement at a fixed rate of num replacement by weight .
ggbfs increases the time of setting of concrete therefore this option shall be used only for concrete placed at ambient temperatures of num f num c or above .
option num class c fly ash and microsilica shall be substituted for cement at a fixed rate of num replacement by weight .
the distribution of the replacement shall be num class c fly ash and num microsilica by weight .
note num the restriction of the amount of absorption applies to gravel aggregates only for the following applications .
gravel for use in bituminous plant mixes and bridge superstructure concrete except prestressed concrete shall have a total sample absorption not greater than num percent on the material passing the num inch num mm sieve and retained on the no .
num num mm sieve as per modified aashto t num .
section num of aashto t num shall be modified to require a num minute vacuum saturation period as per section num of aashto t num prior to the required num hour soaking period .
note num the maximum allowable deleterious materials in coarse aggregate used in class a concrete applies only to concrete used for bridge substructures box culverts retaining walls and concrete safety barriers .
num crushed stone gravel and crushed gravel .
a general .
crushed stone shall be from approved ledges or working strata within an approved source and shall consist of clean tough durable fragments reasonably free of shale conforming to requirements for the type use noted in subarticle numb and the gradation specified .
gravel shall consist of a clean tough durable natural rounded or semirounded siliceous rock free from coatings of any character and conforming to the gradation specified .
crushed gravel shall consist of crushed fragments of gravel conforming to the requirements of subarticles a and b of this article .
gravel for use in bituminous plant mixes and bridge superstructure concrete except prestressed concrete shall have a bulk specific gravity greater than num aashto t num .
section num coarse aggregate num unless otherwise specified at least num percent by weight mass of the blended aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve shall have at least two fully fractured faces measured in accordance with astm d num. b physical tests .
crushed stone gravel and crushed gravel shall meet the following requirements for the respective physical tests cement concrete bituminous work all other uses num .
percent wear los angeles test aashto t num num max .
num max .
num max .
num .
percent sound soundness test aashto t num using sodium sulphate and num cycles num min .
num min .
num min .
except for sandstone and blast furnace slag num max .
num blank .
num crushed slag .
a general .
slag is defined as a stonelike siliceous material with porous faces produced as a byproduct of various manufacturing processes .
crushed slag produced from processing slag obtained from sources approved by the materials and tests engineer shall consist of clean tough durable pieces reasonably uniform in density and quality without thin or elongated pieces free from deleterious substances and conforming to the specified gradation .
crushed slag furnished for use in bituminous wearing surface layers shall in addition to the above be restricted in its glassy particles content when tested in accordance with aldotnum to the following type wearing surface glassy particle content surface treatments num maximum open graded p.m. num maximum dense graded p.m. num maximum b physical tests .
physical tests for crushed slag shall be the same as provided by subarticle numb for the type of construction specified i.e .
soil type or bituminous .
num coarse aggregate for white concrete .
this coarse aggregate shall be white or very light colored gravel limestone marble or granite subject to the approval of the engineer for color and otherwise conforming to the specifications of this section for coarse aggregate .
the size number will be shown on the plans andor proposal .
num coarse aggregate for mastic for water proofing concrete surfaces .
coarse aggregate for mastic shall be a well crushed stone slag or washed gravel that will pass a num inch num mm sieve and be retained on a no .
num num mm sieve .
it shall be free from soft particles and organic matter .
num gradation .
coarse aggregate shall be graded between the limits specified and the size or sizes designated shall conform to the limits shown in the following coarse aggregate gradation table provided in subarticle numd .
num aggregates for base .
aggregates for base layers shall consist of gravel crushed gravel crushed slag or crushed stone as specified for the type of base designated however sand and gravel from local roadside pits will only be required to comply with the applicable portion of section num .
num aggregates for bituminous work .
aggregate for bituminous work shall be one or a combination of the aggregates specified for the type of bituminous work involved .
it shall be uniformly graded so as to meet the gradation requirements for the size designated to be used .
the aggregate shall be of such nature that when once section num coarse aggregate num thoroughly dried and coated with the bituminous material proposed for construction the coating will not strip off upon contact with water .
num use care and handling gradation table and explanation .
a care and handling .
care and handling shall be as provided by article num. b storage .
attention is directed to the requirements of article num and the following num .
the contractor shall prepare the storage area as needed any stockpiled material that can not be removed without including dirt or other foreign matter shall be rejected .
num .
stockpiling shall be as provided by aldotnum .
num .
different sizes of aggregate and aggregate from different sources shall be stored in separate stockpiles sufficiently separated from each other so that the material will not become intermixed .
any material which segregates so that the grading no longer conforms to that specified shall be rejected for use .
c use .
num .
at the time of their use the aggregates shall be free from all foreign materials .
num .
when more than one size of aggregate is required the various sizes shall be combined in proper proportions at the mixer or plant .
num .
aggregates stored in proportioning bins shall be protected from rain by waterproof coverings .
d coarse aggregate gradation table .
table of aldot coarse aggregate sizes percent passing by weight mass each laboratory sieve u.s.a. standard series size num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num m num num m num num m number num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num explanation of table num .
tabulated figures are percentages by weight mass of material finer than each laboratory sieve .
num .
exclusive of lightweight aggregates the minimum dry rodded weight per cubic foot mass per cubic meter shall be num pounds num kg for sizes num num and num and num pounds num kg for other sizes .
see article num for weight mass of lightweight aggregate .
the following coarse aggregate gravel only gradation may be substituted for use in concrete headwalls inlets miscellaneous concrete units slope paving machine laid curbs gutters or combination curbs and gutters section num coarse aggregate num sieve size square openings percent passing by weight mass num inches num mm num num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num lightweight aggregates for bituminous work .
lightweight aggregates of expanded clays or shales produced by the rotary kiln method shall meet the requirements noted herein in this section except the maximum dry rodded weight mass shall be num pounds per cubic foot num kgm and the l.a. abrasion test aashto t num shall be modified to compensate for lightweight aggregate by the use of the following method .
modification to aashto t num for lightweight aggregate to avoid the excessive volume of material in the testing machine which will occur when the lightweight aggregate sample is prepared according to aashto t num it is necessary to reduce the weight mass proportionately to obtain an equal volume of lightweight aggregate comparable to that normally obtained with a conventional aggregate sample .
the abrasive charge must also be reduced in a similar manner .
num .
determine the unit weight mass ul of the lightweight aggregate by aashto t num .
num .
assume an average unit weight mass of conventional aggregate to be num pounds per cubic foot num kgm .
num .
reduce the lightweight aggregate sample .
ul x ul x num c num c x c ul x c ul num num where ul unit weight mass of lightweight aggregate sample pounds per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter c weight mass of conventional aggregate required for grading in aashto t num .
x reduced lightweight aggregate sample charge .
num .
reduce the abrasive charge ul xnum ul xnum num cl num cl xnum x cl ul xnum cl ul num num where ul unit weight mass of lightweight aggregate pounds per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter cl weight mass of abrasive charge required for grading in aashto t num .
xnum reduced abrasive charge for lightweight aggregate .
num .
remainder of procedure as set forth in aashto t num .
note it is sometimes impossible to obtain the exact abrasive charge with the steel balls available .
in this case obtain the closest abrasive charge possible to the reduced value and then adjust the weight mass of the sample in proportion to the new abrasive charge .
section num fine aggregates num section num fine aggregates num description .
a general .
fine aggregate shall consist of natural or manufactured sand having hard clean durable uncoated particles and conforming to the requirements provided in this section .
b acceptance .
the department has established a list of qualified producers of fine aggregates .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
all fine aggregates furnished shall come from an approved producer who is participating in and meeting the requirements of aldotnum quality control program for acceptance of fine and coarse aggregates .
the producers name shall be listed in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list inum .
num concrete sand .
a description .
concrete sand shall consist of natural sand blends of natural sand blends of natural and manufactured sand or manufactured sand .
the use of manufactured sand shall be limited to the conditions noted in article num .
blended sand shall be mixed and tested for gradation after blending has been completed .
the sand shall be washed and have strong hard clean durable particles meeting the physical requirements noted below and the gradation requirements of aldot size no .
num .
there will be no fineness modulus or mortar strength requirements for concrete sand used in bituminous pavements .
b deleterious substances .
num .
the maximum weight mass of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following requirements materials passing the num num m sieve removed by decantation shall be subject to approval or rejection based on the following a .
if any sample has more than num material passing the num num m sieve by decantation the stockpile will be rejected .
b .
an average will be made of the samples tested by decantation through the num num m sieve .
if the average is greater than num the stockpile will be rejected .
if the average is num or less the stockpile will be accepted .
c. if smaller quantities of the fine aggregate are being tested where only one sample would be required this sample will be required to comply with a num maximum removed by decantation not to exceed the following percentages shale num coal andor lignite num clay lumps num cinders and clinkers num other local deleterious substances such as alkali mica coated grains soft and flaky particles num total shale coal andor lignite clay lumps cinders and clinkers and other local deleterious substances num maximum concrete sand to be used in concrete headwalls inlets miscellaneous concrete units slope paving machine laid curbs gutters or combination curbs and gutters shall comply with the above except that not more than num percent shall pass the num num m sieve by decantation .
section num fine aggregates num num .
the percentage of clay lumps shall be determined by examining the various fractions which remain after the test for grading .
an indication of clay lumps shall require testing in accordance with aashto t num to determine the amount of clay lumps .
num .
the diameter of deleterious substances shall not exceed the maximum size of aggregate .
c organic impurities .
all fine aggregate shall be free from injurious amounts of organic impurities .
aggregates subjected to the colorimetric test for organic impurities and producing a color darker than the standard shall be rejected unless they pass the mortar strength or concrete strength tests as outlined in subarticles nume and f. d soundness .
when subjected to five cycles of the soundness test of fine aggregate by the use of sodium sulphate the measured percentage of loss shall not be more than num percent by weight mass when tested by aashto t num .
in lieu of the soundness test satisfactory evidence may be provided that the fine aggregate has been exposed to natural weathering either directly or in concrete for a period of at least five years without appreciable disintegration .
e mortar strength .
when tested in accordance with aashto t num fine aggregate shall have compressive strength not less than num of treated sand as prescribed in aashto t num at num days and num days with the use of type iii portland cement or at num days and num days with type i or type ii portland cement .
f concrete strength .
fine aggregate failing to meet the requirements herein provided for mortar strength may be used if num when tested in combination with the cement and coarse aggregate to be used in the work the crushing or tensile strength of the concrete at the end of num days num days with type iii cement used and num days is at least equal to the strength obtained from specimens made with sand meeting the requirements for the class of concrete in which the material is to be used or num when the past performance record of the aggregate with the particular cement has been satisfactory .
g gradation uniformity .
the gradation of aldot size no .
num fine aggregate from any one source shall be reasonably uniform .
for the purpose of determining the degree of uniformity a fineness modulus determination shall be made upon representative samples from the source in accordance with the provisions of aashto m num for fineness modulus f.m .
determination .
the following schedule will apply to aldot size no .
num fine aggregate for various kinds of concrete .
portland cement concrete pavement bridge superstructure concrete and prestressed concrete f.m .
num min .
num max .
establish working f.m .
w.f.m .
tolerance from w.f.m .
is plus or minus num structure concrete other than bridge superstructure concrete f.m .
num min .
num max .
working f.m .
is not required however if the f.m .
exceeds num the contractor will be required to increase the designated cement volume by num bags per cubic yard num bags per cubic meter without additional cost to the state .
if requested in writing by the contractor consideration will be given to using fly ash in the mix to increase the fines .
the fly ash will be substituted for cement as directed by the materials and tests engineer .
there will be no f.m .
requirements on concrete sand used in concrete headwalls inlets miscellaneous concrete units slope paving machine laid curbs gutters or combination curbs and gutters .
num mortar sand .
sand for mortar aldot size no .
num shall consist of washed hard strong durable uncoated mineral or rock particles reasonably free from injurious amounts of organic or other deleterious substances and meeting applicable requirements of article num .
section num fine aggregates num num bituminous pavement fine aggregate .
fine aggregate for use in bituminous paving mixtures is defined as aggregate passing the num inch num mm sieve and with a minimum num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
the aggregate may be natural fine aggregate or manufactured fine aggregate .
the fine aggregate shall be nonplastic when tested in accordance with aashto t num as modified by aldotnum and aashto t num and shall have a maximum of num percent clay lumps and friable particles as determined by aashto t num .
it shall consist of hard tough grain free of injurious amounts of clay loam or other deleterious substances .
manufactured fine aggregate shall be the product produced from the crushing of aggregates meeting the requirements of section num and shall have num percent passing the num inch num mm sieve with num percent of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve having at least one freshly fractured face .
natural fine aggregate is defined as any fine aggregate that is not manufactured fine aggregate .
natural fine aggregate shall be reasonably clean nonplastic and uniformly graded sand which shall pass the num inch num mm sieve and not have more than num percent passing the no .
num num m sieve when tested in accordance with aashto t num and t num .
mineral filler meeting the requirements of section num agricultural limestone or carbonate stone screenings may be used when additional fines are needed .
num blank .
num manufactured sand for portland cement concrete .
manufactured sand shall meet all of the requirements for aldot num concrete sand article num except the requirement of subitem numbnuma may be increased to five percent if the material is dust of fracture .
manufactured sand may be produced from crushing gravel granite sandstone or quartzite which may be used either as a blend with natural sand or as one hundred percent of the total fine aggregate .
gravel used to produce manufactured sand for use in concrete pavement or bridge superstructure concrete except prestress concrete shall have a bulk specific gravity greater than num aashto t num .
manufactured sand produced from crushing limestone shall not be used in bridge decks or concrete pavement .
however manufactured limestone sand may be used in prestressed or precast concrete or cast in place concrete which will not be exposed to vehicular traffic if approved by the engineer .
num fine aggregate for white concrete .
fine aggregate for white concrete shall be a natural white washed sand andor an artificial sand made from white quartz crushed white limestone white marble or white granite and shall contain no discoloring material clay loam or other foreign matter .
it shall be secured from sources previously tested and approved by the department for whiteness and light reflecting qualities or by visual comparison shall be in the opinion of the engineer at least as white as the approved standard sample on file in the engineers office .
other requirements for this fine aggregate shall conform to article num with the gradation requirements in accordance with aldot size no .
num .
num blank .
num gradation .
fine aggregate shall be well graded between the limits specified and the size or sizes designated shall conform to the limits shown in the fine aggregate gradation table .
table of aldot fine aggregate sizes aggregate size number description percent passing by weight mass sieve size num num inch num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num m no .
num numm no .
num numm num concrete sand num num num num num num num mortar sand num num num num plant mix sand num num num manufactured sand num num num num num num num white concrete fine aggregate num num num num num num num section num asphalt materials num notes num .
figures are percentages by weight mass of material finer than each sieve .
num.the f.m .
for size no .
num when used in portland cement concrete pavement shall be num minimum num maximum .
num .
see articles no .
num to num for descriptions .
optional table of aldot fine aggregate sizes for concrete types num num num description percent passing by weight mass sieve size num inch num mm num inch nummm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no num num mm no .
num num m no .
num num m no .
num num m concrete sand num num num num num num num num note concrete sand for concrete headwalls inlets miscellaneous concrete units slope paving machine laid curbs gutters or combination curbs and gutters may meet this gradation in lieu of the aldot size no .
num concrete sand gradation given above .
num aggregate for bituminous work .
the provisions of article num are applicable to all fine aggregate used in bituminous work .
num use care and handling gradation table .
use care and handling of fine aggregate shall be in accordance with the provisions of article num modified with respect to fine aggregate where necessary .
section num asphalt materials num general .
the asphalt materials furnished shall be of approved quality and shall meet the requirements shown under its respective type in the following tables and referenced specifications for the kind of material furnished .
for any contract the material furnished shall show uniform test results .
where more than one grade of material is permitted for any item of work the engineer shall specify the grade .
in all cases the engineer will specify the consistency limits for the grade of material shown on the plans andor proposal.the contractor may without extra compensation supply asphalt material containing approved additives for producing nonstripping characteristics .
for such materials an adjustment in the total asphalt requirements of this subdivision will be made as deemed necessary .
other additives shall not be added to the asphalt material unless expressly authorized in writing by the materials and tests engineer .
the use of any unauthorized additive will be cause for rejection of the asphalt material .
sampling of tank cars tank trucks distributor trucks or recirculating storage tanks shall be by the use of a sampling valve installed in the tanks as prescribed in figure num of aashto t num .
all products furnished for use shall be from an approved producer who is participating in and meeting the requirements of aldotnum acceptance program for asphalt materials and listed on list inum producers of asphalt products of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
num performance graded asphalt binders pgab .
the material supplied under this article shall be asphalt prepared by the refining of asphaltic petroleum .
no airblown or oxidized asphalt will be allowed.the refined asphalt binder shall be homogeneous free of water and shall not foam when heated at num f num c. the pg num pg num and pg num binders shall conform to the requirements given in aashto mnum as shown in tables num num and num in article num .
the pg num binder not shown in aashto mnum shall conform to the requirements given in aashto mnum and the requirements given in table num of article num .
shipping temperature of the asphalt from the refinery shall not exceed num f num c for unmodified binders .
for polymer modified binders shipping temperatures in excess of num f num c may be allowed with the approval of the materials and tests engineer .
at the time of use the asphalt temperature shall comply with the requirements of item numdnum .
or subarticle numb whichever is applicable .
section num asphalt materials num num cutback asphalt .
the materials supplied under this article shall be made from liquid asphalt binder and naphtha solvent so proportioned and mixed that the finished product shall be homogeneous and conform to the requirements of aashto m num for rapid curing cutback and aashto m num for medium curing cutback .
num emulsified asphalt .
the materials supplied under this article shall be homogeneous emulsification of asphalt and shall show no separation of asphalt or objectionable change in viscosity within three months after delivery .
separation at any time caused by freezing or contamination shall be cause for rejection .
emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements as shown in asphalt materials table no .
num in article num .
num emulsified petroleum resin .
the material supplied under this article shall be a homogeneous emulsification of petroleum resin .
the emulsified petroleum resin shall be supplied from the producer in the form in which it shall be placed .
no dilution of the product will be allowed after the product has left the suppliers facility .
emulsified petroleum resin shall conform to the requirements as shown in asphalt materials table no .
num. in article num .
num blank .
num tables of asphalt materials .
a asphalt materials table number num grade pg num .
asphalt materials table no .
num specifications for performance graded asphalt binder property grade pg num specification test method original binder flash point temperature minimum num c aashto t num rotational viscosity maximum num pas num c aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa num c aashto t num rolling thin film oven residue aashto t num mass loss rtfo maximum num aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa num c aashto t num pressure aging vessel residue aashto r num dynamic shear gsin maximum num kpa num c aashto t num creep stiffness s maximum num mpa num c aashto t num mvalue minimum num num c aashto t num b asphalt materials table number num grade pg num .
asphalt materials table no .
num specifications for performance graded asphalt binder property grade pg num specification test method original binder flash point temperature minimum num c aashto t num rotational viscosity maximum num pas num c aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa numc aashto t num rolling thin film oven residue aashto t num mass loss rtfo maximum num aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa num c aashto t num pressure aging vessel residue aashto r num dynamic shear gsin maximum num kpa num c aashto t num creep stiffness s maximum num mpa num c aashto t num mvalue minimum num num c aashto t num section num asphalt materials num the binder shown in table no .
num shall be made by adding polymer to a refined grade of pg num or shall be blended from pg num using an aldot approved blending procedure at the refinery .
air blown and oxidized asphalt shall not be used .
all pg num shall contain a minimum of num by weight polymer solids .
a sample and infrared scan fourier transform infrared ftir using the aldot num test method to determine the styrene and butadiene peaks and polymer percentage at the appropriate polymer loading shall be submitted to the materials and tests engineer for laboratory evaluation prior to use .
all polymers shall conform to section num for polymer additives .
all polymer modified asphalt binder manufacturers shall submit the information required in article num annually or upon request by the department .
c asphalt materials table number num grade pg num .
asphalt materials table no .
num specifications for performance graded asphalt binders not shown in aashto mnum property grade pg num specification test method original binder flash point temperature minimum num c aashto t num rotational viscosity maximum num pas num c aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa num c aashto t num rolling thin film oven residue aashto t num mass loss rtfo maximum num aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa num c aashto t num pressure aging vessel residue aashto r num dynamic shear gsin maximum num kpa num c aashto t num creep stiffness s maximum num mpa num c aashto t num mvalue minimum num num c aashto t num d asphalt materials table number num grade pg num .
asphalt materials table no .
num specifications for performance graded asphalt binder property grade pg num specification test method original binder flash point temperature minimum num c aashto t num rotational viscosity maximum num pas num c aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa numc aashto t num rolling thin film oven residue aashto t num mass loss rtfo maximum num aashto t num dynamic shear gsin minimum num kpa num c aashto t num elastic recovery minimum num numc aashto t num pressure aging vessel residue aashto r num dynamic shear gsin maximum num kpa num c aashto t num creep stiffness s maximum num mpa num c aashto t num mvalue minimum num num c aashto t num numthe following exceptions shall be made to the requirements given in aashto t num the statement given in section num that reads attach the clips to the pins or hooks of the force adapter and the testing machine shall be disregarded .
the mold shall be in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num with dimensions noted in this method .
all elastic recovery failures will be subject to ftir scans for acceptability .
all binders used in table num shall be made by the addition of polymer to refined gradesof pg num without using air blown or oxidized asphalt .
all pg num shall contain a minimum of num by weight polymer solids .
a sample and infrared scan fourier transform infrared ftir using the aldot num test method to determine the styrene and butadiene peaks along with the percentage of polymer section num asphalt materials num added at the appropriate polymer loading shall be submitted to the materials and tests engineer for laboratory evaluation prior to use .
all polymers shall conform to section num for polymer additives .
all polymer modified asphalt binder manufacturers shall submit the information required in article num annually or upon request by the department .
e asphalt materials table number num emulsified asphalts .
section num mineral filler hydrated limecalcium chloride brick and blocks num notes to asphalt materials table no .
num .
note num .
stone coating test .
use aashto t num coating test except the mixture of stone and asphalt emulsion shall be mixed vigorously for five minutes and then immediately drenched with approximately twice its own volume of tap water at room temperature after which the aggregate shall be at least num percent coated with an asphalt film .
note num .
modified sand coating test .
use aashto t num coating test except a mixture of airdry test aggregate and asphalt emulsion shall be mixed thoroughly for five minutes then allowed to stand for five hours after which the mixture shall be capable of being mixed for an additional five minutes .
the mixture shall then be drenched with approximately twice its own volume of tap water at room temperature without showing more than num percent loss of bituminous film .
the test aggregate for use in this test shall be a combination of num percent concrete sand and num percent portland cement .
the amount of asphalt emulsion used shall be num percent by weight mass of the aggregate .
note num .
float test .
use aashto t num with the exception that the residue shall be allowed to cool to room temperature and remelted at lowest possible temperature that will bring it to a sufficiently fluid condition for easy pouring .
then pour into the collar for completion of the float test .
note num .
viscosity test .
if the viscosity test begins to drip at num f num c test temperature the test shall be repeated at num f num c. the viscosity at num f num c shall not exceed num seconds .
f asphalt materials table number num emulsified petroleum resin .
asphalt materials table no .
num specifications for emulsified petroleum resin results test methods tests minimum maximum astm aashto particle charge test positive d num t num residue residue contains num asphalt num d num t num sieve test num d num t num viscosity num f num c sfs num num d num t num tests on residue flash point coc f viscosity at num f num c cst num num num d num d num t num t num astm d num evaporation test for percent of residue is modified by heating num gram sample to num c until foaming ceases then cooling immediately and calculating results .
test procedure identical with astm except that distilled water shall be used in place of num sodium oleate solution .
section num mineral filler hydrated limecalcium chloride brick and blocks num mineral filler hydrated lime calcium chloride brick and blocks .
these minerals shall meet the following requirements section num mineral admixtures num mineral filler aashto m num hydrated lime astm c num type n. calcium chloride aashto m num type s or l sewer brick aashto m num grade s.m .
or m.m .
building brick clay or shale astm c num grade s.w .
or m.w .
concrete brick manholes etc astm c num type num grade s concrete brick buildings astm c num type num grade ni or nii concrete block hollow load bearing astm c num grade n type i or ii num mineral filler for hot mix asphalt .
these minerals shall consist of finely divided mineral matter such as crusher fines rock dust slag dust hydrated lime hydraulic cement portland cement loess or class f fly ash meeting the requirements of aashto m num .
any lime based product shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
section num mineral admixtures num mineral admixtures .
a general .
the department has established a list of mineral admixtures for use in portland cement concrete .
these products can be found on list inum of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldot num concerning this list .
b fly ash .
fly ash shall consist of the finely divided residue or ash that remains after burning finely pulverized coal at high temperatures and shall meet the requirements of aashto m num. c microsilica .
microsilica for use as a mineral admixture in portland cement concrete shall meet the requirements of aashto m num. d ground granulated blast furnace slag .
ground granulated blast furnace slag for use as a mineral admixture in portland cement concrete shall meet the requirements of aashto m num grade num or num .
the total cementitious material the ground granulated blast furnace slag and the cement shall meet the total alkali content requirement in article num .
additional requirements are given in section num .
if ground granulated blast furnace slag is used as a mineral admixture in soilcement stabilization the ground granulated blast furnace slag shall meet the requirements of aashto m num grade num or num and the content shall be num of the weight mass of the total cementitious material .
section num water num water for cement concrete .
a water used in cement concrete shall be fresh free from oil and shall not contain impurities in excess of the following limits acidity or alkalinity calculated in terms of calcium carbonate num mgl aashto t num total organic solids num mgl aashto t num total inorganic solids num mgl aashto t num chloride ion concentration num mgl aashto t num sulfate ion concentration num mgl aashto t num ph min .
num max .
num astm d num b a comparison of the given water with distilled water can be obtained by making standard soundness time of setting and mortar strength tests with standard ottawa sand using the same section num air entraining additives num cement of standard quality with each water .
any indication of unsoundness marked change in time of setting or a variation of more than num percent in strength from results obtained with mixtures containing the distilled water shall be sufficient cause for rejection of the water under test .
c water from city water supplies may be accepted without being tested .
d water used in curing cement concrete or mortar shall be free from salt or other substance which may be injurious to concrete .
num water for general purposes .
this water shall be suitable for the purpose intended and free from substances harmful to the particular work involved .
num water for lime stabilization work .
water shall be from an approved source free from any substance which might be harmful to the work and the total inorganic solids shall not exceed num percent .
section num air entraining additives num air entraining admixtures .
a general .
air entraining admixtures for portland cement concrete shall comply with aashto m num .
these additives shall not contain chloride added during its manufacture .
air entraining admixtures already approved for use may not be required to meet performance tests however new agents not already approved if deemed necessary will be required to meet the comparative strength and nonbleeding provisions of aashto m num modified to require only num num and num day flexural and compressive tests .
b acceptance of material for use .
the department has established a list of chemical admixtures for use in portland cement concrete .
these products can be found on list iinum of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldot num concerning this list .
section num chemical admixtures for concrete num chemical admixtures for concrete .
a general .
chemical admixtures for concrete shall comply with the requirements of aashto m num within the following limitations these admixtures shall not contain calcium chloride or sugars added during its manufacture .
the dosage of each type additive will be included in the concrete design mix issued from the bureau of materials and tests .
when an air entraining admixture is used with a water reducer andor retarder both admixtures must be manufactured by the same producer .
section num geotextiles num b admixture types .
type a waterreducing admixtures type b retarding admixtures type c accelerating admixtures type d waterreducing and retarding admixtures type e waterreducing and accelerating admixtures type f waterreducing high range admixtures type g waterreducing high range and retarding admixtures c acceptance of material for use .
the department has established a list of chemical admixtures for use in portland cement concrete .
these products can be found on list iinum of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldot num concerning this list .
section num geotextiles num geotextile filters .
geotextile filters shall meet the appropriate chemical and physical requirements of aashto m num for the application for which the material is to be used .
the department has established a list of acceptable geotextiles .
only the materials on this list shall be furnished for use .
this list list iinum is given in the materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
geotextile rolls shall be furnished with a suitable wrapping for protection against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled or tagged to provide product identification sufficient for inventory and quality control purposes .
rolls shall be stored in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors they shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof cover .
the geotextile shall be formed in widths of not less than num feet num m. sheets of geotextile may be sewn together with thread of a material meeting the chemical requirements given for the plastic yarn to form filter widths as required .
the sheets of geotextile shall be sewn together at the point of manufacture or another approved location .
section num polymer additives for asphalt materials num general .
any polymer not specifically addressed in this section shall not be used .
variations in composition of polymers listed in this section will also be considered if requested in writing to the materials and tests engineer .
the use of any polymer shall require the submittal of a written certification to the materials and tests engineer from the manufacturer showing test results for physical properties of the material including as a minimum polymer types polymer percentages percentage of any cross linking agent and specific gravity .
the manufacturer shall also submit a procedure for incorporating the polymer into the asphalt material for actual production and laboratory blending which would include blending procedures desired temperatures duration of blending etc .
a sample of the bituminous material along with an infrared trace using aldot num procedure or aashto t num for emulsions showing the styrene and butadiene peaks and percentage of polymer shall also be submitted by the refinery to the department for laboratory evaluation prior to use .
this submittal shall be made annually or upon request by the department or if the manufacturer changes polymer sources .
field blends of emulsions shall not require an ftir trace .
section num polymer additives for asphalt materials num num styrene butadiene rubber sbr latex for hot mix asphalt .
the latex to be used shall be unvulcanized styrene butadiene rubber in liquid latex form .
a sample of the asphalt binder at the appropriate polymer loading along with an infrared trace showing the styrene and butadiene peaks shall be submitted to the department for laboratory evaluation semi annually or if the manufacturer changes polymer sources .
the manufacturer of the sbr latex shall provide a written certification showing test results for total rubber solids percent styrene and butadiene monomer ash content and viscosity .
the test results shall comply with the following minimum requirements total solids by weight mass min .
num monomer ratio butadienestyrene num num brookfield viscosity rvt num spindle num rpm num total weight per gallon mass per liter kg num num num num total ash max .
of total rubber solids astm d num num num sbr latex for asphalt surface treatments .
the sbr latex to be used shall be an unvulcanized styrene butadiene rubber in liquid latex form .
the manufacturer of the sbr latex shall provide a written certification showing test results for total rubber solids percent styrene and butadiene monomer ash content and viscosity .
the test results shall comply with the following minimum requirements cationic crsnum compatible total solids by weight mass min .
num monomer ratio butadienestyrene num num brookfield viscosity rvt num spindle num rpm num total ash max .
of total rubber solids astm d num num before beginning the sbr latex rubber surface treatment operation and as often thereafter as deemed necessary the department will check the compatibility of the sbr latexand the asphalt emulsion by using the following procedure num .
measure num ml of hot asphalt emulsion num f num c in beaker .
num .
add num of sbr latex to the hot emulsion .
num .
using a stirring rod mix the contents by hand for a minimum of two minutes .
check for coagulum .
num .
allow to cool to ambient temperature .
note any separation or coagulum .
if the sbr latexasphalt emulsion is in a smooth liquid state the materials show compatibility .
if the materials coagulate the contractor will be required to make any changes necessary such as lowering the ph of the asphalt emulsion or slightly increasing the surfactant in the asphalt emulsion to create compatibility of the materials .
the sbr latexasphalt emulsion shall be used within num hours after combining the materials unless special authorization of the engineer allows otherwise .
num styrene butadiene sb or styrene butadiene styrene sbs for hot mix asphalt .
a sample of the asphalt binder at the appropriate polymer loading along with an infrared trace using aldot num showing the styrene and butadiene peaks along with the percent polymer added shall be submitted to the department for laboratory evaluation .
section num masonry stone num section num masonry stone num masonry stone .
a type i masonry stone .
stone for coursed and uncoursed rubble masonry shall be of approved quality sound durable and free from segregations seams cracks and other structural defects or imperfections tending to destroy its resistance to stresses and the weather .
it shall be free from rounded worn or weathered surfaces .
all weathered stone shall be rejected .
it shall be kept free from dirt oil or any other injurious material which may prevent the proper adhesion of the mortar .
unless otherwise provided or shown on the plans individual stones shall have a thickness of not less than num inches num mm .
no stone having a horizontal dimension less than num inches num mm or less than its thickness shall be used except for filling the interior of the wall .
b type ii masonry stone .
this stone shall meet the requirements of type i masonry stone above except that the dimensions of the individual stones shall be num to num inches num to num mm in depth and shall have a reasonably flat top surface of a width not less than num inches num mm and length not less than the depth .
all stones shall be inspected before and after laying and all rejected material shall be removed immediately from the work .
c type iii masonry stone .
stone for rustic masonry shall be rough quarried or field stone of varying sizes and shapes suitable for the purpose intended and with no attempt made toward squaring or dressing .
section num riprap materials num stone .
a general .
all stone for riprap shall consist of field stone or rough unhewn quarry stone as nearly rectangular in section as is practicable .
when tested as specified in aashto t num the stone shall show a soundness of not less than num percent for num cycles using sodium sulphate and shall be suitable in all other respects for the purpose intended .
it shall have a percentage wear not over num percent by the los angeles test aashto t num and shall meet the requirements of article num for deleterious substances however the requirements for deleterious substances may be modified by the engineer .
control of the gradation of the various classes of riprap will be by visual inspection either at the source or the project site at the engineers option .
any difference of opinion between the engineer and the contractor shall be resolved by checking two random truck loads or equivalent size sample in accordance with the method provided in aldotnum with all the equipment labor and sorting site for this check being provided by the contractor at his expense .
b class num riprap .
stone for this class riprap shall consist of graded stones ranging from num to num pounds num to num kg with not more than num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg and at least num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg and not over num having a weight mass under num pounds num kg .
c class num riprap .
stone for this class riprap shall consist of graded stones ranging from num to num pounds num kg to num kg with not over num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg and at least num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg and not over num having a weight mass under num pounds num kg .
section num riprap materials num d class num riprap .
stone for this class riprap shall consist of reasonably well graded stones ranging from num pounds to num pounds num kg to num kg with not over num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg at least num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg and not more than num having a weight mass under num pounds num kg .
e class num riprap .
stone for this class riprap shall consist of reasonably well graded stones ranging from num to num pounds num kg to num kg with not over num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg at least num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg and not more than num having a weight mass under num pounds num kg .
f class num riprap .
stone for this class riprap shall consist of reasonably well graded stones ranging from num pounds num kg and down with not over num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg at least num having a weight mass over num pounds num kg and not more than num having a weight mass under num pounds num kg .
num concrete sacked riprap .
a sacks .
sacks shall be new unused manufactured from jute cotton burlap reinforced paper or other approved materials capable of holding the cement mixture without significant leakage when handled .
the sacks shall be of uniform size and dimension with a capacity of approximately num cubic feet nummnum .
b aggregate .
local sand gravel or other designated aggregates shall be from sources approved by the engineer suitable for the purpose intended .
c cement .
cement shall meet the requirements of section num. d water .
water shall meet the requirements of section num. e mixing .
the aggregate and cement shall be formulated by volumetric measure in the proportions of one part cement to four parts sand and five parts gravel or nine parts of bank run gravel or to designated proportions of other materials then damp mixed in a concrete mixer using sufficient water to provide for a crumbly consistency .
f prepackaged concrete sacked riprap .
prepackaged sack riprap which utilizes approved bagging material and a dry mixture of predried sandcement material may be substituted for the concrete sacked riprap noted in this article provided num the source or prepackaging operation has been approved by the materials and tests engineer num the packing material is permeable and absorptive enough to permit passage of sufficient water to provide for hydration of the cement num the sand and cement materials are from sources acceptable to the materials and tests engineer num the sand and cement are dry mixed in the proportions of num cubic feet num m of sand to one bag of cement until uniform in color num packaging handling and storage shall be such as to prevent damage to the prepackaged material especially from collecting excess moisture until placed .
num filter blanket .
a general .
filter blanket material shall consist of a blanket of aggregate or geotextile blanket placed under a riprap material .
b aggregate blanket .
an aggregate blanket may be either gravel or crushed stone aldot size no .
num aggregate unless otherwise shown on the plans reasonably free from flat or elongated pieces and from organic or soft friable particles in objectionable quantities .
section num cement num c geotextile blanket .
the geotextile shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for permanent erosion control geotextile and section num of these specifications .
section num cement num type i portland cement .
type i portland cement shall meet the requirements of aashto m num and the additional requirements shown below .
num type ii portland cement .
type ii portland cement shall meet the requirements of aashto m num and the additional requirements shown below .
num type iii portland cement high early strength .
type iii portland cement shall meet the requirements of aashto m num and the additional requirements shown below .
num type is portland blast furnace slag cement .
type is portland blast furnace slag cement for use in soilcement stabilization shall meet the requirements of aashto m num blended hydraulic cement .
num blank .
num masonry cement .
masonry cement shall meet the requirements of astm c num .
num chemical properties .
the specifications for all cements as covered by articles num to num inclusive are amended to the effect that the total alkali content of any cement used calculated as the percentage of sodium oxide nanumo plus the product of num times the percentage of potassium oxide knumo shall not exceed num percent .
in addition to the above for type ii cement covered by article num the standard chemical requirement shown in table num of aashto m num for tricalcium silicate cnums is hereby waived .
num testing of cement .
all cement furnished for use shall be tested before use or be from an approved producer meeting the requirements of aldotnum quality control of portland and blended hydraulic cements and listed on list inum producers of portland and blended cement of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldot num concerning this list .
num flash set and false set .
flash set and false set as determined by astm c num shall be cause for rejection of the cement .
num unusual appearance .
unusual appearance as to color etc .
shall be sufficient grounds for rejection of the cement .
num use care and handling .
a use .
num .
bulk cement will be permitted provided the bulk cement is handled as follows a. portland cement shall be measured by weight mass considering that one bag of cement is equivalent to num pounds num kg net of cement .
b .
handling equipment and the equipment used for weight mass determination shall be inspected by the engineer prior to use .
cement shall be fully protected from contamination or damage during handling .
c. bulk cement shall be batched by weight mass and scales may be of either the beam or springless dial type and shall be the product of a reputable manufacturer .
scales section num lime for roadbed and base stabilization num shall be accurate to within a tolerance of num pounds per num pounds num kg per num kg net load in the hopper .
the value of the minimum gradation of any scale shall not be greater than num percent of the scale capacity .
d. provisions shall be made to indicate to the operator that the required load in the hopper or container is being approached such as a springless dial indicator or tare beam .
such device shall indicate at least the last num pounds num kg of load .
e. after the required weight mass of the cement is batched it shall be protected from loss in handling or in transit .
num .
only cement of the same type shall be used in the construction of any structure or unit substructure or superstructure except as permitted in writing .
all cement in any container having lumps of cement or caked cement or cement which for any reason has become damaged or partially set shall be rejected .
cement salvaged from discarded or used bags shall not be used .
cement shall not be used while its temperature is more than num f num c. num .
the contractor shall keep accurate records of the deliveries of cement and its use in the work including that from readymix plants .
copies of these records shall be furnished the engineer at the close of each days work or num hour run in such form as he may require showing the quantity used during the day or run at each part of the work .
b care and handling .
num .
the contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the cement against dampness .
cement not for immediate use shall be stored in suitable weather proof buildings .
buildings shall be placed in approved locations .
provisions for storage shall be ample and the shipment of cement as received shall be separately stored in such a manner as to provide easy access for identification and inspection of each shipment .
on small structures storage in the open may be permitted by authorization in which case a raised platform and ample waterproof covering shall be provided .
stored cement shall meet the test requirements at any time after storage when a retest is ordered .
num .
cement of different types even if tested and approved shall be stored separately and shall not be mixed .
section num lime for roadbed and base stabilization num hydrated lime .
hydrated lime shall be high calcium type num and shall conform to aashto m num when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
hydrated lime shall be stored and handled in waterproof containers until immediately before distribution to the road .
if storage bins are used they shall be completely enclosed .
hydrated lime in bags shall be stored in weatherproof buildings with adequate protection from ground dampness .
num quicklime .
quicklime shall meet the requirements of aashto m num after hydration in the laboratory .
when quicklime is to be applied directly to the roadbed the following additional requirements shall apply sieve passing by weight mass num inch num mm num num inch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num quicklime shall be handled and stored in waterproof containers until used .
accidental contact with water shall be avoided .
section num selected materials for bases num section num selected materials for bases num description .
selected materials for the purpose of these specifications shall be of the kind and general character of sandclay chert claygravel sand local stone stone screenings etc .
or combinations thereof with or without commercial aggregate meeting the requirements noted in this section .
num general requirements .
a general .
the material shall meet the general requirements for the respective material noted in this article and the special and specific requirements noted in article num .
the following terms are defined for general use .
artificial mixture .
the term artificial mixture is defined as a mixture resulting from combining as indicated on the plans or as directed of two or more base course materials including binder soils suitable for the purpose intended and sands of the same or different kind generally from separate sources .
coarse aggregate and binder soil binder .
the coarse aggregate for base courses shall be all material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve binder shall be all materials passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
blends .
blends shall be an artificial mixture of num two or more materials of the kind andor character described in this section or similar materials num one or more soils plus stabilizer aggregate or either local stone commercial coarse aggregate meeting the provisions of section num with size number designated on the plans or processed reef shell meeting provisions of section num. b sand clay .
sand clay shall be a natural material or artificial mixture consisting largely of a mixture of sand and clay in proper proportions that occurs in natural deposits of varying depths or a blended mixture of sand and clay .
c chert .
chert shall be a metamorphic fragmentary flint or silica formation interspersed with varying quantity and quality of clay binder .
chert in its natural formation may require blasting to facilitate loading and manipulation .
d clay gravel .
clay gravel shall be composed of gravel and sand with clay binder .
the coarse aggregate gravel shall be clean hard tough durable and reasonably free from thin elongated soft or laminated pieces .
the binder consisting of material passing the no .
num num mm sieve shall be a good grade of sand clay or other approved material .
clay gravel in its natural formation may require blasting to facilitate loading and manipulation .
e local sand .
local sand shall consist of grains of hard sound material predominantly quartz or other hard durable rock including friable loosely bound deposits of sandstone conglomerate normally found in natural deposits in the project vicinity .
f local sandgravel .
local sandgravel shall be hard sound durable rock including friable loosely bound sandstone conglomerate with varying amounts of coarse aggregate and sand normally found in natural deposits in the project vicinity .
the coarse aggregate and the sand shall be free from a coating of injurious material lumps of clay loam organic matter or other foreign material .
if necessary gradation andor other requirements will be provided in the plans andor proposal form .
g local stone .
approved local sourcerun stone shall consist of tough durable fragments and sand clay or other binder type materials .
if necessary gradation andor other requirements will be provided in the plans or proposal .
section num granular soil materials num h commercial aggregates .
commercial aggregates shall meet the appropriate requirements of sections num and num. i stone screenings .
stone screenings shall consist of crushed stone fragments all passing the no .
num num mm sieve with the fines down to and including dust but not more than num percent by weight mass passing the no .
num num m sieve .
the stone shall meet the general requirements of section num. j pond ash .
pond ash shall consist of a combination of bottom ash and fly ash produced as a byproduct of burning coal .
num specific requirements .
general composition sieve requirements percentage passing by weight mass type a anum b bnum c num inch num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num no .
num num m num num num num num liquid limit ll num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
plasticity index pi num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
num max .
cbr of num with swell of less than num material placed on the road found not meeting the above requirements may in lieu of removal and replacement be stabilized with approved materials in such proportions that the finished layer will meet the above specified requirements .
section num granular soil materials num description .
granular soil for the purpose of these specifications shall be of the kind and general character of sandclay topsoil sand soft sand rock etc .
or combinations thereof meeting the requirements noted in this section .
num general requirements .
a general .
the material shall meet the general requirements for the respective material noted in this article and the specific requirements noted in article num .
reference is made to subarticle numa for definition of terms for coarse aggregate binder artificial mixture and blends .
b sand clay .
see subarticle numb .
c topsoil base material .
topsoil base material shall consist of a natural material or artificial mixture sometimes pebbly in character that occurs in surface deposits of limited depth and in general on elevated areas .
d foundry sand .
foundry sand shall be a waste material consisting of burned sand with or without slag fragments .
in general this material is waste or byproduct material from foundry operations .
e soft sand rock .
soft sand rock shall be a friable natural material generally sandy in character and occurring as a partially disintegrated sandstone with occasional hard strata in sub surface formations of varying thickness and in general on elevated areas .
section num drainage plane materials num blasting is usually required to facilitate loading with power shovels .
pulverizing by use of rollers tractors or other equipment is usually necessary .
f local sand .
see subarticle nume .
num specific requirements .
general composition sieve requirements percentage passing by weight mass type a b c num inch num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num m num num num no .
num num m num num num clay num num num liquid limit ll num max .
num max .
num max .
plasticity index pi num max .
num max .
num max .
material placed on the road found not meeting the above requirements may in lieu of removal and replacement be stabilized with approved materials in such proportions that the finished layer will meet the above specified requirements .
section num drainage plane materials num general .
drainage plane material shall unless otherwise specified by plan details be restricted to aldot sizes num num num or num conforming to the requirements of section num modified to require a minimum permeability of num mmsec .
as determined by the constant head permeameter test .
each material source will be pretested for permeability before shipments of material to the project are begun and after approval no further permeability tests will be required provided there are no significant changes in the characteristics of the material noted however continuing gradation tests of the material will be made .
section num soil aggregate materials num description .
soil aggregate for the purpose of these specifications is classified according to the several kinds and general characteristics set forth in this section .
num general requirements .
a general .
the material shall meet the general requirements noted in this article and the specific requirements noted in article num .
reference is made to subarticle numa for definitions of terms coarse aggregate binder artificial mixture and blends .
b clay gravel .
see subarticle numd .
c clay gravelsand .
clay gravelsand shall meet the general requirements provided in subarticle numb for clay gravel except that it is an artificial mixture composed of clay gravel and sand .
section num soil aggregate materials num d chert .
see subarticle numc .
e chertsand mixture .
chertsand shall meet the same general requirements provided in the subarticle numc for chert except that it is an artificial mixture composed of chert and sand .
f float gravel .
float gravel shall be a varying stream deposit of worn and weathered coarse aggregate containing varying amounts of sand and soil .
oversized rock and boulders are frequently encountered and require reduction in size if used or elimination from the desired material .
if provided by the plans sand or binder soil shall be combined to provide for an artificial mixture .
g industrial waste .
industrial waste shall be a mixture of foundry sand and fragments of slag or other materials of a durable nature .
this is a waste material occurring as a result of processing iron and steel and due to chemical actions therein the stockpile must be approved by the materials and tests engineer before it may be used .
h red dogsand .
red dogsand is an artificial mixture of red dog and sand .
red dog or red ash is a burned waste material from mining or industrial operations and in general is a fragmentary tilelike material with varying amounts of binder and fines which will not be permitted unless specified on the plans or in the proposal .
i soft sand rock any aggregate .
soft sand rock any aggregate shall be an artificial mixture consisting of soft sand rock as defined by subarticle nume combined with num any aggregate or num other base materials which in general is predominantly coarse aggregate .
j stone gravel and slag aggregate .
stone gravel and slag aggregate shall meet the general requirements provided by articles num num and num respectively .
this classification is an artificial mixture of stone gravel or slag aggregate and num binder soil or num clay gravel chert float gravel or other natural soilaggregate material .
k limerock .
limerock shall be crushed or processed as a part of the mining operations .
limerock shall not have chert or other deleterious substances .
limerock shall have a carbonate calcium or magnesium content of at least num .
at least num by weight of the material shall pass a num inch sieve and the material shall be graded uniformly down to dust .
the fine material shall consist entirely of dust of fracture .
the liquid limit shall not exceed num and the crushed limerock material shall be nonplastic .
limerock shall have an lbr of at least num according to aldotnum procedure for limerock bearing ratio .
producers of limerock shall participate in aldotnum procedure for acceptance of fine and coarse aggregates .
section num processed reef shell base materials num num specific requirements .
general composition sieve requirements percentage passing by weight mass type a b c num inches num mm num num num inches num mm num num num num inch num mm num num num num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no num num m num num num no .
num num m num num num clay num num num liquid limit ll num max .
num max .
num max .
plasticity index pi num max .
num max .
num max .
retained portion must contain a minimum of num crushed particles .
material placed on the road found not meeting the above requirements may in lieu of removal and replacement be stabilized with approved materials in such proportions that the finished base will meet the above requirements .
section num processed reef shell base materials num description .
processed reef shell base for the purpose of these specifications is classified as a composite base course material which contains a large percentage of processed reef shell blended with portions of selected soil granular soil soil aggregate or other approved materials .
num general requirements .
processed reef shell furnished for use shall comply with the requirements of article num and when combined with other material shall produce the material complying with the designated type noted in the specific requirements provided in article num .
gradation may be obtained by the proper blending of local or other commercial materials and approximately num of reef shell by weight mass for type a and approximately num reef shell by weight mass for type b .
special note is made of the fact that should the gradation run on the extreme fine or coarse side difficulty can be expected in obtaining the modified proctor density .
section num crushed aggregate base materials num num specific requirements .
general composition sieve requirements percentage passing by weight mass type a b num inches num mm num num inches num mm num num num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no num num m num no .
num num m num num clay num max .
liquid limit ll num max .
num max .
plasticity index pi num max .
num max .
note retained portion must contain at least num shell particles .
section num crushed aggregate base materials num description .
crushed aggregate base for the purpose of these specifications shall consist of num percent crushed stone conforming to the requirements noted in this section .
num general requirements .
the crushed stone furnished for use shall conform to the general requirements of section num and the specific requirements noted in article num .
gradation analysis will be performed in accordance with aashto t num .
gradation may be obtained by the proper mixing of certain regular aldot size aggregates as noted below however no specific gradation will be required prior to mixing operations .
type a approximately num aldot no .
num with approximately num aldot no .
num .
type b approximately num aldot no .
num with approximately num aldot no .
num .
section num local sand and sandgravel for miscellaneous construction use num num specific requirements .
general composition sieve requirements percentage passing by weight mass type a b num inches num mm num num inches num mm num num inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num no .
num num m num num no .
num num m num num the fraction passing the no .
num num m sieve shall not have a liquid limit in excess of num .
the fraction passing the no .
num num m sieve shall not have a p.i .
in excess of num nor a l.l .
in excess of num and contain not more than num by weight mass passing the no .
num num m sieve .
section num local sand and sandgravel for miscellaneous construction use num description .
local materials for the purpose of these specifications shall be of the kind and character of local sand and local sandgravel or blends thereof .
num general requirements .
a general .
the kind of material shall meet the general requirements for the respective classification of material as noted in this article .
blends shall consist of any combinations of local sand or sands or local sandgravel or sandgravels .
all blends shall be of the material proportions or ratio provided by the plans andor proposal .
when used in bituminous pavements local source material shall be nonplastic .
b local sand .
local sand shall be pitrun sand suitable for the purpose intended .
in general all local sand shall consist of grains of hard sound material predominantly quartz or other hard durable rock including friable loosely bound deposits of sandstone conglomerate .
the sand shall be free from a coating of injurious material lumps of clay loam organic matter or other foreign material .
if necessary gradation andor other requirements will be provided in the plans andor proposal form .
c local sandgravel .
local sandgravel shall be pitrun sandgravel suitable for the purpose intended .
in general the sandgravel shall be hard sound durable rock including friable loosely bound sandstone conglomerate with varying amounts of coarse aggregate and sand .
the coarse aggregate and the sand shall be free from a coating of injurious material lumps of clay loam organic matter or other foreign material .
if necessary gradation andor other requirements will be provided in the plans andor proposal form .
section num processed reef shell num section num processed reef shell num description .
processed reef shell shall consist of dead reef shells oyster clam or other dead shell as encountered in the reef but not cannery or live shell .
processing shall consist of washing the shell by the use of a screen washer the mesh of which shall not be smaller than num of an inch num mm .
the processed shell shall be classified as a commercial aggregate .
num processed shell for soil or aggregate base courses .
processed shell used in base courses shall after processing not contain foreign matter in excess of three percent when washed over a no .
num num m sieve of the dry weight mass of the shell .
num processed shell for bituminous bases and pavements .
processed shell used in bituminous work shall in addition to the requirements noted in articles num and num require the oversize fraction to be crushed in a mechanical crusher and rescreened .
section num concrete curing materials num burlap cloth and waterproof covering material .
a general .
burlap cloth and waterproof covering material shall be of sufficient length and width to extend beyond the edge of the concrete a distance of at least twice the thickness of the slab .
sections of covering material shall be lapped at least num inches num mm .
the surface and both sides of a concrete slab shall be completely covered .
the covering shall be so placed and secured as to cause it to remain in total contact with the exposed surface .
burlap cloth shall be saturated with water before being placed and shall be kept wet while in position .
the covering shall remain in position for six days after the concrete has been placed unless otherwise specified or directed .
b types of covering material .
num .
burlap cloth shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for class num burlap .
num .
white waterproof paper shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
num .
polyethylene sheeting film shall be white opaque conforming to the requirements of astm c num modified to omit the elongation requirements when the sheeting is internally reinforced with a cord net having a cord spacing of num to num of an inch num to num mm .
net may be nylon or other approved material .
num .
white burlap polyethylene sheet shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
num impervious membrane .
impervious membrane compounds shall meet the requirements of astm c num class a .
type num white pigmented shall be used on concrete pavement .
other types may be used on other concrete .
membrane liquid shall be applied under pressure with spray nozzles in such a manner as to cover the area being treated with a uniform film .
for concrete pavement the rate of application shall be num gallon num l to not more than num square feet num m applied in two applications .
forsidewalksthe rate of application shall be num gallon num l to not more than num square feet num m .
num wetted earth or sand .
when this type of curing is used the pavement shall be cured initially with burlap cloth polyethylene sheets or waterproof paper as specified in article num until after final set of the concrete or in any case for num hours after placing the concrete .
as soon as the covering material is removed the surfaces and sides of the pavement shall be covered with a blanket of earth or sand not less than num inches num mm thick .
if the earth or sand covering becomes displaced during the curing period it shall be replaced to the original depth and saturated with water for three days and thoroughly wetted down during the morning of the fourth day the cover shall remain in place until the section num precast concrete products num concrete has attained the required strength .
when permission is given to open the pavement to traffic the covering material shall be removed and the pavement cleaned and swept .
earth or sand used in this method of curing shall be free of sticks stones or other matter which might injure the surface of the concrete .
the material shall contain no ingredients which would be detrimental to the concrete or discolor the surface finish .
num straw .
straw used as a supplement to the curing materials noted in article num and num for cold weather protection shall be suitable for the purpose intended and approved each time it is used .
section num precast concrete products num description .
all precast concrete products except precast nonprestressed concrete bridge members shall be furnished from an approved producer that is participating in and meeting the requirements given in aldotnum .
aldot num is the procedure for inspection of concrete pipe precast manholes precast box culverts and miscellaneous precast concrete products .
producers of precast concrete products shall be shown in list inum producers of precast concrete products of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
section num concrete joint fillers joint and cracksealants and waterstop materials num preformed joint filler .
a general .
preformed joint filler units shall be furnished in one piece of the length thickness and depth shown on the plans for a complete joint unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
when the use of more than one piece is authorized the abutting ends shall be fastened securely and held accurately in place to correct shape by stapling or other satisfactory means .
when a preformed filler is used with dowels or other protruding items which must pass through the filler cleancut holes accurately spaced and not more than num of an inch num mm larger than the protruding item shall be provided .
damaged filler units shall be rejected .
joint fillers used in conjunction with expansion joints will require the use of a joint sealer in order to provide a functional joint .
sealants shall be one of the appropriate types specified in article num or subarticle numa unless a specific type is specified by the plans .
b filler for construction joints in bridge culvert and drainage structures .
preformed bituminous joint filler for general use in bridge culvert and drainage structure work shall meet the requirements for one of the following types unless a specific type is required by the detailed plans type num aashto m num type num aashto m num modified to allow a maximum of num water absorption .
c expansion joint filler .
expansion joint filler for concrete pavement curb gutter combination curb and gutter flumes slope paving and other miscellaneous concrete structures shall be one of the materials provided by aashto m num or aashto m num with the latter being modified to allow a maximum of num water absorption .
section num concrete joint fillers joint and cracksealants and waterstop materials num num joint and crack sealants .
a general .
joint and crack sealants may be used for sealing both expansion joints and construction joints in concrete units other than bridges within the following limitations vertical joints in concrete units such as curbs etc .
will require the use of a nonsag compound .
construction joints num of an inch num mm or less in width will not require sealing unless specified by plan details .
the shape factor of joint sealant is most important .
the joint configuration shown by the plan details may require the use of a backer rod or strip to insure proper shape .
when a backer rod or strip is necessary it shall be compatible with the sealant and shall have no bond or reaction between the sealant and the backer rod or strip .
a bond breaking tape may be used to insure no bond occurs between the two materials .
requirements for joint and crack sealants are noted in the following subarticles however the contractor may substitute an approved preformed elastomeric seal meeting the requirements of subarticle numa in lieu of a sealer provided such is furnished at no additional cost to the department .
a certified test report showing actual test results shall be furnished with each lot of joint sealer furnished to each project .
each lot of sealant shall be delivered in containers plainly marked with manufacturers name or trade mark type of sealant lot number and date of manufacture .
the department may run any or all tests deemed necessary .
b hot applied joint and crack sealant .
hot applied joint and crack sealant shall meet the requirements of aashto m num astm d num for type i sealant or type ii sealant .
hot applied joint sealant shall be selected from the departments list iiinum joint and crack sealants .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
c cold applied joint and crack sealant .
cold applied joint and crack sealant shall be a resilient adhesive compound capable of effectively sealing joints from infiltration of incompressible materials and water throughout repeated contraction and expansion cycles .
the sealant when delivered shall be capable of being used on the job site and may be placed by machine pressure gun or by hand .
the compound when used in other than horizontal joints shall be capable of conforming to the slope face without sagging .
cold applied joint sealant shall be selected from the departments list iiinum joint and crack sealants .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
the sealant shall be a homogeneous blend of materials which may or may not require a primer .
the sealant shall meet the requirements given in astm d num .
num preformed elastomeric joint seals .
a compression seals .
num .
general .
compression type elastomeric seals shall consist of an approved seal shape formed from elastomeric material designed to be installed and function in a compressed state .
installation of this type seal requires the use of a lubricant adhesive .
this type seal when used on bridge decks will not require the use of a joint filler material unless such is specified by plan details .
num .
materials .
materials used in fabricating the preformed elastomeric seals shall conform to the requirements of astm d num for concrete pavement and astm d num for bridges and be of the basic shape dimension etc .
shown by the plan details .
no factory or field splicing of seals in transverse joints num feet num m or shorter in length will be allowed .
on transverse joints over num feet num m in length one field splice will be considered for approval by the engineer pending written request from the contractor .
this request shall specify the materials and details of performing the splice .
since the intent is to have one continuous seal meeting the above requirements absolutely no patching of torn or damaged spots in the seal shall be permitted .
section num concrete joint fillers joint and cracksealants and waterstop materials num in addition to the above seals for bridge joints including the joint between the bridge end and the bridge end slab shall have a depth to width ratio of not less than num dw num .
the lubricant adhesive used in installing the compression seals in joints shall meet the requirements of astm d num for concrete pavement and astm d num for bridge joints .
num .
construction method .
the installation of the seal shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation plan details approved shop drawings and the following a .
sand blast and clean all surfaces of the joint with steel areas cleaned to a near white classification .
b .
prepare joint lubricant adhesive compound and apply to joint .
c. place sealer without stretching beyond a maximum of five percent elongation .
b diaphragm type seals num .
flexible unreinforced elastomeric type seal .
a .
general .
this type seal shall consist of an approved seal shape formed from elastomeric material without metal reinforcement anchored by mechanical or other acceptable methods to anchor plates cast into or affixed to the joint edges .
b .
materials .
the elastomeric material shall conform to the requirements of astm d num modified to omit the recovery tests with or without fiber or other types of acceptable nonmetallic reinforcement .
the seal shall be of the basic shape and dimensions shown by plan details unless otherwise authorized in writing by the bridge engineer .
metal anchor plates shall conform to the requirements of astm a num or equivalent .
any sealant or lubricant shall conform to the requirements for lubricant adhesive noted in subarticle numa or an approved equivalent .
c. construction methods .
the installation of the seal shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations the plan details and the approved shop drawings .
num .
flexible reinforced elastomeric type seal .
a .
general .
this type seal shall consist of an approved shape formed from elastomeric material reinforced internally with metal strips with the seal affixed to the bridge deck by the method indicated in the plan details .
b .
materials .
the elastomeric material used in the seal shall conform to the following elastomeric seal specifications test requirement test method hardness durometer a num num astm d num tensile strength num psi num mpa min .
astm d num elongation break num min .
compression set num hrs .
num f num c num max .
astm d num method b low temperature not brittle num c astm d num ozone resistance exposure to num ppm num mgl ozone for num hrs .
num f num c sample under num strain no cracks astm d num oil deterioration volume increase after immersion in astm oil num for num hrs .
num f num c num max .
astm d num flame resistance will not propagate flame astm c num reinforcement astm a num or equivalent sealant shall conform to lubricant adhesive in subarticle a or an approved equivalent .
section num concrete joint fillers joint and cracksealants and waterstop materials num c. construction method .
installation of the seal shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations in the plan details and the approved shop drawings .
num blank .
num waterstop materials .
a description .
waterstops shall be of the size and shape shown on the plans .
the material may be either neoprene polyvinylchloride or strip applied expandable waterstop meeting the requirements given in this section .
b neoprene .
physical requirements .
num .
tensile strength method a using die c num psi num mpa min .
astm d num .
num .
ultimate elongation method a using die c num min .
astm d num .
num .
type a shore durometer hardness num num astm d num .
num .
change in type a durometer hardness num hrs .
heat aged num f num c num points max .
astm d num .
num .
compression set method b max permissible change after num hrs .
heat aged num f num c num astm d num. c polyvinylchloride .
physical requirements .
num .
tensile strength method a using die c num psi num mpa min .
astm d num .
num .
ultimate elongation method a using die c num min .
astm d num .
num .
type a shore durometer hardness num num astm d num .
num .
change in type a durometer hardness num hrs .
heat aged num f num c num points max .
astm d num. d strip applied expandable waterstop .
physical requirements .
num .
specific gravity num astm d num .
num .
penetration cone at num f num gm num sec num mm num astm d num .
num .
volatile matter num max .
astm d num .
num drainage trough material for open type expansion dam units .
drainage trough material furnished for use shall be a high grade neoprene reinforced with at least two layers of flexible polyester or nylon cord fabric acceptable to the engineer meeting the following requirements .
num .
fabric reinforcement shall be a close woven material providing equal strength in both warp and fill directions .
num .
the finished product shall be of the shape size and thickness shown by the plan details meeting the following test oil deterioration maximum weight mass change of num after immersion in irm oil num for num hours at num f num c astm d num .
num .
only minimum splicing across the width of the required material will be allowed .
any splice allowed must be performed using materials and in a manner recommended by the producer of the material so as to provide a waterproof full strength same as original material joint through the splice .
samples num inch x num inch num mm x num mm minimum of the material along with the material data sheet of the producer of the material shall be submitted to the central laboratory for approval .
section num lumber and timber untreated and treated num num blank .
section num lumber and timber untreated and treated num structural lumber and timber .
structural lumber and timber shall be southern yellow pine unless otherwise noted on the plans or in the proposal meeting the requirements of aashto m num standard specification for wood products .
the grade of structural wood shall be as shown on the plans .
num preservative treatment .
preservatives for treated wood shall meet the requirements of aashto m num preservatives and pressure treatment processes for timber .
section num piling materials num concrete piles .
precast prestressed concrete piles shall be manufactured in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num steel pile point protectors .
the pile points shall be fabricated from cast steel meeting or exceeding the requirements of aashto m numm .
the pile points shall be properly identified as to the heat from which they were fabricated either by this number being cast into the point or by being legibly stenciled on each point .
certified mill test reports shall be submitted for the pile points in accordance with the requirements given for the submittal of certified mill test reports for structural steel .
num steel bearing piles .
the material in rolled steel piles and splices shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num aashto m numm unless otherwise specified by plan details .
all piles shall be rolled steel sections of the section number size and weight per foot mass per meter indicated on the plans and shall be fabricated in conformity with the requirements of astm a num astm a numm .
the heat number and section size shall be legibly marked on each piece by stamp paint tag sticker or other industry accepted method .
any piece that can not be properly identified at time of use will be rejected .
num steel sheet piles .
permanent steel sheet piling shall be of the type called for on the plans and shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num aashto m numm and its supplementary requirement snum .
temporary steel sheet piling shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num aashto m numm and its supplementary requirement snum and may be either new piling or used piling acceptable to the engineer for the intended function .
the temporary steel sheet piling shall be interlocking type piles having a num inch num mm minimum web thickness .
num storing and handling steel piles .
when placed in the leads the pile shall conform to camber and sweep permitted by allowable mill tolerance .
the method of storing and handling shall be such as to avoid undue bending stresses or other injury .
piles bent cracked or otherwise injured will be rejected .
section num steel reinforcement num section num steel reinforcement num general .
all reinforcing steel shall be grade num grade num steel unless otherwise stipulated in these specifications or specifically designated by plan details .
all steel reinforcement bars smooth and deformed must come from an aldot approved steel mill .
approved steel mills are listed in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list inum deformed and plain steel bar producing mills .
all reinforcing bars over num of an inch num mm in diameter shall have deformations as prescribed in aashto m num .
num reinforcing bars .
steel reinforcement bars num of an inch num mm or less in diameter shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
steel reinforcement bars over num of an inch num mm in diameter shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
num reinforcing mesh or mats .
wire for mesh reinforcement .
plain wire for mesh reinforcement shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
deformed wire for mesh reinforcement shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
welded wire reinforcement .
welded plain wire reinforcement mesh shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
welded deformed wire reinforcement mesh shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
fabricated bar or rod mat .
fabricated bar or rod mat shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
num spiral reinforcement .
spiral reinforcement may be plain or deformed bars or may be cold drawn wire .
plain reinforcing bars shall conform except for deformations to aashto m num grade num grade num or grade num grade num .
deformed bars shall conform to article num .
cold drawn wire shall conform to aashto m num .
num dowel and tie bars for concrete pavement .
a dowel bars .
dowel bars shall be smooth round bars of the size shown by plan details .
the bars shall be fabricated from steel conforming to aashto m num for grade num or num grade num or num or aashto m num for grade num grade num or higher .
the bars shall have a corrosion resistant coating conforming to the requirements of aashto m num for a type a or type b coating .
one end of each dowel used in an expansion assembly shall be provided with an approved tight fitting noncollapsible expansion cap .
b tie bars .
standard tie bars shall be of the size shown by plan details fabricated from deformed bars meeting the requirements of aashto m num for grade num or num grade num or num .
sectional tie bars shall be of the size shown by plan details fabricated from deformed bars meeting the requirements of aashto m num for grade num grade num steel .
connectors shall be of a type approved by the engineer .
num prestressing steel .
a strand .
unless otherwise shown by plan details stressing cables shall meet the requirements of aashto m num astm a num grade num num ksi num mpa .
b bars .
stressing bars when allowed by plan details shall meet the requirements of aashto m num astm a num for type num or type ii with mill test reports including supplemental requirements snum snum and snum unless other requirements are provided by the plans or proposal .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num num use care and handling .
all reinforcement received on the project shall be placed in approved storage and shall be maintained clean intact and free from distortion .
reinforcement shall be free from loose or thick rust which would impair bond of the steel with the concrete .
rust that produces only discoloration without reducing the cross section of the steel will not be considered objectionable .
only such reinforcement shall be distributed along the construction as needed for immediate use .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num general .
a marking of steels .
steels when received from the mill shall be identified in accordance with astm a num a numm .
on steel piling the heat number and section size shall be legibly marked on each piece by stamp paint tag sticker or other industry accepted method .
any piece that can not be properly identified at time of use will be rejected until such time documentation or approved testing of the items in question can prove conformance to the requirements .
certified mill test reports or certified reports of tests made by other agencies which are recognized by the aldot shall be furnished for each heat of steel verifying that the material meets the requirements of the type and grade specified .
the department reserves the right to make its own test of any material and the material may be rejected if these tests prove the material does not meet the requirements .
for identification purposes the fabricator shall utilize low stress stencils to dye stamp the mill heat numbers of the flanges and webs in the webs of welded members and in the webs of rolled members .
the heat numbers shall be legible located adjacent to piece marks and placed centered between the top and bottom flange in the first panel to the left end and near side of the member .
all steel which is required to have a yield point greater than num psi num mpa shall at all times in the fabricators plant be color marked to identify its aashto astm or special specification .
b general requirements .
num .
structural steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num grade num grade num unless otherwise noted hereinafter in this section or shown on the plans .
aashto material specifications shall govern in lieu of astm material specifications where an aashto equivalent specification exists for all references within any referenced specification .
with the approval of the engineer materials other than web and flange material and web splice and flange splice material for members may be taken from stock provided the fabricator provides all documentation which shows the material conforms to the required specifications prior to use of such material .
the term main member as used hereinafter in this section or shown on the contract plans is defined as any member requiring charpy vnotch cvn testing .
structural steel members requiring charpy vnotch testing shall include but not be limited to the following all rolled beams in the superstructure and steel pier caps .
all flanges and webs of steel plate girders and steel pier caps .
all cover plates for beams and girders .
all flange and web splice plates for beams girders and floorbeams or stringer beams .
all connection plates welded to rolled beams steel plate girders and steel pier caps .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num all diaphragms or cross frames for curved beams and girders including their gusset and connection plates .
all stringer beams floorbeams and any connection plates welded thereto .
all floorbeam trusses cross frames which support stringer beams floorbeams including their gusset and connection plates .
the material supplied shall meet the longitudinal charpy vnotch test noted below .
sampling and testing shall be in accordance with aashto t num with the h frequency of heat testing used .
all members requiring cvn testing shall have heat numbers legibly marked during fabrication .
steel grade thickness test requirements m num grade num up to num num ft. lb .
numf .
min .
ser .
temp .
numf .
and above m num grade num grade numw up to num mech .
fastened up to num welded over num to num welded num ft. lb .
numf .
num ft. lb .
numf .
num ft. lb .
numf .
min .
ser .
temp .
numf .
to numf .
num up to num mm num j num c min .
ser .
temp .
num c and above num numw up to num mm mech .
fastened up to num mm welded over num mm to num mm welded num j num c num j num c num j num c min .
ser .
temp .
num c to numc if the yield point of the material exceeds num ksi num mpa the temperature of the cvn value for acceptability shall be reduced by num f num c for each increment of num ksi num mpa above num ksi num mpa .
when designated on the plans the contractor fabricator shall furnish one main load carrying member girder flange num inches num mm overlength per individual aldot bridge project in order to provide an num inch num mm sample for departmental job control testing .
unless otherwise shown on the plans steel plates for main members shall be cut and fabricated so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the main tensile andor compressive stresses .
num .
fasteners pins and rollers shall conform to the requirements of articles num num and num .
threads for all bolts and pins for structural steel construction shall conform to the american national standard for unified screw threads ansi bnum class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads except that pin ends having a diameter of num inches num mm or more shall be threaded six threads to the inch num mm .
all bolt heads and nuts shall be hexagonal shaped with dimensions conforming to the requirements for hexagon structural bolts and heavy semifinished hexagon nuts of ansi standard bnum and bnum .
num .
all cast and builtup bearings shall be shop assembled checked for fit securely packaged and shipped as a unit unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the method of securing the bearing unit for shipment shall be as shown by the plan details or a method acceptable to the engineer .
the diameter of pins used in cast and builtup bearing shall be within num inch num mm of the diameter specified by the plans with pin holes not in excess of the pin diameter by more than num inch num mm .
num .
copper bearing structural steel used for structural steel piling shall conform to the requirements of article num except that it shall contain not less than num percent of copper .
copper bearing steels for other structural uses shall be as specified .
num .
high strength and alloy steel shall be in accordance with the following .
a .
special alloy steels to meet definite corrosion requirements shall be as specified on the plans .
b .
high strength structural steel for bolted and welded construction shall conform to aashto m num of the grade as shown on the contract plans grade num or grade numw .
aashto m num grade num grade num steel shall be limited to structural shapes in groups num num and num in astm a num a numm and to plates and bars section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num in thicknesses through num inches num mm .
plates and bars over num inch num mm through num inches num mm in thickness shall be killedfine grain practice .
num .
corrosionresistant iron chromium and iron chromiumnickel castings for general application shall conform to the requirements of astm a num of the grade specified on the plans .
num .
anchor bolt assemblies anchor bolts nuts and washers shall be in accordance with aashto m num maximum tensile strength is waived .
galvanization of the anchor bolt from num inches num mm below the top of the concrete to the top of the anchor bolt shall be required .
the remaining length of the anchor bolt will not be required to be galvanized .
c full size testing of members .
when full size tests of structural members are required the methods and procedures shall be provided in the plans and specifications .
num steel forging .
carbon steel forgings shall unless otherwise specified by plan details conform to the requirements of aashto m num for class c material .
all forgings shall be annealed prior to being machined to form finished parts .
a record of the annealing charges shall be furnished the engineer by the manufacturer showing the forgings in each charge the melt or melts from which they were secured and the treatment they received .
num blank .
num steel castings .
steel castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num grade num unless otherwise specified and the following a the dimensions of fillets shall not be less than the thickness of the thinnest adjoining section or member nor less than num inch num mm .
b all steel castings shall be annealed unless otherwise provided in accordance with aashto m num m numm .
certification of annealing process shall be furnished by the manufacturer .
c steel castings shall be true to pattern in form and dimension free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
no finished casting shall have visible blow holes so located that a straight line laid in any direction will cut a total length of cavity greater than num inch num mm in any num foot num mm nor shall any single blow hole exceed num inch num mm in any dimension or have an area greater than num square inch num mmnum .
blow holes shall not have a depth injuriously affecting the strength of the casting .
minor defects which do not impair the strength may if approved be welded by the electric process .
the defects shall be removed to solid metal by chipping drilling or other satisfactory methods and after welding the castings shall be annealed if required .
no cracks flaws or other defects shall appear after such treatment .
no sharp unfilleted angles or corners will be allowed .
castings that have been welded without the engineers permission shall be rejected .
d all castings shall be blast cleaned of scale and sand so as to present a smooth clean and uniform surface .
e castings shall be checked for soundness by comparing computed weight mass against actual weight mass actual weight mass less than num of computed weight mass shall be cause for rejection of casting andor by suspending the casting and hammering it all over comparing soundness of the ring .
num gray iron castings .
a general .
gray iron castings shall be boldly filleted at angles and the arrises shall be sharp and perfect .
they shall be true to pattern in form and dimensions .
castings will be classified under one of the following grades num .
grade a. grade a castings shall conform to the requirements of class no .
num a for gray iron castings aashto m num .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num num .
grade b. grade b castings shall conform to the requirements of class no .
num a for gray iron castings aashto m num .
all castings shall be of the grade a classification unless otherwise noted .
b cleaning .
all castings shall be blast cleaned of scale and sand so as to present a smooth clean and uniform surface .
c weights masses .
any casting weighing less than num of the weight mass computed from its dimensions shall be rejected .
num malleable iron castings .
malleable iron castings shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade no .
num .
castings shall be boldly filleted at angles and the arrises shall be sharp and perfect .
the dimensions of fillets shall not be less than provided in article num .
the surfaces shall have a workmanlike finish .
malleable castings shall be true to pattern in form and dimension free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
cleaning shall be as provided in subarticle numb .
soundness shall be checked as provided in subarticle nume .
num ductile iron castings .
ductile iron castings shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
castings shall be boldly filleted at angles and the arrises shall be sharp and perfect .
the dimensions of fillets shall not be less than provided in article num .
the surfaces shall have a workmanlike finish .
malleable castings shall be true to pattern in form and dimension free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
cleaning shall be as provided in subarticle numd .
soundness shall be checked as provided in subarticle nume .
num selflubricating bronze or ptfe bearing plates .
a selflubricating bronze bearing plates .
these bearing plates shall be an article of standard production by an established manufacturer of such equipment .
they shall be provided with trepanned or drilled recesses not grooves which shall be filled with a lubricating compound capable of withstanding the atmospheric elements and consisting of graphite and metallic substances with a lubricating binder .
such compound shall be pressed into the recesses by hydraulic presses so as to form dense nonplastic lubricating inserts .
the lubricating area shall comprise not less than num percent of the total area .
the manufacturer shall furnish additional lubrication and just prior to assembling the entire sliding surfaces of members in contact with plates shall be thoroughly lubricated with the approved lubricant .
the bearing plates shall be made of bronze conforming to the requirements for bronze castings for bridges and turntables aashto m num alloy d copper alloy num except that a maximum of num percent lead will be permitted .
this will modify minimum on copper to num percent minimum on tin to num percent and maximum on zinc to num percent .
the coefficient of friction shall not exceed onetenth .
b ptfe bearing plates .
the structural steel portion of the bearing plate shall meet the requirements of aashto m num grade num m numm grade num unless shown otherwise on the plans .
the material fabrication and installation requirements for polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe polymer shall be those given in section num .
the coefficient of friction shall not exceed onetenth .
num grounding materials for steel bridges .
standard stranded copper grounding conductor shall be bare annealed class b stranded electric conductor .
extra flexible grounding conductor shall be class g bare annealed stranded electric conductor .
grounding rods shall be num inch x num feet num mm x num m minimum size copperclad steel grounding rods as manufactured by a.b .
chance mcgrawedison joslyn manufacturing and supply company or approved equal .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num exothermic welding shall be by the cadwell process or an approved equivalent method .
all materials shall conform to the national electrical manufacturers association nema or the underwriters laboratories inc. standards .
num lead plates etc .
lead used for plates pipes etc .
shall conform to the requirements of astm b num for common desilverized lead .
num hardware for timber bridges .
machine bolts nuts washers drift bolts lag bolts and screws dowels nails spikes shear rings and plates and other miscellaneous hardware shall be common stock hardware items either plain or galvanized .
galvanization when specified shall be in accordance with aashto m num .
num and num blank .
num shop and working drawings .
the plans furnished the contractor by the department are not intended for use as shop or working drawings .
shop drawings and working drawings will be required as specified in article num .
all applicable aldot specifications shall be referenced on the first shop drawing sheet by specification number and title .
shop drawings shall include camber and sweep diagrams covering steel portions of all structures .
fabricators shall furnish verification certificates of the actual measurements of the camber placed in each beam girder or truss .
num mill orders and shipping statements .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with as many copies of mill orders and shipping statements as may be directed .
the weights masses of the individual members shall be shown .
num notice and facilities for inspection .
after the bridge engineer has received the fabricator notification required by numb and as the fabrication begins copies of the mill test reports and fabricators material information for materials which require cvn testing shall be supplied to the bridge engineer or his representative prior to completion and acceptance of fabrication .
no materials or members will be accepted by the bridge engineers representative on structural steel until the departments form bbfnum available from the bridge engineer and the supporting mill test reports for the materials have been furnished and approved by the department .
a complete package of this information shall be given to the aldot representative at the fabricators plant to be followed by a submittal to the aldot materials tests certification office where official certification and approval is processed .
the bbfnum form shall be signed by a company official and shall be notarized .
the acceptance of members as fabricated may be noted by the affixing of the aldot stamp on the member by the bridge engineers representative .
the contractorfabricator shall provide aldot with adequate suitable office facilities and equipment when required for the inspection of materials and workmanship in the fabrication plant .
this office shall be conveniently located near the fabricating plant or work site shall be private and not shared with the fabricator or any other agency and shall be equipped so that it may be locked .
it shall be climate controlled water tight and include necessary office furnishings such as a desktable chairs and file cabinet .
telephone is optional .
inspectors shall be allowed free access to the necessary parts of the work .
refer to articles num num and num concerning the duties of the inspectors and inspection of work .
unless otherwise provided the contractor shall furnish without extra compensation test specimens as provided herein .
fabrication shops shall have a master tape calibrated by the national institute of standards and technology .
all tapes used in fabrication measurements shall be calibrated with the master tape before being used on the project .
any master tape found damaged or with a certification over two years old shall be replaced or recalibrated .
the quality control program for any fabrication work performed will be subject to the review of the bridge engineer .
a written current copy of the fabricators quality control manual and current copies of all nondestructive testing and quality control inspection personnel certifications associated with fabrication work shall be on file with the bridge engineer prior to the beginning of work .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num any bridge fabrication facility that is required to have an aisc certification of intermediate bridge or advanced bridge shall have a certified welding inspector cwi employed by or retained by and preferably working with the fabricators quality control office .
a cwi shall be present on all shifts and shall be available at any location that fabrication and welding are to take place .
quality control guidelines and all welding code requirements shall conform to the aashtoaws dnummdnum bridge welding code seventh edition .
if the bridge engineer finds the fabricators quality control department is not providing sufficient inspection on the work in progress he may suspend all or any portion of the work in progress reference is made to article num and subarticle numa .
work may resume only after necessary adjustments to the quality control program are instituted which will assure conformance to the contract requirements .
all nondestructive testing personnel shall meet the requirements set forth in the asnt standard for qualification and certification of nondestructive testing personnel ansiasnt cpnum .
num handling storage and transporting of materials .
the loading unloading handling and storing of materials shall be so conducted that the metal will not be injured or damaged .
structural material delivered at the bridge shop receiving yard shall be stored above the surface of the ground upon platforms skids or other supports and shall be protected from corrosion .
it shall be kept free from accumulations of dirt grease or foreign matter .
during and after fabrication proper lifting equipment with the capacity to handle members carefully at all times so that no member or part thereof will be bent excessively stressed deformed or otherwise damaged shall be used .
handling of members shall require the use of suitable clamps plate hooks or other suitable devices .
chains or chokers will not be allowed without the use of a protective shield between the chain and the member .
members longer than num feet num m shall utilize a two or more point pickup method .
members shall be transported in such a manner that they will not be excessively stressed deformed or otherwise damaged .
unless otherwise authorized for exceptionally deep girders girders and beams shall be stored and transported in a workway position as used in the structure with appropriate shoring and blocking methods suitable to the engineer .
chain tie downs shall be provided with protection shields .
multiple stacking of beams and girders may only be done in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
any suspected damage from handling storage or hauling shall be cause for the engineer to order verification of design camber andor repair of the beam or girder .
all structural materials shall be examined by shop personnel andor quality control at the earliest possible time for evidence of any defects .
if pitting or other defects are plainly visible during early stages of fabrication prior to any required surface preparation sand or shot blasting evaluation shall be required .
information regarding actual material thickness amount of area affected and end use of material being evaluated will be submitted to the engineer for acceptability .
any required conditioning will be allowed only when in compliance with astm a num a numm .
the above shall also apply to pitting of fabricated material stored prior to shipment and to material delivered to the bridge site .
attention is called to subarticle numb .
preparation and shipment of fabricated pieces shall conform to the following loose members .
num .
parts not completely assembled in the shop shall be secured insofar as practicable to prevent damage in shipping or handling .
num .
projecting parts likely to be damaged during shipment shall be blocked with wood or otherwise protected .
packages .
num .
pins small parts and small packages of bolts rivets washers and nuts shall be shipped in boxes crates kegs or barrels .
a list and description of the contained material shall be plainly marked on the outside of each shipped container .
num .
anchor bolts washers and other anchorage or grillage materials shall be shipped in time to suit the requirements of the masonry construction .
loading diagrams shall be provided to the bridge engineer for his review when structural steel items are to be shipped by barge or railcar .
num straightening material .
rolled material before it is marked laid out or otherwise worked in the shop must be straight or cambered as shown on the plans .
material with sharp kinks or bends may be rejected .
if straightening is necessary it shall be done by methods that will not injure the metal and must be approved by the section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num engineer .
heat straightening will be permitted provided the metal is not heated above numf num c. controlled by the use of heat crayons furnished by the fabricator or other approved means .
after heating the metal shall not be artificially cooled until after naturally cooling to num f num c or less .
the method of artificial cooling is subject to the approval of the engineer .
water or water spray misting shall not be used as a means of artificial cooling .
after straightening the surface of the metal shall be carefully inspected for evidence of fracture .
num workmanship and finish .
a general .
workmanship and finish shall be first class in every respect .
materials at the shop shall be kept clean and protected from the weather insofar as practical .
shearing burning chipping and grinding shall be neatly and accurately done in a workmanlike manner .
damage incurred to members or the surfaces of members for any reason shall be cause for the engineer to order the damage repaired or to reject the member in accordance with the following num .
except as noted in paragraph num below damage to surfaces of plates that does not reduce the plate thickness below the permissible minimum thickness allowed by astm a num a num m or the thickness of structural shapes in excess of num inch num mm for material less than num inch num mm in thickness num inch num mm for materials num inch to num inches num mm to num mm inclusive in thickness or num num mm in for material over num inches num mm thick are considered repairable .
damage in excess of the limits noted will be evaluated by the engineer as to whether to reject or allow repair of member .
num .
surface indentation of members caused by lifting devices shall be evaluated by the bridge engineers representative to determine if the damage is repairable and if repairable the repairs necessary for acceptance .
continued use of lifting devices that cause damage especially that which reduces the specified thickness by more than num inch num mm will be cause for the rejection of all such members so damaged .
num .
in general when allowed repair work will consist of welding andor grinding of the surfaces however when evaluation of base metal defects becomes necessary such evaluation shall be done in the presence of the bridge engineers representative .
the type of evaluation shall be determined by the fabricators quality control personnel subject to the approval of the bridge engineers representative .
after evaluation of such defects and where welding is necessary on rolled surfaces stringer beads shall be placed parallel to the direction of stress .
all welding shall be performed by competent welders using low hydrogen welding electrodes andor welding consumables listed in an aldot approved welding procedure wps .
the engineer shall be the sole judge as to the acceptability of the repair work any unacceptable work shall be cause for rejection of a member .
num .
a form of buffer andor shield shall be utilized during fitting operations to protect base materials from damage caused by fitting tools or devices .
if evidence of base metal damage appears due to misuse of such devices the material may be deemed unacceptable .
b details .
num .
bends and crimps shall conform to wood or metal templates .
all bending or crimping shall be done to the bend lines shown on the plans by a mechanically operated press without avoidable or unnecessary decrease in section .
num .
all material shall be bent cold when practical .
cold bending of rolled steel plates shall conform to the following a .
they shall be so taken from the stock plates that the bending line will be at right angles to the direction of rolling .
b .
the radii of bends measured to the concave face of the metal shall not be less and preferably shall be greater than shown in the following table .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num plate thickness t bend radii for all grades of steel t num in t num mm numt num in .
t num in .
num mm t num mm numt num in .
t num in .
num mm t num mm numt num in .
t num in .
num mm t num mm numt num in .
t num in .
num mm t num mm numt if a shorter radius is essential the plates shall be bent hot .
hotbent plates shall conform to requirement item num above .
c. before bending the corners of the plate shall be rounded to a radius of num inch num mm throughout that portion of the plate at which the bending is to occur .
num .
when hot bending is necessary the metal shall be carefully heated to a temperature not to exceed num f num c. as evidenced by heat crayons or other approved means .
material that has been heated shall be slowly cooled after the bending has been completed .
num .
material that is overheated fractured or otherwise injured or damaged shall be rejected .
c camber or curving of beams and girders .
camber in rolled beams shall be accomplished by the heat upset method utilizing the lowest possible temperature not to exceed num f num c as evidenced by infrared thermometers or heat crayons .
the application of heat shall be carefully supervised using a method acceptable to the engineer .
camber for builtup girders shall be accomplished by cutting the web to the prescribed camber with suitable allowance for shrinkage due to cutting and welding .
however moderate variation from the prescribed camber tolerance may be corrected by a carefully supervised application of heat not to exceed num f num c as evidenced by infrared thermometers or heat crayons .
horizontal curving of rolled beams shall be accomplished by the heat upset method which will require a written procedure approved by the engineer .
said procedure shall utilize the lowest temperature possible but not in excess of num f num c as evidenced by infrared thermometers or heat crayons .
horizontal curving of builtup girders shall be accomplished by cutting flange plates to the radii shown by the plan details from wider plates unless the heat upset method is allowed by the plans or proposal .
when the heat upset method is allowed such will require a written procedure approved by the engineer .
said procedure shall utilize minimum temperatures not to exceed numf num c as evidenced by infrared thermometers or heat crayons .
after heating of metals as noted the metal shall not be artificially cooled until after naturally cooling to numf num c. or less .
the method of artificial cooling must be acceptable to the engineer .
water or water spray misting shall not be used as a means of artificial cooling .
any material that is heated above the temperature limit noted will be rejected until tests and investigations reveal the material is suitable for use .
the fabricator shall be solely responsible for providing any test data or other information deemed necessary by the engineer to evaluate the acceptability of the material at no cost to the department .
the fabricators quality control inspector shall furnish verification certificates of the actual measurements of the camber overall length and horizontal sweep placed in each beam or girder .
actual measurements shall be verified and recorded by the fabricators quality control inspector .
d straightness camber and sweep in welded beams girders and ancillary products .
num .
straightness of welded beams and girders no required camber or sweep .
if requirements for camber and sweep are not given in the contract welded beams and girders shall be straight within a plus and minus tolerance for straightness .
the straightness tolerance shall be num inches per foot times the number of feet from the nearest end of the beam or girder divided by num num mm times the number of millimeters from the nearest end of the beam or girder divided by num .
num .
tolerance for the camber of welded beams girders and bridge deck joint armor plates .
the camber of welded beams girders and armor plates shall be within a plus and minus tolerance measured in inches .
the tolerance shall be num inches and num inches per foot section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num times the number of feet from the nearest end of the beam girder or armor plate divided by num num mm and num mm times the number of millimeters from the nearest end of the beam girder or armor plate divided by num .
num .
tolerance for the sweep of welded beams and girders .
the sweep of horizontally welded beams and girders shall be within a plus and minus tolerance measured in inches .
the tolerance shall be num inches per foot times the number of feet from the nearest end of the beam or girder divided by num num mm times the number of millimeters from the nearest end of the beam or girder divided by num .
the horizontal alignment of the sweep of the top and bottom flanges at any point along welded beam or girder shall be within num inch num mm .
e surface profile at the centerline of structural steel finger joints .
the profile of the surface of a structural steel finger joint measured along the centerline of the finger plate sections of the finger joint transverse to the centerline of the roadway shall be within a plus and minus tolerance .
the tolerance shall be num inch and num inches per foot times the number of feet from the nearest end of the joint divided by num num mm and num mm times the number of millimeters from the nearest end of the joint divided by num .
when all fabrication is completed the flat surfaces of each finger plate section shall be straight edged for flatness and any area found exceeding num inch in num feet num mm in num m shall be marked and corrected by approved methods .
a num foot num m straightedge shall be used and lapped at least num feet num m over the prior num foot num m check .
num thermal cutting .
steel may be thermal cut provided a smooth surface is secured by the use of a mechanical guide .
thermal cutting by hand shall be done only when approved and the surface shall be made smooth by planing chipping or grinding .
reentrant cuts shall be filleted to a radius of not less than num inch num mm .
defects in cut edges shall not be repaired by welding except with approval of the engineer for occasional notches or gouges less than num inch num mm deep for material up to num inches num mm thick and less than num inch num mm for material over num inches num mm thick .
such weld repairs shall be made by suitably preparing the defect welding with low hydrogen electrodes not exceeding num inch num mm in diameter observing the applicable requirements of departmental welding requirements and grinding the completed weld smooth and flush with the adjacent surface to produce a workmanlike finish .
other methods of cutting steel may be acceptable provided the method will produce cut surfaces within the required tolerances for thermal cut surfaces .
num substitutions .
substitutions of sections having different dimensions than those shown on the plans shall be made only when approved in writing .
num fastener holes .
a general .
num .
required size of fastener holes .
in any one connection all holes may be oversized or slotted by no more than num inch num mm .
in any one connection a maximum of num of the holes may be oversized or slotted by no more than num inch num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the fastener .
num .
fastener holes in main members .
holes for connections in structural steel main members main members as defined in article num shall be made in accordance with one or more of the following procedures subdrilling and then reaming or drilling all members to full size holes with the members assembled drilling full size holes in the assembled members by using a steel template with hardened steel bushings with the holes accurately dimensioned from the centerlines of the connection drilled using computer numerically controlled cnc machinery .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num web and flange splice plates shall be match marked to the splice locations regardless of the method used for drilling the holes .
num .
fastener holes in members that are not main members .
holes in members other than main members main members as defined in article num may be punched with a full size die if the thickness of the member is not greater than the nominal diameter of the fastener and not greater than num inch num mm for carbon steel and not greater than num inch num mm for high strength steel and not greater than num inch num mm for quenched and tempered alloy steel .
the diameter of the die shall not exceed the diameter of the punch by more than num inch num mm .
punched holes shall be clean cut and without torn or ragged edges .
num .
control of drilling and punching and quality of fastener holes .
web and flange splice plates shall be match marked to the splice locations regardless of the method used for creating the fastener holes .
members drilled while assembled shall be securely held in the correct position while being drilled .
burrs on the metal surfaces shall be removed .
plug welding of any mislocated or missized holes is not allowed .
b accuracy of punched holes .
num .
if the engineer finds that the punched work does not comply with requirements hereinafter provided it may be required that any or all holes be num subpunched or subdrilled and either reamed or drilled to full size or num drilled full size from the solid .
all subpunched holes shall be num inch num mm smaller than the nominal diameter of the fastener .
num .
the punched holes shall be so accurately punched that after assembling before any reaming is done a cylindrical pin num inch num mm smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole may be entered perpendicular to the face of the member without drifting in at least num percent of the contiguous holes in the same surface or in like proportion for any group of holes .
if this requirement is not fulfilled the badly punched pieces will be rejected .
if any hole will not pass a pin num inch num mm smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole this will be cause for rejection .
c shop assembly .
bolted trusses arches continuous beam spans and plate girders shall be assembled in the shop either in an upright position or on their side .
after the members have been adjusted to line and fit with proper camber and rigidly fastened i.e .
drift pinned together the holes for field connections shall be reamed or drilled .
filler plates for bolted beam and girder splices have been based on theoretical dimensions .
the thickness of the plates shall be adjusted in the shop to take care of any difference greater than num inch num mm between the theoretical and actual dimensions .
splices in members of the same theoretical size will require filler plates if the actual dimensions vary more than num inch num mm .
after assembling subpunched or subdrilled holes shall be reamed to a diameter num inch num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the fastener .
reaming shall be done after all the pieces to be connected are assembled and firmly fastened together .
reaming of fastener holes shall be done with twist drills or with short taper reamers .
where practicable reamers shall be directed by mechanical means .
burrs resulting from reaming or drilling shall be removed .
d accuracy of reamed or drilled holes .
reamed or drilled holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the member and their accuracy shall be the same as provided for punched holes subarticle numb except that after reaming or drilling num percent of the contiguous holes in the same surface or in like proportion for any group of holes shall not show an offset greater than num inch num mm between adjacent thickness of metal .
there shall be no drifting in the shop or field to enlarge mismatched holes .
if any holes must be enlarged to admit the fastener they shall be reamed .
e edge distance of fasteners .
num .
the minimum distance from the center of any fastener to a sheared or flame cut edge shall be num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm .
the minimum distance from the center of any fastener to a rolled or planed edge except in flanges of beams and channels shall be num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm .
in the flanges of beams and channels the minimum distance from the center of the fastener to a edge shall be num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm .
num .
when enlarged or slotted holes are used the distance between edges of adjacent holes shall not be less than three times the diameter of the fastener minus the nominal diameter of the hole .
the distance to an edge shall not be less than the amount shown in item numenum .
minus num the nominal diameter of the hole .
num through num blank .
num shop assembling .
a general .
all surfaces of metal that will be in contact when assembled shall be cleaned before assembly but shall not be painted unless otherwise specified by plan details .
no temporary welds for fitting aids or for other purposes will be allowed unless shown on the approved drawings .
all welding including stiffeners shall be completed on beams or girders before they are put into laydown andor assembled .
b assembling .
num .
before the reaming or drilling of any holes in a splice for continuous beam spans continuous plate girder spans and stringer beams is done a laydown consisting of at least three contiguous shop sections or all members in at least three contiguous panels but not less than the number of panels associated with three contiguous chord lengths lengths between field splices and not less than num feet num m in the case of structures longer than num feet num m shall be required .
all individual members girders and beams which require horizontal curvature shall be processed in the laydown with the required curvature .
shop assembly may proceed so long as one section of the minimum size lay down has been satisfactorily assembled in a preceding lay down .
all trusses shall be assembled in the shop .
all expansion dams finger joints shall be assembled in the shop .
expansion dams shall be shipped assembled including troughs unless otherwise shown on the plans .
for structures having curved girders girders with integral steel caps extreme skews in combination with severe grade or camber or other complex characteristics the plans may direct that the entire structure including the floor system be assembled in the shop .
the assembly including camber alignment accuracy and fit of joints shall be approved by the fabricators quality control inspector before reaming or drilling is commenced .
num .
the parts of a member shall be assembled properly aligned with drift pins and firmly drawn together with bolts before reaming or shop fastening is commenced .
assembled pieces shall be taken apart for the removal of burrs and shavings produced by reaming or drilling operation .
the member shall be free from twists bends and other deformations .
num .
preparatory to the shop fastening of fullsized punched material the fastener holes if necessary shall be spearreamed for the admission of the fastener .
the reamed or drilled holes shall not be more than num inch num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the fastener .
num .
abutting joints in compression members where so specified on the drawings shall be faced and brought to an even bearing .
no milling shall be done until members are completely shop section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num assembled unless otherwise provided on the plans .
where joints are not faced field splices in continuous steel girder lines the opening shall not exceed num inch num mm .
num .
field splice plates and filler plates shall be bolted to girders andor beams at the locations shown on the approved shop drawings in the fabrication shop after cleaning blasting and coating painting of both pieces to be joined .
num blank .
num matchmarking .
connecting parts assembled in the shop for the purpose of reaming or drilling holes in field connections shall be matchmarked with low stress stencils using figures and letters at least num inch num mm high and a diagram showing such marks shall be shown on approved shop drawings .
reamed parts shall not be interchanged .
num rivets .
in removing rivets care shall be taken not to injure the adjacent metal and if necessary they shall be drilled out .
num blank .
num bolts and bolted connections .
a general .
num .
this article does not pertain to the use of high strength bolts .
num .
unfinished and turned bolts and nuts shall conform to the requirements for grade a bolts of astm a num unless otherwise specified .
num .
the holes shall be truly cylindrical .
holes shall be at right angles to the surface of the metal so that both head and nut will bear squarelyagainst the metal .
num .
the heads and nuts shall be drawn tight against the work with a suitable wrench .
where bolts are to be used in beveled surfaces beveled washers shall be provided to give full bearing to the head or nut .
all bolts shall have cut threads neatly and accurately finished .
num .
permanent unfinished or turned bolts shall have single selflocking nuts or double nuts unless otherwise shown on the plans .
b unfinished bolts .
bolts transmitting shear shall be threaded to such a length that not more than one thread will be within the grip of the metal .
the bolts shall be of such length that they will extend entirely through their nuts but not more than num inch num mm beyond them .
c turned bolts .
num .
holes for turned bolts shall be carefully reamed and the bolts turned to a light driving fit with the threads entirely outside of the holes and under the washer and a washer shall be used .
the heads and nuts shall be hexagonal .
num .
the surface of the body of turned bolts shall meet the ansi roughness rating value of num num m num .
bolts shall be driven accurately into the holes without damaging the thread .
a snap shall be used to prevent damaging the threads .
num high strength fasteners .
the components of high strength bolt assemblies shall meet the requirements of the following astm a num a numm bolts astm a num a numm nuts astm f num f numm washers astm f num direct tension indicators unless otherwise noted by plan details or approved by the engineer type num bolts shall be used for standard construction and type num bolts shall be used with weathering steel .
galvanization where required shall be in accordance with the provisions of astm b num class num .
when an inorganic zinc paint primer is specified on the contract plans all bolts shall be galvanized .
the producer supplier and distributor shall submit the documentation required to certify that the bolt assembly components are in compliance with these specifications .
these requirements shall be modified or supplemented as follows section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num a quality assurance .
acceptance of bolts nuts washers and direct tension indicator washers shall be based on the production lot method of identification and quality assurance .
a production lot is a group of bolts nuts washers or load indicator washers that are the same nominal size are produced from the same heat of steel and are processed together through all operations to the shipping container .
the manufacturer shall identify and maintain the integrity of each production lot from rawmaterial selection through all processing operations and treatments to final packing and shipment .
b manufacturing .
num .
bolts .
bolts shall meet the hardness requirements given in astm a num a numm .
num .
nuts .
nuts to be galvanized shall be heat treated grade dh .
plain ungalvanized nuts shall be grades c d or cnum with a minimum rockwell hardness of num hrb or brinell hardness num hb or heat treated grades dh or dhnum .
the hardness requirements for grades c d and cnum exceed the current aashtoastm requirements .
nuts that are to be galvanized shall be tapped oversize the minimum amount required for proper assembly .
the amount of overtap in the nut shall be such that the nut will turn freely on the bolt in the coated condition .
galvanized nuts shall meet the mechanical requirements of astm a num a numm and the rotationalcapacity test herein the overtapping requirements of astm a num a numm paragraph num shall be considered maximum values instead of minimum as currently shown .
num .
marking .
all bolts nuts and washers shall be marked in accordance with the appropriate aashtoastm specifications .
c testing .
num .
bolts .
proof load tests astm f num method num are required .
minimum frequency of tests shall be as specified in astm a num a numm paragraph num .
wedge tests on full size bolts astm f num paragraph num are required .
if bolts are to be galvanized tests shall be performed after galvanizing .
minimum frequency of tests shall be as specified in astm a num a numm paragraph num .
if galvanized bolts are supplied the thickness of the zinc coating shall be measured .
measurements shall be taken on the wrench flats or top of bolt head .
num .
nuts .
proof load tests astm f num paragraph num are required .
minimum frequency of tests shall be as specified in astm a num a numm paragraph num .
if nuts are to be galvanized tests shall be performed after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
if galvanized nuts are supplied the thickness of the zinc coating shall be measured .
measurements shall be taken on the wrench flats .
num .
washers .
if galvanized washers are supplied hardness testing shall be performed after galvanizing .
coating shall be removed prior to taking hardness measurements .
the thickness of the zinc coating shall be measured .
num .
assemblies .
rotationalcapacity tests are required and shall be performed on all plain and galvanized after galvanizing bolt nut and washer assemblies by the manufacturer or distributor prior to shipping .
washers are required as part of the test .
the following shall apply a .
except as modified herein the rotationalcapacity test shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of astm a num a numm .
b .
each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot shall be tested as an assembly .
where washers are not required by the installation procedures they need not be included in the lot identification .
a production lot change of section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num either the bolt nut or washer shall require the testing of additional assemblies .
c. a rotationalcapacity lot number shall be assigned to each combination of lots tested .
d. the minimum frequency of testing shall be two assemblies per rotationalcapacity lot .
e. the bolt nut and washer assembly shall be assembled in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device note this requirement supersedes the current astm a num a numm requirement that the test be performed in a steel joint .
for short bolts which are too short to be assembled in the skidmorewilhelm calibrator see subitem numcnum.i .
f. the minimum rotation from a snug tight condition num of the specified proof load shall be num num turn for bolt lengths num diameters num num turn for bolt lengths num diameters and num diameters num num num turn for bolt lengths num diameters g. the tension reached at the above rotation shall be equal to or greater than num times the required installation tension .
the installation tension and the tension for the turn test are shown below diameter in .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num req .
installation tension kips num num num num num num num num num turn test tension kips num num num num num num num num num diameter mm num num num num num num num req .
installation tension kn num num num num num num num turn test tension kn num num num num num num num h. after the required installation tension listed above has been exceeded one reading of tension and torque shall be taken and recorded .
the torque value shall conform to the following torque num pd where torque measured torque footpounds p measured bolt tension pounds and d bolt diameter feet .
i. bolts that are too short to test in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator may be tested in a steel joint .
the tension requirement of subitem numcnum.g .
need not apply .
the maximum torque requirement of subitem numcnum.h .
shall be computed using a value of p equal to the turn test tension shown in the table in subitem numcnum.g .
num .
reporting .
the results of all tests including zinc coating thickness required herein and in the appropriate aashto specifications shall be recorded .
the location where tests are performed and the date of tests shall be recorded .
d documentation .
num .
mill test reports mtr .
an mtr shall be furnished for all mill steel used in the manufacture of the bolts nuts and washers .
the place where the material was melted and manufactured shall be shown on the mtr .
num .
manufacturer certified test reports mctr .
the manufacturer of the bolts nuts and washers shall furnish test reports mctr for the item furnished .
each mctr shall show the relevant information required in accordance with item numcnum .
the manufacturer performing the rotationalcapacity test shall include on the mctr a .
the lot number of each of the items tested .
b .
the rotationalcapacity lot number as required in subitem numcnum.c .
c. the results of the tests required in item numcnum .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num d. the pertinent information required in item numcnum .
e. a statement that mctr for the items are in conformance to this specification and the appropriate aashto specifications .
f. the location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured .
num .
distributor certified test reports dctr .
the dctr shall include mctr above for the various bolt assembly components .
the rotationalcapacity test may be performed by a distributor in lieu of a manufacturer and reported on the dctr .
the results of the tests required in item numcnum .
shall be shown on the dctr .
the pertinent information required in item numcnum .
shall be shown on the dctr .
the rotationalcapacity lot number as required in subitem numcnum.c .
shall be shown on the dctr .
the dctr shall contain a statement that the mctr are in conformance to this specification and the appropriate aashto specifications .
e shipping .
bolts nuts and washers from each rotationalcapacity lot shall be shipped in the same container .
if there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and washer the nuts and washers may be shipped in separate containers .
each container shall be permanently marked with the rotational capacity lot number such that identification will be possible at any stage prior to installation .
num sheared edges .
sheared edges of plates more than num inch num mm in thickness shall be planed to a depth of num inch num mm .
plates num inch num mm and less in thickness shall be ground to remove sharp corners and burrs .
reentrants corners shall be filleted to a minimum radius of num inch num mm before cutting .
num facing of bearing surfaces .
the top and bottom surfaces of steel slabs and base plates and cap plates of columns and pedestals shall be planed or else the plates or slabs hotstraightened .
parts of members in contact with them shall be faced and shall have full contact when assembled .
for fitup of sole plates or bearing seats of beams or girders see article num .
sole plate and masonry plate corrections may be made by planing or hotstraightening .
in planing the surface of expansion bearings the cut of the tool shall be in the direction of expansion .
cast pedestals shall be planed on surfaces to be in contact with steel and the surface to be in contact with masonry rough finished .
the surface finish of bearing and base plates and other bearing surfaces that are to come in contact with each other or with concrete shall meet the ansi surface roughness requirements as defined in ansi bnum surface roughness waviness and lay part i unless otherwise specified steel slab in contact with masonry ansi num num m steel slabs ansi num num m heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded ansi num num m milled ends of compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers ansi num num m bridge rollers and rockers ansi num num m pins and pin holes ansi num num m sliding bearings ansi num num m surfaces of bronze bearing plates intended for sliding contact shall be carefully milled and polish finished .
num blank .
num blank .
num finished members .
these shall be true to line and free from twists bends and other defects .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num num blank .
num blank .
num stress relieving .
members such as bridge shoes or pedestals which are builtup by welding sections of plates together shall be stress relieved in accordance with the requirements given in ansiaashtoaws dnumdnumm num for stress relieving unless an alternate method has the written approval of the bridge engineer .
num pins and rollers .
a general .
pins and rollers shall be accurately turned to the dimensions shown on the drawings and shall be straight smooth and free from flaws .
pins and rollers more than num inches num mmin diameter shall be forged and annealed pins and rollers num inches num mmor less in diameter may be either forged and annealed or cold finished carbon steel shafting .
pins and roller material shall conform to one of the following unless a specific grade or class is specified by plan details num num mm in diameter or lessaashto m num grade num to num inclusive num to num num mm to num mm in diameteraashto m num class c class d or class g num to num num mm to num mm in diameteraashto m num class f this material shall provide the following minimum values yield num psi num mpa stress in extreme fiber num psi num mpa shear num psi num mpa bearing on pins not subject to rotation num psi num mpa bearing on pins subject to rotation num psi num mpa rolled material with the same properties may be substituted for this class .
in pins larger than num inches num mm in diameter a hole not less than num inches num mm in diameter shall be bored full length along the axis after the forging has been allowed to cool to a temperature below the critical range under suitable conditions to prevent injury by too rapid cooling and before being annealed .
two pilot nuts and two driving nuts shall be furnished for each size pin unless otherwise provided by plans or directed .
the diameter of pins and rollers shall not exceed num inch num mm plus or minus from the diameter specified by the plans or ordered by the engineer .
b boring pin holes .
pin holes shall be bored true to gage smooth and straight at right angles with the axis of the member and parallel with each other unless otherwise shown on the plans .
pins shall be parallel to each other unless otherwise shown on the plans .
the final surface shall be obtained by a finishing cut .
boring of holes in built up members shall be done during the final lay down operation .
c pin clearance .
the diameter of the pin holes except as noted in item numbnum shall not exceed that of the pin by more than num inch num mm for pins num inches num mm or less in diameter or num inch num mm for larger pins .
num through num blank .
num welds .
a general .
shop welding shall be performed by submerged arc welding saw in accordance with the specification noted herein .
in the event the above method can not be used approved manual welding or other approved and qualified automatic or semiautomatic methods may be authorized .
field welding shall be performed by manual shielded metal arc welding smaw using approved electrodes and procedures in accordance with the specifications noted herein .
if a minimum of num inches num mm of excess material beyond the theoretical end cuts does not exist extension bars or runoff tabs shall be used at girder ends to insure sound welds on web to flange welds .
section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num all welding shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the engineer or his representative .
during inspection of the work any workman including welders and inspection technicians who in the opinion of the engineer produces inferior work may under the provision of article num be disqualified from performing departmental work .
all welding shall be in accordance with the aashtoaws dnummdnum bridge welding code seventh edition as modified by the following article num .
a new sentence shall be added to paragraph num as follows shop welding except for minor secondary members and minor repair welding shall be done under a cover of a permanent structure andor building capable of protecting the actual welding operation from inclement weather .
any standing water that would be dangerous to the welder or operator or to the integrity of the weld itself shall be cause for the welding to stop until such time as the situation is corrected .
paragraph num .
the original a.w.s .
subclause was deleted but shall be replaced with the following paragraph num .
all corners of thermal cut or sheared edges including edges of flanges of beams and girders along with splice material and other sharp edges deemed undesirable by the engineer on structural members designated to be coated shall be slightly rounded .
said rounding shall be accomplished by light grinding to produce a satisfactory surface for painting approximately num inch num mm radius .
the grinding shall be performed in such a manner as to produce a neat workmanship like product without nicks or notches in the metal .
a new paragraph to num shall be added as follows paragraph num gaps shall not exceed num inches num mm between the contact surfaces at the bottom flanges of beams or girders and steel bearing plates .
there shall be no gap for at least num of this contact area .
new paragraphs num and num shall be added as follows paragraph num saw single electrode num saw parallel and multiple electrodes .
a properly operated heating torch shall run immediately ahead about num inches num mm and on the same side in advance of the point of welding of the submerged arc welding head to remove moisture from the steel in the vicinity of the weld when making web to flange fillet welds of plate girders .
gases producing moisture in welding operations are discouraged unless it can be shown that the resultant temperature of the metal is sufficient to vaporize any moisture that might be present .
paragraphs num num and num in regard to nondestructive testing ndt of complete joint penetration groove welds shall be deleted in their entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof paragraph num complete joint penetration cjp groove welds shall be tested by a.w.s .
dnum bridge welding code requirements in regard to and mandating the use of either radiographic testing rt or ultrasonic testing ut in accordance with the following num shop welds .
num of all cjp butt weld splices in the following all flanges tension and compression of beams and girders all flanges of floorbeams all members of floorbeam trusses which support stringer beams all flanges of steel bent caps and all chords diagonals and verticals of trusses .
num of all vertical cjp butt weld splices in webs of beams girders floorbeams and steel bent caps .
this requirement shall consist of num of the web depth beginning at the top of the web plate and num of the web depth beginning at the bottom of the web plate .
if rejectable discontinuities are found in the vertical cjp butt welded splices the remainder of the weld shall be tested .
num of each longitudinal cjp butt weld splice in the webs of beams girders floorbeams and steel bent caps and in truss members .
this requirement shall consist of num of weld length at each end of each plate and num of the weld length at the center of the plate each plate is defined as that portion of web between vertical splices either welded or bolted.if rejectable discontinuities are found in a partially ndt examined section num structural steel fasteners and miscellaneous metals num longitudinal joint additional ndt examinations using the original ndt process of that joint shall be made as required by the engineer .
num of all cjp welds used at the ends of longitudinal stiffeners welded to girder webs and the cjp welds used to splice sections of the longitudinal stiffeners together .
num of all cjp groove welds in t and corner joints girder stiffenerconnection plate to flange welds shall be tested by ut .
all welded repairs of rt or ut examined joints shall be reexamined by the original ndt process for quality and acceptability in the area of the repair .
num .
field welds .
num of all butt welds in beams girders floorbeams steel bent caps and chords diagonals and verticals of trusses .
all repairs of radiographed joints shall be reradiographed in the repair area .
a new paragraph num. shall be added as follows paragraph num .
magnetic particle examination of all fillet welds andor reinforcement welds used in bearing assembly fabrication and a minimum of num of all fillet welds in expansion dams is required .
if defects are found which require repair they shall be reexamined with magnetic particle testing after the repairs are made .
magnetic particle examination shall follow the procedures and requirements as outlined in aws subsection num .
a new paragraph num shall be added as follows paragraph num dye penetrant pt examination of all welded and finished plate edges of cjp butt weld splices of girder web plate or girder flange plate weld splices in main members is required .
this examination shall be performed in addition to the required radiographic testing rt or ultrasonic testing ut .
if defects are found which require repair these areas shall be reexamined with pt after repairs are made .
written documentation of all nondestructive testing performed on all welding which requires ndt testing shall be submitted to the aldot representative within num hours of completion of the tests .
b qualification of welders .
field welders shall be prequalified according to the standard qualification procedure of the applicable aws specifications and amendments thereto as noted in subarticle numa .
a welder that passes the required test procedure without requiring a retest will then be qualified for the next three years with no test required provided his performance is satisfactory .
during this three year period a new card will be issued for oneyear periods when the welder presents evidence that he has been welding during the previous six month period .
welders that require a retest to become qualified must take and pass the test each year .
field welders must have a current qualification card on his person at all times that he is doing field welding .
c shop welding .
num .
the contractor or his representative shall furnish to the department a written report that shall cover the welding procedure specification wps for each process and joint used in shop welding .
this report shall be submitted in duplicate on a format approved by the department .
num .
all shop welds shall be properly identified so that it can be determined by the engineer which welder performed the work .
num .
the aws joint designation shall appear in the tail of the weld symbol on the shop drawing .
num .
each full penetration weld that is to be tested by ultrasonic or radiographic testing shall be assigned a unique number by the preparer of the shop drawing .
this number shall serve to identify that particular weld and shall also appear on all nondestructive test reports and xray film .
num .
whenever there are members identified on bridge plans or structural shop drawings as fracture critical members post weld heating shall be used to prevent cracking in the heat affected zone due to hydrogen embrittlement .
the cost of post weld heating will be considered a subsidiary obligation of the fabrication process .
d field welding .
only authorized welding shall be done in the field .
unauthorized indiscriminate welding shall not be done to attach temporary construction details to beams girders or other main members section num elastomeric bearing materials num without approval of the construction bureau .
welding is strictly prohibited in areas where this restriction is shown on the plans tension flanges and other critical areas fractural critical members noted in these specifications .
e non destructive testing .
all nondestructive testing required by these specifications shall be performed by the contractor fabricator at his expense .
num num blank .
num painting .
shop coating shall meet applicable requirements of section num .
num protection of machine finished surfaces .
machinefinished surfaces in general shall be shop painted except for the following driven pins and pin holes surfaces in sliding contact bronze and steel surfaces opposing bronze in sliding contact other surfaces as noted on the plans .
machine surfaces of steel not requiring paint should receive a heavy shop coat of petrolatum meeting the requirements of astm d num nlgi grade num or num or military specification cnumd grade num .
other approved coating may be used .
surfaces opposing bronze in sliding contact if shipped assembled with bronze shall be coated and assembled with the lubricant supplied by the bronze manufacturer .
if not shipped assembled with bronze such surfaces shall receive a shop coating which shall be removed before field assembly .
the lubricant furnished by the bronze manufacturer shall then be applied .
no paint or protective coating shall be applied to bronze .
section num elastomeric bearing materials num description .
elastomeric bearings shall be classified by type in accordance with the following bearing type plain elastomer layers of elastomer with internal steel laminate plates bearing plate vulcanized to the elastomer ptfe surfacing bonded to the bearing plate on the elastomer .
stainless steel surfacing attached to a second bearing plate .
type num x type num x type num x x type num x x type num x x x num required physical properties .
a general .
the materials for the elastomeric bearings shall meet the requirements given in aashto m num appendix xnum .
physical property tests shall be performed in accordance with applicable aashto astm and aldot procedures .
b elastomer .
the elastomer unless otherwise specified shall be num virgin polychloroprene neoprene .
natural rubber vulcanized rubber natural or synthetic or other synthetic rubberlike materials will not be accepted .
the elastomer for type num and type num bearings bearings without internal laminate plates shall be num durometer hardness .
the elastomer for type num type num and type num bearings bearings with internal laminate plates shall be num durometer hardness .
where bearing plates are required the elastomeric portion of the pad shall be hot bonded to the bearing plate during the vulcanization of the pad .
this process shall form a bond such that section num elastomeric bearing materials num removal of the elastomeric portion of the pad from the bearing plate will result in elastomer failure before bond failure .
c internal steel laminate plates for type num num and num bearings .
internal steel laminate plates unless shown otherwise on the plans shall have a nominal thickness of not less than num gage .
d steel bearing plates for type num num and num bearings .
steel bearing plates shall be hot dipped galvanized coated in accordance with the requirements given in astm a num .
the surfaces of the plates that will be bonded to the elastomer shall be cleaned to sspc num near white metal finish after galvanization and immediately prior to bonding .
the cleaned bonding surface shall be protected from rust that will be detrimental to the strength of the bond .
a portion of the galvanization shall be removed from the bearing plates to allow the field welding for the installation of the bearings .
for each weld a num inch num mm wide strip of galvanization shall be removed .
this strip of bare metal shall extend across the entire width of the bearing plate .
e ptfe for type num bearings .
the ptfe shall be composed of num percent virgin unfilled polytetraflouroethylene polymer .
the ptfe resin shall be num percent pure new material and shall comply with astm d num .
no reclaimed material shall be used .
the ptfe shall meet the following requirements physical properties of ptfe physical property astm test method sheet unfilled specific gravity d num num num melting point f c d num num num num tensile strength psi mpa d num num num elongation at break d num num the thickness of the ptfe shall be at least num inch num mm after compression .
the ptfe shall be attached to the bearing plate by adhesive bonding using an adhesive that is approved by the engineer in accordance with the instructions of the adhesives manufacturer .
prior to bonding the surface shall be etched by an approved manufacturer using the sodium naphthalene or sodium ammonia process .
the peel strength of the bond shall be not less than num pounds per inch num knm when tested in accordance with astm d num method b .
if shown on the plans the ptfe shall be confined in a recess in the bearing plate for one half of the ptfe thickness .
ptfe confined in a recess shall be at least num inch num mm thick when the maximum dimension of the ptfe is less than or equal to num inches num mm and num inch num mm when the maximum dimension of the ptfe is greater than num inches num mm unless shown otherwise on the plans .
the finished surface of the ptfe shall be smooth free from bubbles and shall conform to the tolerances shown .
f stainless steel surfacing for type num bearings .
the required thickness of the stainless steel sheet may be shown on the plans .
if not shown the thickness shall be at least num inch num mm when the maximum dimension of the surface is less than or equal to num inches nummm and num inch num mm when the maximum dimension is larger than num inches num mm .
the stainless steel surfacing shall meet the requirements of astm a num type num and the requirements of astm a num and shall have a no .
num finish mirror finish on the side in contact with the ptfe layer .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the coefficient of friction between the bearing element bearing plate with ptfe and the stainless steel shall not be more than num at num psi num mpa compressive loading .
the stainless steel component shall be furnished as one piece of steel if it is shown on the plans to be a single piece .
after removal of the galvanization on the bearing plate in the footprint of the stainless steel sheet each sheet shall be attached to the bearing plate by seal welding around the entire perimeter so as to prevent entry of moisture between the stainless steel sheet and the bearing plate .
after welding the bead and any damaged galvanized area shall be repaired as per the sprayed zinc metallizing requirements of astm a num .
welds shall conform to the american section num structural plate for pipe pipearches and arches num welding society requirements for stainless steel .
after welding the stainless steel sheet shall be flat free from wrinkles and in continuous contact with its sole plate .
g manufacturing requirements .
types num num num and num pads shall be fabricated in accordance with aashto m num .
type num pads shall be fabricated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
h tolerances .
pads shall be manufactured in accordance with plan details and shop drawings with applied tolerances as established in aashto m num .
type num bearing pads shall in addition to aashto m num meet the following tolerances flat ptfe sliding bearing tolerances item thickness dimension flatness or outofround ptfe num num nummm nummm num num nummm nummm num x nominal thickness stainless steel num num nummm nummm num num nummm nummm num x nominal thickness num marking sampling and testing .
bearings shall be divided into lots and marked in accordance with aashto m num appendix xnum as modified in aldotnum to allow pads of the same type but different sizes to be grouped together in a lot .
bearings less than num inches num mm in thickness may have markings placed on the top surface in lieu of the side .
lots may contain up to num additional pads for sampling purposes .
sampling for departmental verification testing shall be in accordance with aldot num and the aldot testing manual .
in addition to aldot testing manufacturers shall as a minimum test all lots to level num of aashto m num appendix xnum .
manufacturers shall furnish certified test reports showing actual test results for all parameters found in table xnum of aashto m num .
in addition steel reinforced pads shall have test results covering the peel strength test and certification that all pads have been proof loaded and passed the requirements for level num criteria as well as a mill test report for the steel laminates showing the actual physical and chemical analysis for the heat of steel .
mill test reports shall also be submitted for all bearing plates .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification that the type num bearing assembly meets the requirement for the maximum allowable coefficient of friction between the ptfe and the stainless steel sheet .
section num structural plate for pipe pipearches and arches num description .
a general .
corrugated metal structural plate pipe pipearches and arches shall meet requirements noted in this section and the details shown on the plans .
acceptance of material will be based on job site inspection for workmanship and compliance with fabrication requirements .
a certificate of compliance for each shipment as per aashto requirements will not be required however a copy of the manufacturers analysis of the sheets used in the manufacture of the pipe shall be furnished .
for correlation of specified plate thickness and allowable fill heights see plan details .
b forming and punching of plates for pipe .
plates shall be formed to provide lap joints .
the bolt holes shall be so punched that all plates having like dimensions curvature and the same number of bolts per meter of seam shall be interchangeable .
each plate shall be curved to the proper radius so that the crosssectional dimensions of the finished structure will be as indicated on the plans .
section num pipe culvert joint sealers num plates for forming skewed or sloped ends shall be cut to give the angle of skew or slope specified .
burned edges shall be free from oxide and burrs and shall present a workmanlike finish .
elongation of structural plate pipe may be accomplished by forming plates so that the finished pipe is elliptical in shape with the vertical diameter approximately five percent greater than the nominal diameter of the pipe .
plates for a pipe arch shall form a cross section made up of four circular arcs tangent to each other at their junctions and symmetrical about the vertical axis .
the top shall be an arc of not more than num degrees nor less than num degrees .
the bottom shall be an arc of not more than num degrees nor less than num degrees .
the top shall be joined at each end to the bottom by an arc having a radius between num and num inches num and num mm and of not more than num degrees nor less than num degrees .
num corrugated steel .
corrugated steel structural plates fasteners etc .
shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num with plates hotdipped galvanized after fabrication punching and cutting .
num corrugated aluminum .
corrugated aluminum structural plates fasteners etc .
shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num modified to include the following bolt holes along those edges of the plates that will form longitudinal seams in the finished structure shall be on a double row with center to center dimension num inches num mm .
in all structures the longitudinal joint shall be composed of two bolts in the valley and crest of each corrugation .
bolt holes along those edges of the plates that will form circumferential seams in the finished structure shall provide for a bolt spacing of not more than num inches num mm .
the minimum distance from center of hole to edge of plate shall be not less than num times the diameter of the bolt .
num bituminous coatings and paved inverts .
bituminous coatings shall be in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numc however field coatings may be applied in accordance with the provisions of aashto m num .
paved inverts shall be in accordance with the provisions of subarticle numc however field application may be accomplished using the asphalt mastic noted in aashto m num applied as noted therein to the depth and width required by subarticle numc .
num handling and storage .
handling and storage of plates shall be as specified in subarticle numf for pipe .
any spelter damaged in handling shall be painted with two coats of approved galvanizing repair paint section num or an approved zinc spelter paint .
section num pipe culvert joint sealers num rigid pipes .
a general .
allowable joint materials will be determined based on the shape of the pipe culvert as given in the table below .
pipe culvert shape allowable joint materials round rubber gasket arch horizontal elliptical and precast culverts rubber gasket bituminous plastic cement or preformed flexible joint sealant note the joint sealing material requirements of this specification are provided to insure the installed pipe joints provide a soil tight performance .
if a more stringent joint performance requirement is deemed necessary during the design phase the engineer may specify other materials or a different combination of materials specified above .
section num pipe culvert joint sealers num b bituminous plastic cement .
bituminous plastic cement meeting the specifications noted in this section may be used on joints for arch and or horizontal elliptical pipe and precast box culverts .
this specification covers a bituminous joint sealing compound which may be applied cold for sealing the joints of bell and spigot or tongue and groove storm or culvert pipe .
material furnished shall be composed of a steamrefined petroleum asphalt dissolved in a suitable solvent and stiffened with a mineral filler .
properties the bituminous plastic cement shall be a smooth uniform mixture not thickened or livered and it shall show no separation which can not be easily overcome by stirring .
the material shall be of such consistency and properties that it can be readily applied with a trowel putty knife or caulking compound gun without pulling or drawing .
when applied to the joint surfaces it shall exhibit good adhesive and cohesive properties .
the material shall meet the following requirements num .
when applied in a layer num to num inch num mm to num mm thick on a tinned metal panel and cured at room temperature for num hours the bituminous plastic cement shall set to a tough plastic coating free from blisters .
minimum maximum num .
grease cone penetration num num num .
unit weight unit mass pounds per gallon kilograms per liter num num num .
nonvolatile num num .
ash by ignition by weights masses num num tests methods of tests shall be in accordance with the following grease cone penetration aashto t num nonvolatile astm d num ash astm d num c preformed flexible joint sealant preformed flexible joint sealant meeting the requirements of this section may be used on joints for arch and or horizontal elliptical pipe and precast box culverts .
this material shall meet the latest requirements of astm cnum standard specification for joints for concrete pipe manholes and precast box sections using preformed flexible joint sealants .
the material shall be installed per the manufacturers recommendations .
d rubber gaskets .
rubber gaskets shall be used on all round pipe joints .
this material shall meet the latest requirements of astm cnum standard specification for joints for concrete pipe and manholes using rubber gaskets .
the material shall be installed per the manufacturers recommendations .
e other types of joint sealers .
external wrap joint sealant meeting the specifications noted in this section may be used in addition to and combination with joint material as specified in subarticle a above .
this material if or when used shall meet the latest requirements of astm cnum standard specification for external sealing bands for concrete pipe manholes and precast box sections .
the material shall be installed per the manufacturers recommendations .
other types of joint sealers or gaskets with proven satisfactory performance records may be considered by the department for use on individual contracts on a trial basis .
num flexible pipe sealers .
a general .
connecting bands complying with the appropriate provisions of the type pipe being used may be considered as a satisfactory sealer provided the installation method provides a water tight joint for the full circumference of the joint unless otherwise directed .
where a satisfactory joint seal can not be obtained using only the connecting band the joint shall be sealed by the use of gaskets designed for this purpose mastic or other approved material .
the producer of the sealant used in the joints shall furnish the engineer with a certification showing the physical properties of the material and hydrostatic tests of joints sealed with his material .
section num roadway pipe num b special joints .
if special joints or sealers are required such will be designated by plan details .
section num roadway pipe num concrete pipe .
a general .
concrete pipe shall be reinforced circular or reinforced arch concrete pipe .
circular concrete pipe shall comply with the requirements of aashto m num except that elliptical steel reinforcement will not be permitted unless such is permitted for special design pipe by details provided in the plans .
concrete arch pipe shall comply with the requirements of aashto m num. b special design .
when so permitted by the plans or in the proposal pipe of designs other than those shown in the standard plans may be permitted however such pipe must meet performance and test requirements specified in aashto m num and shall be installed under the same specifications as circular pipe .
c classes of pipe .
circular pipe and arch pipe shall be of the following classes corresponding to aashto m num or aashto m num classes as tabulated herein .
aashto class aldot class abbreviation class ii class num reinf .
conc .
pipe cl .
num r.c .
pipe class iii class num reinf .
conc .
pipe cl .
num r.c .
pipe class iv class num reinf .
conc .
pipe cl .
num r.c .
pipe class v class num reinf .
conc .
pipe cl .
num r.c .
pipe class ii class num reinf .
conc .
arch pipe cl .
num r.c .
arch pipe class iii class num reinf .
conc .
arch pipe cl .
num r.c .
arch pipe class iv class num reinf .
conc .
arch pipe cl .
num r.c .
arch pipe d materials .
coarse aggregate fine aggregate cement steel reinforcement and water shall meet the requirements of aashto m num or m num whichever is applicable except as modified in applicable sections of division num materials .
e acceptance .
all precast products furnished shall meet the requirements of section num. f handling and storage .
pipe shall be handled transported delivered and stored in a manner that will not injure or damage the pipe .
pipe shall not be shipped before it has been inspected and approved .
pipe that is damaged during shipment or handling will be rejected even though satisfactory before shipment .
pipe dropped from platforms or vehicles or in the pipe trench will be rejected .
num corrugated steel pipe .
a general .
corrugated steel pipe used in the construction of roadway culverts shall be either circular or arch pipe meeting the requirements of aashto m num for type i ir or ii culverts the requirements noted in this section and the details shown in the plans .
the pitch and depth of corrugations allowed by the aashto specifications but not covered by plan details must be approved by the department before use .
acceptance of pipe will be based on job site inspection for workmanship and compliance with fabrication requirements .
a certificate of compliance for each shipment as per aashto m num will not be required however a copy of the manufacturers analysis of the sheets used in the manufacture of the pipe will be furnished .
section num roadway pipe num corrugated steel roadway pipe shall have a protective coating and in most cases requires a paved invert .
certain secondary roads may use plain galvanized steel pipe .
a paved invert will not be required in a type ir pipe unless needed for abrasion resistance .
when such is the case the requirement for a paved invert in a type ir pipe will be shown on the plans .
b fabrication .
all pipes furnished under this section shall be fabricated with circumferential corrugations and a riveted lap joint or with helical corrugations and a continuous lock seam or welded seam or helical ribs projecting outwardly with a continuous lock seam extending from end to end of each length of pipe .
in addition helical corrugated or helical ribbed pipe shall comply with the following num .
lock joints or seams shall produce a continuous watertight seam parallel to the corrugations or ribs and as near as practical to the neutral axis of the corrugations or midpoint between ribs for all sizes without perforations .
the seam shall be so designed and fabricated as to develop strength and serviceability equal to that of riveted pipe of the same wall thickness .
num .
welded seams shall produce a continuous watertight seam parallel to the corrugations and as near as practical to the neutral axis of the corrugations .
the welding process shall be so controlled that the combined width of the weld and the adjacent spelter coat burned by the welding operation shall not exceed three times the thickness of the metal being joined .
if the spelter is damaged outside the above specified width the weld and the damaged area adjacent to the weld shall be cleaned and treated as required by the appropriate article of aashto m num .
a coating of rust on the base metal portions of the weld is not considered a defect .
the welding process shall be such that the welded seam strength shall not be less than num percent of the base metal .
the manufacturer of welded seam pipe shall submit a certified test report of his production testing that shows the production will meet the above noted weld strength requirements .
one test will be reported for each days production run with the test performed on the final joint produced for that day .
num .
all ends of helical corrugated or helical ribbed pipe which are to be joined to other pipe with coupling bands shall be reformed to provide a minimum of two standard size circumferential corrugations .
c protective coatings linings and paved inverts .
num .
general .
protective coating for corrugated metal round and arch pipe shall meet one of the requirements noted in this article .
concrete linings for corrugated steel round pipe shall meet the requirements specified in subarticle d of this article .
paved inverts shall be formed by the addition of a smooth pavement in the invert of the pipe filling the corrugations for at least num of the circumference for a round pipe and num for an arch pipe .
the pavement shall have a minimum thickness of num of an inch num mm above the crest of the corrugations except where the upper edges intersect the corrugations .
in addition the following will be required for the manufacturer of each length of coated pipe shipped to a project a .
each length of protective coated corrugated metal pipe shall have one section covered with duct tape for identification .
this covered section shall include the heat number and metal thickness .
b .
the section of pipe covered with duct tape shall be marked for easy location by project personnel .
c. pipe that is not properly taped shall not be placed on a project until it has been sampled and tested by the central laboratory .
num .
coating .
bituminous coating shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for type a pipe .
polymeric coatings on precoated metal sheets meeting the requirements of aashto m num for type b sheets may be used provided the pipe is fabricated so that the heavier coating is located on the inside of the pipe .
num .
paved inverts .
section num roadway pipe num paved inverts for bituminous coated pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for type c pipe .
paved inverts for pipe formed from precoated metal sheets shall be compatible with the coating material capable of providing an acceptable bond with coating material and otherwise meeting the same basic test requirements of section num of aashto m num .
num .
concrete lining .
concrete lined pipe shall be bituminous coated on the outside as outlined in item num above .
although not required bituminous coating of the inside of the pipe will be permitted .
concrete for the lining shall be composed of cement fine aggregate and water that are well mixed and of such consistency as to produce a dense homogeneous nonsegregated lining .
the cement shall be portland cement type ii conforming to aashto m num .
aggregate shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except the sections on gradation and uniformity of gradation .
num of the aggregate shall pass the no .
num num mm sieve with not more than num passing the no .
num num m sieve .
the concrete used as lining shall have a minimum num day compressive strength of num psi num mpa when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
the concrete lining shall be applied in one or more courses by a machine traveling through the pipe and discharging the concrete over stationary pipe sections .
the rate of travel of the machine and the rate of concrete discharge shall be regulated so as to produce a homogeneous nonsegregated lining throughout .
the lining machine shall be equipped with attachments for mechanically troweling the concrete lining .
the trowel attachment shall be such that the pressure applied to the lining will be uniform and shall produce a lining that has a uniform thickness and a smooth surface .
the concrete lining thickness shall be num inch num inch num mm num mm over the inside crests of the corrugations .
the manufacturer shall submit certifications stating the gage of the pipe and that the cement aggregate and the lining itself all comply with the above specifications .
random samples of the cement aggregate and cylinders made from the lining mixture shall be submitted on request of the department .
if cylinders are required they shall be made from the last batch mix of the days operation .
either standard rodded cylinders or cylinders compacted and cured in the same manner as the pipe lining will be acceptable .
the minimum average num day compressive strength of cylinders tested from any one batch shall be num psi num mpa .
d connecting bands .
connecting bands shall be made of material conforming to aashto m num or to aashto m num depending on the type of metallic coat on the pipe .
all bands shall have a minimum of two circumferential corrugations which shall effectively engage the second as a minimum circumferential corrugated valley from the end of each pipe .
connecting bands shall be no more than three nominal sheet thicknesses lighter than the thickness of the pipe to be connected but in no case lighter than num gage .
bolts and nuts for connecting bands furnished in sufficient sizes and numbers to adequately perform the intended function shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
band connection hardware consisting of bolts nuts bars and rivets shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num or be coated by the electroplating process as provided in astm b num class fezn num .
protective coatings for connecting bands shall be the same as used on the pipes which are being connected and shall meet the appropriate requirements for such noted in subarticle c above .
e blank .
f handling and storage .
pipe shall be handled transported delivered and stored by methods that will not damage the pipe or bituminous coating and with the paved invert at the bottom of the pipe .
any pipe damaged or bent will be rejected even though previously inspected and found satisfactory and shall be replaced or repaired at the engineers option without additional compensation .
damaged coating or paving shall be repaired in a manner satisfactory to the engineer using approved materials .
section num side drain pipe num num corrugated aluminum pipe .
a general .
corrugated aluminum pipes used in the construction of roadway culverts shall be either circular or arch pipe meeting the requirements of aashto m num except as provided in this article or shown on the plans .
the pitch and depth of corrugation allowed by the aashto specifications but not covered by plan details must be approved by the department before use .
acceptance of pipe will be based on job site inspection for workmanship and compliance with fabrication requirements .
a certificate of compliance for each shipment as per aashto m num will not be required however a copy of the manufacturers analysis of the sheets used in the manufacture of the pipe shall be furnished .
for correlation of the specified plate thickness of corrugated metal pipe and aluminum sheet thickness shown in the detailed plans the following shall apply aluminum sheet thickness nominal table num aashto m num specified culvert sheet thickness nominal table num aashto m num num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm note minimum acceptable aluminum sheet thickness num inches num mm .
tolerances for aluminum sheet thickness noted in table num aashto m num shall apply .
b fabrication .
all pipe furnished under this article shall be fabricated with circumferential corrugations and a riveted lap joint or with helical corrugations and a continuous lock seam or welded seam extending from end to end of each length of pipe provided the seams and ends of the pipe comply with the additional requirements of paragraph num of subarticle numb .
c bituminous coating and paved invert .
bituminous coatings and paved inverts shall comply with the requirements of subarticle numc .
d connecting bands .
the width and design of connection bands shall be as noted in aashto m num with the pitch and depth of corrugations etc .
consistent with the type corrugations of the pipe being used .
bituminous coating for use with bituminous coated pipe and pipe arches shall conform to the appropriate requirements of aashto m num. e handling and storage .
handling and storage shall meet the requirements of subarticle numf .
section num side drain pipe num concrete pipe .
a general .
concrete pipe shall be reinforced circular or reinforced arch concrete pipe except that pipe num inches num mm or less in diameter and equivalent size arch pipe may be plain concrete provided the pipe meets all other requirements of this article .
b special design .
when so permitted by the plans or in the proposal pipe of designs other than those shown in the standard plans may be permitted however such pipe must meet the performance and test requirements specified for aashto m num and shall be installed under the same specifications as circular pipe .
section num side drain pipe num c classes of pipe .
num .
plain concrete pipe pc .
only plain concrete pipe num inches num mm or less in diameter or equivalent area in arch pipe will be permitted .
circular pipe shall meet the requirements for class num pipe of aashto m num or for class ii of aashto m num without steel reinforcement provided the same strength requirements for the same size pipe provided in aashto m num for class ii pipe are met .
arch pipe equivalent to a num inches num mm diameter round pipe or less shall meet the requirements for class aii of aashto mnum without steel reinforcement provided the same strength requirements of the equivalent size circular pipe provided in aashto mnum for class num pipe are met .
num .
reinforced concrete pipe rc .
circular pipe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for the class of pipe designated by the plans .
arch pipe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for the class of pipe designated by the plans .
d materials .
coarse aggregate fine aggregate cement steel reinforcement and water shall meet the requirements of aashto m num or m num whichever is applicable except as modified in applicable sections of division num materials .
e tests .
all precast products furnished must meet the requirements of section num precast concrete products .
f handling and storage .
handling and storage shall meet the requirements of subarticle numf .
num corrugated steel pipe cs .
cs used in the construction of side drain culverts shall be either circular or arch pipe meeting the requirements of article num except that most side drain pipe may use plain galvanized steel pipe .
num corrugated aluminum pipe ca .
ca used in the construction of side drain culverts shall be either circular or arch pipe meeting the requirements of article num .
num vitrified clay pipe vc .
a general .
vc used in the construction of side drain culverts shall meet the requirements of aashto m num or astm c num for extra strength pipe .
b handling and storage .
handling and storage shall meet the requirements of subarticle numf .
num polyvinyl chloride pipe pvc .
pvc shall meet one of the following specifications astm d num f num d num d num d num d num f num f num or f num .
num acrylonitrile butadiene styrene pipe abs .
abs shall meet the requirements of astm d num or d num .
num high density polyethylene pipe hdpe .
hdpe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num type s. hdpe shall be furnished from an approved producer .
approved producers are shown on list inum producers of high density polyethylene pipe in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf .
num high performance polypropylene pipe pp .
pp shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
pp shall be furnished from an approved producer .
approved producers are shown on list inum producers of high performance polypropylene section num underdrain pipe materials num pipe in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf .
num special requirements .
the specifications for all pipes as covered by articles num num num and num are amended to the effect that any of these materials are acceptable in any configuration which will meet the criteria listed below num .
pipe shall have a minimum pipe stiffness as shown in aashto m num for hdpe aashto m num for pvc astm d num for abs and aashto m num for pp when tested in accordance with astm d num .
num .
fill heights will be restricted to num feet num m maximum .
pipe cover shall be num inches num mm minimum .
num .
all joints shall be soiltight .
num .
pipe ends shall be encased in accordance with special drawing number hwnumsp .
section num underdrain pipe materials num vitrified clay pipe .
this pipe shall meet requirements for standard strength either plain or perforated pipe of aashto m num or astm c num .
num concrete pipe .
this pipe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num class num for plain pipe for perforated pipe aashto m num class num and aashto m num type num or num for porous concrete pipe aashto m num extra strength class with special attention directed to section num precast concrete products .
num corrugated iron or steel pipe .
this pipe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for type iii class i ii or iii pipe fabricated from a specified sheet thickness of num inches num mm and may be perforated or nonperforated as required .
num coated corrugated iron or steel pipe .
this pipe shall meet the requirements of article num coated as specified in subarticle numc .
num corrugated aluminum pipe .
this pipe shall meet requirements of aashto m num for type iii class i ii or iii pipe fabricated from a specified sheet thickness of num inches num mm and may be perforated or nonperforated as required .
num coated corrugated aluminum pipe .
this pipe shall meet requirements of article num coated as specified in subarticle numc .
num polyvinyl chloride p.v.c .
pipe .
this pipe shall meet the requirements of astm d num .
pipe having a nominal diameter of num inches num mm shall have a standard dimension ratio sdr of num pipe having a nominal diameter of num inches num mm or more shall have a standard dimension ratio of either num or num .
perforations if required shall be in accordance with the perforation requirements of aashto m num for either type num or type num .
pipe meeting the requirements of astm f num or astm f num type ps num or type ps num may be used in lieu of the above designated pipe .
num acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene a.b.s .
pipe .
this pipe shall meet the requirements of astm d num for sdr num or sdr num pipe .
perforations if required shall be in accordance with the perforation requirements of aashto m num for either type num or type num .
section num sanitary sewer pipe manholes and appurtenances num num high density polyethylene hdpe pipe .
this pipe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num and in addition have a full circular crosssection with an outer corrugated pipe wall and a smooth inner liner .
corrugations may be either annular or helical .
pipe may be perforated or nonperforated as required .
hdpe pipe shall be furnished from an approved producer .
approved producers are shown on list inum producers of high density polyethylene pipe in the departments material sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf .
num filter material .
a type a coarse filter material .
the coarse filter material may be slag gravel or crushed stone meeting gradation of aldot sizes num num num or num at the contractors option provided he gives the engineer written notice of his choice in advance .
soundness and los angeles abrasion tests will not be required .
b type b fine filter material .
fine filter material shall be reasonably clean natural sand or manufactured sand produced from the crushing of quartzite gravel sandstone or sandstone conglomerates meeting the following requirements permeability at least num mmsec when measured by the constant head method of aashto t num .
gradation limits when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
sieve no .
passing num inch num mm num num no .
num num m num num num handling and storage .
pipe shall be handled transported delivered and stored by methods that will not damage the pipe or coating .
any pipe damaged or bent will be rejected even though previously inspected and found satisfactory and shall be replaced or repaired at the engineers option without additional compensation .
bituminous coating scratched or damaged shall be repaired in a satisfactory manner with bituminous material .
section num sanitary sewer pipe manholes and appurtenances num ductile iron sewer pipe .
ductile iron pipe shall meet the requirements of ansiawwa c numanum unless otherwise stated in the project specifications and plans .
the pipe shall have an inner cement mortar lining meeting awwa c num and an outer bituminous coating .
the pushon joints shall meet the requirements of awwa c num .
the flanged pipe joints shall meet the requirements of awwa c num .
restrained joints shall meet the requirements of awwa c num .
lock joint pipe shall meet the requirements of awwa c num .
the pipe length shall be num num feet num num meters .
num ductile iron fittings .
ductile iron fittings shall meet the requirements of awwa c num or awwa c num when approved by the engineer .
fittings shall have an inner cement mortar lining meeting awwa c num and an outer bituminous coating .
the fitting shall have a minimum pressure rating equal to the pipe being installed .
num polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe pvc and fittings .
pipe for pressure flow applications shall meet the requirements of astm d num for sdr num or awwa c num for dr num with a minimum cell classification numb as defined in astm d num .
fittings for pressure flow applications shall be ductile iron meeting the requirements of awwa c num .
pipe and fittings for gravity flow applications shall meet the requirements of astm d num astm d num for sdr section num sanitary sewer pipe manholes and appurtenances num num or astm fnum with a minimum cell classification numb as defined in astm d num .
marking tape shall be provided for all pvc force mains to allow for locating by location equipment .
num high density polyethylene pipe hdpe and fittings .
hdpe pipe and bends shall meet the requirements of astm d num astm d num grade pe num and astm f num .
the hdpe pipe shall have a minimum wall thickness determined by the depth of bury and loading on the pipe .
num high performance polypropylene pipe pp and fittings .
pp pipe and bends shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum .
the pp pipe shall have a minimum wall thickness determined by the depth of bury and loading on the pipe .
pp pipe shall be furnished from an approved producer .
approved producers are shown on list inum producers of high performance polypropylene pipe in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf .
num handling and storage of pipe .
pipe shall be handled transported delivered and stored by methods that will not damage the pipe coatings or linings .
any pipe damaged or bent will be rejected even though previously inspected and found satisfactory and shall be replaced or repaired at the engineers option without additional compensation .
coating or linings scratched shall be repaired in a satisfactory manner with appropriate material .
num joint materials for pipe .
joint material shall provide a suitable waterproof joint capable of withstanding internal pressure of the system involved and be of an approved type .
num manholes .
precast reinforced concrete manholes shall meet the requirements of astm c num .
the manhole shall consist of the base riser transition and conical sections and shall have a minimal number of joints .
the minimum nominal diameter of manholes shall be num inches num mm for pipe sizes less than num inches num mm .
the aggregate shall be calcareous rock .
concrete used to cast manholes shall comprised with type iii or type ii cement only .
the cone shaped top section shall be either conical or eccentric as required by the project plans and specifications .
the top section of manholes less than num feet num m in depth shall be flat concrete slabs and shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
basis of acceptance for flat slab tops shall be either proof of design testing or rational design calculations as described in astm c num and shall be submitted to the engineer for review .
both cone shaped top sections and flat slab tops shall be designed to withstand a minimum hnum wheel loading in accordance with aashto requirements .
a black mastic joint sealer as approved by the engineer shall be placed on top of the cone section of the manhole before setting the castings to prevent infiltration .
manholes shall be supplied with pipe cutouts for all incoming and outgoing pipe .
the pipe cutouts shall be fitted with flexible manhole pipe connectors boots that meet astm c num and as required by the engineer .
cast iron frames and covers shall conform to the plans in all essentials of design .
all castings shall fit the manholes properly .
all castings shall be made of clean even grain tough gray cast iron .
the quality of iron in the castings shall conform to the current astm a num for class num gray iron castings .
frames and covers shall weigh not less than that shown on the plans .
the castings shall be smooth true to pattern and free from projections sand holes or defects and shall properly fit the manhole opening .
the portion of the frame and cover which forms the cover seal shall be machined so that no rocking of the cover is possible .
the castings shall be coated with coal tar pitch varnish .
the cover shall have non penetrating pick holes .
on paved streets the frame and cover shall be set flush with and in the plane of the paved surface .
where shown on the plans or directed by the engineer sealed castings shall be of the bolted watertight manhole rings and covers and meet the above requirements .
manhole steps shall be steel rods encased in polypropylene plastic and shall be as approved by the engineer .
steps may be type psnum or psnum .
steps shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
manhole steps shall be driven into the wet wall during manufacture to prevent each from working loose or pulling out .
section num storm sewer pipe num manholes shall be constructed in the size shape and dimension as detailed in the utilities standard drawings or on the plans .
num crushed stone foundation for pipe and manholes .
crushed stone shall be screened washed and num percent shall be retained by a num inch num mm sieve .
crushed stone shall have num percent passing a num inch num mm sieve and shall be uniformly graded from maximum to minimum size .
foreign matter shall not exceed num percent by weight when dry .
num air and vacuum valve .
the air and vacuum valve for sanitary sewer shall permit unrestricted passage of air during filling of the force main and unrestricted entry of air during vacuum of the force main and rated for a minimum of num psi num kpa .
the float shall be stainless steel .
the valve shall not come into contact with the sewer .
the valve shall have a national pipe thread ntp inlet and shall be fitted with back flushing device .
the air and vacuum valve assembly shall be as detailed in the project plans and specifications .
section num storm sewer pipe num concrete storm sewer pipe .
a plain concrete pipe pc .
only plain concrete pipe num inches num mm or less in diameter or equivalent area in arch pipe will be permitted .
circular pipe shall meet the requirements for class num pipe of aashto m num or for class ii of aashto m num without steel reinforcement provided the same strength requirements for the same size pipe provided in aashto m num for class ii pipe are met .
b reinforced concrete pipe rc .
circular pipe over num inches num mm in diameter shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for class ii unless another class is designated by the plans or proposal .
arch pipe larger than num inch num mm rise by num inch num mm span shall meet the requirements of aashto m num for class aii unless another class is designated by the plans or proposal .
c acceptance .
in addition to the above requirements all precast products furnished must meet the requirements of section num precast concrete products .
num coated smooth lined corrugated metal storm sewer pipe cslcm .
cslcm shall meet the requirements of aashto m num or aashto m num for type numa pipe .
the shell and liner shall be precoated on both sides with a num mil num mm polymeric coating as per aashto m num .
for correlation purposes the following table provides acceptable shell and liner plate thickness which may be used to equate with corrugated metal pipe cm wall thicknesses .
class of pipe equivalent single steel sheet wall thickness s.l .
wall thickness shell liner num num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm num num inches num mm num inches num mm num inches num mm note for aluminum all thicknesses may be reduced by num inches num mm to compensate for zinc coating .
connecting bands shall conform to the appropriate provisions of aashto m num or m num for the type material used and shall have the same type coating as used on the pipe .
appropriate designed waterproof gaskets shall be used in conjunction with connecting bands to form a watertight joint .
gasket material shall be neoprene or other approved material .
section num storm sewer pipe num damage to coatings shall be repaired in accordance with the appropriate provisions of aashto m num for a polymeric coating .
num coated smooth flow corrugated metal storm sewer pipe csfcm .
csfcm shall meet the applicable requirements of article num or article num and the following all pipes shall have a protective coating in accordance with the applicable provisions of subarticle numc .
in addition the inside of the pipe shall have a paved lining for the entire inside periphery which will fill the valleys to the extent that the thickness above the top of the crest of the corrugations will not be less than num inch num mm .
the lining shall be smooth and uniform and its surface shall be parallel to a line projected along the crest parallel to the centerline .
bituminous coating and pavement lining shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for type b sheets with the pavement lining formed from material compatible with the coating material and otherwise meeting the same basic requirements of section num of aashto m num .
connecting bands shall meet the requirements of subarticle numd and have appropriate waterproof seals in accordance with article num .
damage to coating and pavement linings shall be repaired in accordance with the appropriate provisions of aashto m num for polymeric material and approved asphalt mastic as noted in aashto m num .
num concrete lined corrugated metal storm sewer pipe cl .
cl shall meet the requirements of article num or article num with the lining as specified in item numcnum .
numpolyvinyl chloride storm or sanitary sewer pipe pvc and fittings .
pvc and fittings shall meet the requirements of astm d num astm d num sdr num or astm f num .
num high density polyethylene storm sewer pipe hdpe .
hdpe shall meet the requirements of aashto m num type s. hdpe shall be furnished from an approved producer .
approved producers are shown on list inum producers of high density polyethylene pipe in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf .
num high performance polypropylene storm sewer pipe pp .
pp shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
pp shall be furnished from an approved producer .
approved producers are shown on list inum producers of high density polyethylene pipe in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf .
num handling and storage .
pipe shall be handled transported delivered and stored by methods that will not damage the pipe coatings or linings .
any pipe damaged or bent will be rejected even though previously inspected and found satisfactory and shall be replaced or repaired at the engineers option without additional compensation .
coating or linings scratched shall be repaired in a satisfactory manner with appropriate material .
num joint materials .
joint material shall provide a suitable waterproof joint capable of withstanding internal pressure of the system involved and be of an approved type .
basic requirements are as follows however other types may be considered if appropriate backup data etc .
is submitted in writing to the central office for evaluation .
joint material for storm sewers shall be the same as specified in section num for roadway pipe or those specified for sanitary sewers in section num .
section num coatings paints enamels and varnishes for metal and wood structures num section num coatings paints enamels and varnishes for metal and wood structures num general information .
this section covers the specifications of the above mentioned materials and their components .
unless otherwise specified all materials shall be delivered to the job completely mixed and ready for use without the addition of oils or thinners .
all materials shall be well ground shall not settle or cake badly in the container and shall be readily broken up to a smooth uniform material .
when brushed or sprayed on a smooth vertical surface the material shall dry hard and elastic without running streaking sagging or spotting .
no materials shall exceed the maximum volatile organic solvent content v.o.c .
allowed by the current federal and state laws governing their use in the state of alabama .
num storage .
a all materials and their components shall be amply protected from all forms of damage at all times .
all materials shall be stored in tightly covered unopened containers at a temperature range recommended by the manufacturer of the product .
b storage space for all materials shall be acceptable to the engineer .
improper storage conditions may cause the rejection of the material stored therein .
num identification and certification .
a each container shall bear a label on which shall be complete written instructions and precautions for use the date of manufacture the batch andor lot number the designation of the product and recommended coating thickness .
b each shipment of these materials shall be accompanied by written certification from the manufacturer stating that the material furnished complies with the applicable specifications .
the certification shall show the designation of the product the batch andor lot number and the project number .
c each system of inorganic zinc primer used on bolted connection surfaces faying shall be qualified in accordance with testing method to determine the slip coefficient for coatings used in bolted joints as adopted by the research council on structural connections .
this qualification is required for the systems shown on list iiinum in the materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
see appendix a of allowable stress design specification for structural joints using astm a num a numm or astm a num a numm bolts published by the research council on structural connections .
all inorganic zinc primers shall have a minimum slip coefficient of num unless shown otherwise on the bridge plans .
num resampling and retesting .
a coating systems for structural steel will be approved on the basis of field testing as outlined in list iiinum of the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
components of each batch will be sampled at the project level or fabrication plant for selective verification testing of those parameters listed in the procedure for list iiinum .
b the right is reserved to inspect resample and retest any previously approved material at any time when it is deemed expedient by the engineer .
c materials stored in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer may be used at any time up to the expiration date printed on the material container .
materials not used prior to the expiration date must be retested and reapproved before their use will be allowed .
num coating systems for structural steel .
the department has established several types of coating systems according to the anticipated environmental conditions as well as the required surface preparation .
the list is divided into various coating systems which have been approved for each of these types through actual field use or field andor laboratory tests conducted by approved governmental agencies .
these are multiple coat systems of production run materials from various coating manufacturers .
this list is found in the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual list section num coatings paints enamels and varnishes for metal and wood structures num iiinum .
the requirements for the use of products from this list are found in its accompanying procedure .
a copy of the list and its accompanying procedure are available from the bureau of materials and tests .
the following will apply when the condition exists where a coating system produced by a manufacturer not initially listed on list iiinum is proposed for use a the manufacturer of the coating shall request that the department approve the coating system according to the procedure referred to above .
b in lieu of the completed field test the manufacturer shall be required to demonstrate to the department that the system can be sucessfully applied .
c upon demonstration of a successful application the department may give temporary approval to the coating system until time allows for the system to complete a performance field test .
d upon successful completion of the field test the coating system will be added to list iiinum .
e the department will monitor the applied coating system during this interim period until field testing is complete for any cracking peeling blistering or loss of adhesion between the substrate or any layer which will be cause for revocation of the temporary approval .
the required type of system will be specified on the contract plans for individual projects .
contractors may select any system listed from the specified type of system .
only systems on this list shall be furnished for use .
systems are comprised of multiple products representing the various coats required .
products must be used with their counterparts in that system only .
mixing of products from different systems will not be allowed .
the number of coats is specified on the list .
coating thickness shall be as recommended by the producer of the material with conformance checked in accordance with standard sspcpanum .
all coatings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations using spray equipment suitable for the coating unless otherwise specified .
to allow ease of visual inspection the prime coat shall be a color to contrast the cleaned steel surface and each coat in the system shall be of a color which will contrast the other layers in contact with it .
the topcoat for nonweathering steel shall be a green color matching federal standard num chip num unless otherwise specified .
the topcoat for the partial painting of weathering steel shall be a brown color matching federal standard num chip num unless otherwise specified .
high solids aluminum mastic coatings will not be required to be colored unless otherwise specified .
num timber and wood paints .
the following primer second and third coat paints shall meet the production specification indicated below .
unpainted work and old painted surfaces in poor condition shall be painted with one coat of primer fss ttpnum .
these paints have different uses according to the area in which they are used and whether they are to be tested or not .
num primer wood .
fss ttpnum .
num outside white .
aashto m num type num .
num outside black .
fss ttenum .
intended for the top or finish coat on previously primed wood or metal .
num paint for concrete and masonry .
fss ttpnum .
type i white only .
type ii tintbasewhite for tinting .
primarily intended to be used as a primer and finish coat on outside surfaces .
it can be used inside over suitable primed concrete brick stucco and similar surfaces except floors .
the dried coat is an eggshell color .
num paint for masonry .
fss ttpnum .
acrylic emulsion type for exterior use .
num olivedrab exterior .
fss ttpnum .
section num traffic marking materials num num green exterior paint .
fss ttenum .
num enamel exterior .
fss ttenum .
class a airdrying .
class b baking .
this enamel gives a highgloss finish to be used over previously primed smooth wood or metal surfaces .
color selection is wide .
it is suitable for signs and automotive equipment .
num zinc coating for galvanization and coating repair .
the zinc coating used for the repair of damaged galvanization and the repair of zinc coatings shall be one of the coatings given under the classification zincrich coating for repairing galvanized items or zinc coatings shown in list iiinum coating systems for structural steel .
num asphalt varnish .
fssttvnum .
num shellac varnish .
fss ttsnum .
num spar varnish .
fss ttvnum .
section num traffic marking materials num acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
the guidelines for the evaluation and acceptance of traffic marking materials are given in the procedure aldotnum acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
these guidelines shall be followed in furnishing traffic marking materials .
num packaging and labeling of containers .
traffic marking materials shall be shipped in containers that are plainly marked with the weight in pounds per gallon kilograms per liter the volume in gallons liters the color user information date of manufacture lot and batch number .
each batch shall have a unique number .
a statement of the percentage composition of the pigment the proportion of pigment to vehicle and the name and address of the manufacturer shall also be shown .
the label shall contain any instructions for special handling or precautions for use of the material that are recommended by the manufacturer .
containers with inadequate indentification and marking will not be accepted for use .
the date of manufacture and the shelf life shall be shown for materials that have a shelf life .
preformed thermoplastic materials and permanent tape products shall be marked with content color date of manufacture and lot number .
num color and luminance factor the materials for pavement stripe markings and legends shall meet the performance requirements given in astm d num as tested in accordance with the requirements given in astm e num with the instrument set to read x y and y coordinates with num degreenum degree bydirectional geometry observer angle num degrees and illuminant dnum with the exception of the following the initial daytime chromaticity for yellow materials shall fall within the box created by the following coordinates section num traffic marking materials num initial daytime chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x num num num num y num num num num the initial daytime chromaticity for white materials shall fall within the box created by the following coordinates initial daytime chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x num num num num y num num num num white and yellow materials shall meet the following luminance factor requirements white daylight luminance factor at num degreesnum degrees num minimum yellow daylight luminance factor at num degreesnum degrees num minimum .
num environmental requirements .
all yellow materials using lead chromate pigments shall meet the criteria of nonhazardous waste as defined by num cfr num when tested in accordance with epa method num toxicity characteristics leaching procedures tclp .
the striping and marking material upon preparation and installation shall not exude fumes which are toxic or detrimental to persons or property .
all material using lead free pigments shall not contain either lead or other resource conservation and recovery act rcra materials in excess of the standard defined by epa method num and num .
num glass beads .
glass beads shall meet the requirements given in aashto m num and shall not contain greater than num ppm total for arsenic num ppm total for antimony and num ppm total for lead when tested according to us epa method num and num .
the manufacturer shall provide independent certified test results that the glass beads meet these requirements .
type num num and num glass beads used for drop on beads shall be coated with a bead coating that is compatible with the traffic marking material to which the glass beads will be applied and will provide adequate moisture proofing increased adhesion and optimum embedment of the glass beads .
beads used in the intermix premixed with paint thermoplastic or other striping materials are not required to be coated .
glass beads shall meet the gradations shown in the following table .
section num traffic marking materials num gradations of glass beads passing designated sieve sieve size type of gradation type num type num type num numm reflective elements s series num type num and num type num intermixed num type num num type num and num numm reflective elements intermixed num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num sieve analysis in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num num class num paint .
class num paint shall be one of the materials shown on list vnum permanent traffic marking materials .
list vnum is in the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
manufacturers of class num paint shall participate in aldotnum acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
num class numh high build paint .
class numh paint shall not be used after the expiration of the shelf life .
the paint shall be easily stirred and mixed to a uniform consistency prior to use .
manufacturers of class numh paint shall participate in aldotnum acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
class numh high build paint shall meet the following requirements .
section num traffic marking materials num physical and performance requirements for high build traffic paint property value test method acrylic resin num rohm haas rhoplex fastrack hdnuma emulsion with num num solids content or dow dt numna acrylic emulsion with num num solids content or an approved equal .
astm d num infrared spectral analysis nonvolatiles in vehicle num minimum by weight astm d num no track time maximum of num minutes astm d num volatile organic content maximum of num pounds per gallon astm d num pigment content minimum of num by weight maximum of num by weight astm d num total solids content minimum of num by weight maximum of num by weight astm d num white pigment content rutile titanium dioxide minimum of num pound per gallon astm d num yellow pigment content hansa yellow num minimum per manufacturer viscosity numf numc kreb units num num astm d num density in pounds per gallon white num minimum yellow num minimum astm d num scrub resistance pass minimum num cycles astm dnum ph num minimum astm e num daylight reflectance white num minimum yellow num minimum astm e num num class num and class numt spray applied thermoplastic .
thermoplastic shall be alkyd based materials .
manufacturers of class num and class numt thermoplastic shall participate in aldotnum acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
reflective glass beads shall be mixed into the thermoplastic as a part of the manufacturing process .
the intermixed glass beads shall be either num type num and num type num beads or num type num num type num and num numm reflective elements .
the pigment glass beads and filler shall be well dispersed in the resin .
the composition of class num and class numt thermoplastic material shall be in accordance with the following .
section num traffic marking materials num composition of class num and class numt thermoplastic by weight composition value for white value for yellow lead free value for yellow leaded test method binder num minimum num minimum num minimum aashto t num white pigment tionum type ii rutile num minimum num minimum astm d num glass beads intermixed num minimum num minimum num minimum aashto t num yellow pigment lead chromate na num minimum aashto t num yellow pigment organic pigment yellow num minimum per manufacturer na calcium carbonate and inert filler num mesh num m sieve num maximum num maximum num maximum astm d num note for yellow leaded thermoplastic markings the pigment shall be silica encapsulated lead chromate yellow containing a minimum of num lead .
note for yellow lead free markings the pigment shall be an organic pigment yellow num .
the lead free yellow thermoplastic material shall contain no more than num ppm of lead cadmium or hexavalent chromium .
the physical requirements for the thermoplastic shall be in accordance with the following .
physical requirements of class num and class numt thermoplastic by weight property maximum minimum test method water absorption num astm d num softening point num f num c astm d num low temperature stress resistance pass aashto t num specific gravity num num astm d num indentation resistance num num astm d num shore durometer anum impact resistance num nm astm d num method a flash point num f num c astm d num the durometer and panel shall be at num f numc with a num lb num kg load applied .
instrument measurement shall be taken after num seconds .
num preformed thermoplastic preformed thermoplastic shall be alkyd based materials .
manufacturers of class num preformed thermoplastic shall participate in aldotnum acceptance program for traffic marking materials .
preformed thermoplastic shall conform to all physical and composition requirements of class num and numt thermoplastic with the exception that preformed thermoplastic shall contain num intermix glass beads .
section num temporary traffic marking materials num section num temporary traffic marking materials num general .
the department has established a list of products approved for use through field tests .
these products can be found on list vnum temporary traffic marking materials .
information concerning this list is given in subarticle numf and aldotnum .
the contractor may choose from any of these products unless otherwise noted .
although the product durability has been approved acceptance of the material will still be based on laboratory testing as outlined in list vnum and the departments testing manual .
section num roadside improvement materials num seed .
a pure seedings .
num .
testing and certification .
seeds shall be certified by an official seed certifying agency .
seeds shall have been tested within nine months prior to use .
each kind of seed shall be separately packed and delivered to the project in a seedtight bag .
each bag shall bear a tag or label bearing the seal of the official seed certifying agency .
the analysis of the seed pure seed germination date tested etc .
shall be attached to each bag .
seed shall be at least num pure seed of the required type .
seed for lespedezas shall have a minimum germination rate of num .
seed for all other species shall have a minimum germination rate of num .
num .
sampling and verification testing .
samples of seeds may be taken at any time by the engineer .
tags or labels that have the analysis of the seeds will be placed with the samples taken by the engineer .
the samples will be stored by the engineer until a satisfactory stand of grass is obtained .
if it is apparent that germination or other problems exist in the establishment of the ground cover the samples will be submitted to the alabama department of agriculture for testing .
num .
hulled and scarified seeds .
bermudagrass may be either hulled or unhulled as shown in the table of seed mixes .
sericea lespedeza shall be hulled and scarified .
annual lespedeza kobe white dutch clover and reseeding crimson clover shall be hulled .
num .
coated seeds .
coated seeds will not be accepted for planting unless noted otherwise on the plans .
b seed mixes designated for areas of frequent mowing .
some seed mixes are designated for areas subject to frequent mowing .
areas subject to frequent mowing are roadway shoulders medians and front slopes flatter than num extending num feet beyond the edge of pavement or to the toe of the front slope whichever is less .
all other areas designated for seeding shall be considered to be areas not subject to frequent mowing .
c planting zones .
the state of alabama is divided into three planting zones as shown in the following table section num roadside improvement materials num zone num zone num zone num blount calhoun cherokee clay cleburne colbert cullman dekalb etowah fayette franklin jackson jefferson lamar lauderdale lawrence limestone madison marion marshall morgan randolph shelby st. clair talladega walker winston autauga bibb bullock chambers chilton coosa dallas elmore greene hale lee lowndes macon montgomery perry pickens russell sumter tallapoosa tuscaloosa baldwin barbour butler choctaw clarke coffee conecuh covington crenshaw dale escambia geneva henry houston marengo mobile monroe pike washington wilcox d seed mixes .
seed mixes shall be mixtures of the types of seeds shown in the following tables .
the required weight shown in the chart is the actual seed weight as delivered and takes into account the minimum required percentage of pure seeds and minimum required germination rates .
zone num areas subject to frequent mowing required pounds per acre kilograms per hectare of pure live seed date of planting aug. num to feb. num mar .
num to may num may num to august num annual ryegrass num num num num hulled bermudagrass num num num num unhulled bermudagrass num num num num annual lespedeza kobe num num white dutch clover num num num num notes num num required permanent plant bermudagrass num .
during this season ryegrass bermudagrass and clover are required where vegetation must be established within an area no further than num feet num m from the edge of mainline pavement .
this is usually required for short duration work that is done on pavement resurfacing projects .
num .
annual ryegrass is required where vegetation must be established within an area that extends further than num feet num m from the edge of mainline pavement .
seeding in stubble for the establishment of permanent vegetation is required during the following month of march .
zone num areas not subject to frequent mowing required pounds per acre kilograms per hectare of pure live seed date of planting jan. num to feb. num mar .
num to august num aug. num to nov. num nov. num to dec. num annual ryegrass num num num num hulled bermudagrass num num unhulled bermudagrass num num num num num num num num tall fescue num num num num num num num num weeping lovegrass num num hulled sericea lespedeza num num num num unhulled sericea lespedeza num num num num reseeding crimson clover num num required permanent plant mixed section num roadside improvement materials num zone num areas subject to frequent mowing required pounds per acre kilograms per hectare of pure live seed date of planting aug. num to feb. num mar .
num to apr .
num apr .
num to aug. num annual ryegrass num num num num hulled bermudagrass num num num num unhulled bermudagrass num num num num annual lespedeza kobe num num white dutch clover num num num num notes num num required permanent plant bermudagrass num .
during this season ryegrass bermudagrass and clover are required where vegetation must be established within an area no further than num feet num m from the edge of mainline pavement .
this is usually required for short duration work that is done on pavement resurfacing projects .
num .
annual ryegrass is required where vegetation must be established within an area that extends further than num feet num m from the edge of mainline pavement .
seeding in stubble for the establishment of permanent vegetation is required during the following month of march .
zone num areas not subject to frequent mowing required pounds per acre kilograms per hectare of pure live seed date of planting jan. num to feb. num feb. num to aug. num sept. num to nov. num nov. num to dec. num annual ryegrass num num num num num num num num hulled bermudagrass num num num num unhulled bermudagrass num num num num num num num num tall fescue num num num num num num weeping lovegrass num num num num annual lespedeza kobe num num reseeding crimson clover num num num num num num pensacola bahia grass num num num num num num num num required permanent plant mixed section num roadside improvement materials num zone num areas subject to frequent mowing required pounds per acre kilograms per hectare of pure live seed date of planting sept. num to feb. num mar .
num to aug. num mar num. to aug. num annual ryegrass num num num num hulled bermudagrass num num unhulled bermudagrass num num num num num num annual lespedeza kobe num num num num pensacola bahia grass num num reseeding crimson clover num num notes num num num num required permanent plant bermudagrass pensacola bahia grass num .
during this season ryegrass bermudagrass and clover are required where vegetation must be established within an area no further than num feet num m from the edge of mainline pavement .
this is usually required for short duration work that is done on pavement resurfacing projects .
num .
annual ryegrass is required where vegetation must be established within an area that extends further than num feet num m from the edge of mainline pavement .
seeding in stubble for the establishment of permanent vegetation is required during the following month of march .
num .
bermudagrass will be required as the permanent plant if it is not shown on the plans that pensacola bahia grass will be required as the permanent plant .
zone num areas not subject to frequent mowing required pounds per acre kilograms per hectare of pure live seed date of planting jan. num to feb. num feb. num to aug. num sept. num to nov. num dec. num to dec. num annual ryegrass num num num num num num hulled bermudagrass num num num num unhulled bermudagrass num num num num num num num num tall fescue num num num num num num weeping lovegrass num num num num annual lespedeza kobe num num reseeding crimson clover num num num num num num pensacola bahiagrass num num num num num num num num required permanent plant mixed num grass sprigs .
a general .
this article is based on the use of sprigs however should the contractor elect to use plugs of sod the same basic requirements are applicable except that harvesting shall be in accordance with the provisions of article num for solid sod which in turn shall be cut to proper size at least num inches by num inches num mm by num mm by an acceptable procedure before use .
grass sprigs or plugs of sod turfs shall be common or tiflawn bermudagrass centipede myers zoysia zoysia matrella or other perennial running grasses that may be indicated by the plans .
all grass shall be native or adaptable to the locality of the work and shall be live fresh vigorous and uninjured at the time of planting and until completion and acceptance of the work .
the sprigs shall have well formed and developed root systems and shall be in clusters or tufts at least num inch num mm in diameter unless otherwise directed .
sprigs containing johnsongrass bahiagrass dallasgrass or other objectionable grasses or weeds will not be accepted .
b procuring and handling sprigs .
before harvesting the engineer shall be notified of the source of sprigs for purposes of inspection .
approval of sources on such examination shall not be construed as an acceptance of section num roadside improvement materials num the material .
unless the grass area has been grazed closely it shall be mowed to height of num inches num mm maximum before harvesting .
the sprigs shall be harvested with a sodcutter turning plow or other approved implements in such a manner that at least num inches num mm of the root system will be lifted intact .
raking and otherwise harvesting sprigs that remain on the surface after digging and have been allowed to dry out will not be permitted .
solid sod specified in article num may be pulled apart and used as sprigs .
the properly harvested sprigs shall be loaded within one hour after they are dug then transported to the place where they are to be planted .
they shall be kept cool moist and shaded at all times after digging while being transported to the sprigging site after being unloaded and until planted .
small quantities of sprigs left over at the end of the work day or at time of heavy rains may be stocked in thin covered piles and may be used the next day or not over three days later provided sprigs in the pile are still acceptable .
the sprigs will be subject to inspection during the planting period and any material which has been permitted to dry out or to freeze or which is not moist and viable will be rejected .
when large pieces of sprigs are to be broken down into smaller pieces for sprigging this operation shall be done by hand or by such other means that will avoid severing the roots from the tops of the sprigs .
after unloading accepted sprigs shall be carried to the planting site in moist cloth or burlap bags and kept therein until ready to be dropped into the furrows .
num mulching material .
a dry blown mulch .
dry blown mulch shall be hay or straw applied at rates required in section num .
hay shall be native hay or sudan grass broom straw coastal bermudagrass or other materials approved by the engineer .
straw shall be threshed straw of oats wheat or rye .
mulch materials shall not contain an excessive quantity of matured seeds or noxious weeds or a species which would constitute a menace to the planted species and to surrounding farm land .
mulch shall not be too fresh or excessively brittle or so decomposed as to retard growth of grass .
the moisture content of the mulch shall not exceed num at the time that the mulch is weighed .
moisture content will be checked as directed by the engineer .
the moisture content of the mulch will be checked in accordance with aldot procedure num determination of moisture content in mulching materials .
acceptable tackifier adhesives are listed on list iinum tackifiers mulch control netting and hydraulic mulch products of the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
tackifiers shall be used at the manufacturers recommended rates when chosen for mulch stabilization .
tackifiers shall be harmless to fish wildlife and plants and shall be nontoxic and noncombustible as documented through material safety data sheets and a num day chronic ceriodaphnia reproduction test report .
asphalt adhesives are not acceptable for use .
acceptable mulch control netting products are listed on list iinum tackifiers mulch control netting and hydraulic mulch products of the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
mulch control netting shall be num biodegradable be of a uniform open plain weave and meet the following requirements minimum mass per unit area of num ounces per square yard astm d num minimum tensile strength machine direction dry of num pounds per foot astm d num minimum tensile strength transverse direction dry of num pounds per foot astm d num minimum num open area as determined by physical measurement .
b hydraulic mulch products .
hydraulic mulch products shall consist of natural fibers with or without tackifier adhesives andor binding agents .
it shall be processed in such a manner that it will contain no growth or germination inhibiting factors and shall be dyed an appropriate color to facilitate a uniform spread of the slope by visual inspection .
it shall be manufactured in such a manner that after addition and agitation in slurry tanks with soil amendments the fibers in the material will become uniformly suspended to form a homogeneous slurry and that when hydraulically sprayed on the ground the material will form a ground cover and which after application will allow the section num roadside improvement materials num absorption of moisture and allow rainfall or mechanical watering to percolate to the underlying soil .
hydraulic mulch products shall have a maximum rusle cover factor cfactor of num defined as the ratio of the soil loss from a slope protected by the product to the soil loss from an unprotected or bare soil slope .
at a minimum one slope test replicate of astm d num shall be conducted at an independent laboratory accredited by the geosynthetic institutes geosynthetic accreditation instituteslaboratory accreditation program gailap for this test .
the hydraulic mulch product shall have a minimum num vegetation enhancement compared to the control and shall be measured in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num .
acceptable hydraulic mulch products are listed on list iinum tackifiers mulch control netting and hydraulic mulch products of the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
all packaging of the mulch shall be clearly marked with the lot or batch number material specifications and application recommendations .
weight mass specifications of this material shall refer only to air dry weight mass of the fiber material .
num grassy mulch material .
a general .
grassy mulch shall be obtained from the sources of the contractors selection and meeting the approval of the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish such material and construct and maintain hauling roads necessary for obtaining the material all without extra compensation .
the grass contained in the grassy mulch material shall be live growing grass as provided in article num and shall be procured from areas where the soil is fertile as indicated by vigorous growth .
the grass shall have a healthy virile root system of dense thickly matted roots .
it shall be reasonably free from obnoxious weeds or other grasses and shall not contain any matter deleterious to its growth or which might affect its subsistence or hardiness when transplanted .
the soil part of the mulch shall be the topsoil in which grass is growing and may include the num inches num mm immediately underlying the root system provided it is identical topsoil and no part of the less friable subsoil is taken .
b harvesting and handling grassy mulch .
num .
harvesting operations .
grassy mulch shall be taken only from an approved source .
the grassy mulch shall be procured only when the soil is in a moist friable condition .
during extremely dry periods it may be necessary to water the areas from which mulch is to be taken .
previous to any other manipulations these areas shall be grubbed clear of any bushes or stubs and closely mowed and raked to remove all weeds and long standing stems .
the material thus cleaned from the sites shall be burned .
such cleaning is deemed a necessary part of this item and not considered under the item of clearing and grubbing .
if directed this operation may be omitted if the grass is sufficiently short and the area satisfactorily cleared of obstructions .
after grubbing mowing and raking and sprinkling if considered necessary the grass shall be disced until the sod has been well mangled and the topsoil loosened to the depth it is to be taken .
after discing the grassy mulch shall be cast into windrows by an approved tractordrawn or motorpowered blade grader .
num .
loading .
the well mixed topsoil and grass roots shall be loaded into trucks by hand shovels power shovels drag lines or other mechanical loading devices .
no grassy mulch shall be loaded which has been disced but not windrowed more than six hours or which has been windrowed more than num hours unless the loading operations have been interrupted by rain in sufficient quantity to wet the grassy mulch and make work impracticable .
loading shall be resumed as soon as practicable after such rain ceases .
all material windrowed prior to such rain shall be loaded and placed within num hours after such rain ceases .
in no case shall grassy mulch be used in which the grass has soured mildewed or started to decay .
section num roadside improvement materials num num solid sod .
a general .
solid sod shall be obtained from sources of the contractors selection meeting with the approval of the engineer .
the contractor without extra compensation shall furnish such material and construct and maintain hauling roads necessary for obtaining the material .
the sod shall be of common tiflawn bermudagrass centipede myers zoysia zoysia matrella or other approved types of native or adaptable grasses suitable for growing in the locality of the work .
b procuring and handling sod .
num .
general .
all sod shall be procured from areas where the soil is fertile and contains a high percentage of loamy topsoil and where the grass is well rooted and full grown and from areas that have been grazed or mowed sufficiently to form a dense turf .
approximately num inches num mm in height at the time of lifting .
the soil shall be free from obnoxious weeds or other grasses and shall not contain any matter deleterious to its growth .
solid sodding shall be living or seasonally dormant during the cold or dry season and have an established root system capable of continued growth .
solid sodding grown with a geotextile backing is acceptable for use at the contractors option with no additional compensation .
solid sodding used in channel applications shall be rolled sod .
num .
harvesting .
mechanical devices such as sod cutters may be used for cutting the sod into strips blocks or rolls at least num inches num mm wide except when sod strips are specified then they shall be at least num inches num mm wide .
depth of sod cutting shall be such that approximately num of an inch num mm of soil is removed with the turf .
care shall be exercised at all times to retain the native soil on the roots of the sod during the process of excavating hauling and planting .
num .
handling .
sections of sod shall be cut away below the root line and shall be lifted and loaded in such a manner that no tearing or breaking will occur and unloaded by hand or approved mechanical method .
dumping from vehicles will not be permitted .
all broken or dried sod shall be rejected and removed from the job .
num .
control .
the sod shall in general be transplanted within three days from the time it is harvested .
however if held in temporary storage the sod shall be spread in a shady location with the grass side up .
the sod shall be sprinkled with water when and as directed .
if required it shall be covered with moist burlap straw or other acceptable material .
any sod permitted by the contractor to dry out may be rejected whenever in the judgment of the engineer its survival after placing shall have been rendered doubtful and no payment for such sod shall be made .
in no event shall more than num days elapse between the cutting and planting of the sod .
prior to permitting sod planting the engineer will inspect the sod stacks for retention of native soil .
such may be accomplished by measuring the stack height and determining the average layer thickness num of an inch num mm minimum .
num vines shrubs and trees .
a general .
num .
the scientific and common names of plants shall be in conformity with the approved names in standardized plant names current edition prepared by the american joint committee on horticultural nomenclature .
num .
plants shall be in accordance with the american standards for nursery stock current edition except as provided on the plans .
all plants shall have normal habit of growth and shall be typically characteristic of the particular variety and species .
all plants shall conform to the measurements provided which are the minimum acceptable sizes .
they shall be measured before pruning with branches in normal position .
when a minimum and maximum size is provided an average size is required .
deciduous trees shall be measured by approved calipers .
plants which hare been cut back from larger grades to meet these specifications will not be acceptable .
plants shall be nursery grown and shall bear evidence of proper top and root pruning unless otherwise section num roadside improvement materials num provided .
no cold storage plants will be accepted .
plants shall have been growing for a period of at least one year under the same climatic conditions as exist at the location to be planted .
where the specifications or plans permit planting stock which has been collected such stock shall be clean sound stock free from decayed or decaying stumps and from fire injury .
num .
for purpose of inspection the contractor shall give notice to the engineer num hours in advance of the delivery of plant material .
the contractor shall be responsible for all certificates of inspection of plant materials that may be required by federal state or other authority to accompany shipments of plants .
all plants shall be subject to inspection and approval by the engineer at any place and at any time .
plants may be inspected where growing but approval at place of growth shall not preclude the right of subsequent rejection of plants not fully meeting the requirements of the specifications .
after the award is made the engineer reserves the right to place department seals on any and all materials selected but such tagging and approval shall cover the type and body quality of the plant only but not final acceptance .
the removal and replacement of rejected plants shall be effected by the contractor in compliance with the specifications and shall be without extra compensation .
num .
plants and plant qualities other than those named in the specifications will be accepted only if approved .
num .
legible labels shall be attached to all separate plants or boxes bundles bales or other containers indicating the name size age or other necessary detailed information and the quantity contained in the individual bundles boxes or bales .
b planting limitations .
normal planting season for vines shrubs and trees is between december num and february num and the contractor shall make every effort to accomplish the planting during this period .
should however the contract time be such that plants can not be placed during this period the engineer shall direct the placement of the plants at the earliest possible time the plant areas can be made available .
under conditions that require or if the contractor elects to place the plants out of the normal planting season all plants shall be container grown or precured and planted in accordance with the following container grown .
container grown plants shall have been grown in its container for a minimum of eight months .
after plants are moved to their permanent location they shall be watered in as specified mulched etc .
syringing down of the leaf areas shall be performed as necessary to prevent wilting dehydration and excessive shedding of new or old growth .
this will require a period of thirty days or longer to assure that a given plant has been successfully transplanted .
precured .
precuring of plants is a technique that allows the planting of balled or burlap plant materials during period other than in the dormant period of planting season specified .
the following procedure shall generally be followed to precure or hardening off a plant .
num .
specified plants shall be dug and placed unpruned in a lath or green house .
num .
the ball shall be covered with well rotted sawdust .
num .
humidity shall be maintained to such a degree that wilting or dehydration does not occur .
num .
spray nozzles shall be of mist type connected to suitable interrupter devices if necessary so that water logging of the plant balls does not occur .
num .
after root hairs have formed as evidenced by their emergence through the burlap and with new and old top growth in a health turgid condition the plants shall be transplanted to their permanent location .
num .
this precuring period shall be a minimum of thirty days .
num .
leaf drop or defoliation shall be limited to onefourth the total leaves .
num .
after plants are moved to their permanent location they shall be watered mulched etc .
syringing down of the leaf areas shall be performed as necessary to prevent wilting dehydration and excessive shedding of new or old growth .
this will require a period of num days or longer to assure that a given plant has been successfully transplanted .
section num roadside improvement materials num any plantings accomplished outside of the normal planting season shall be inspected regularly and any plant found defective shall be removed and immediately replaced with the same size and kind in the same manner as originally provided .
any additional cost involved in planting out of season due either to the contractors inability to schedule his work properly or contract time requirements shall be considered incidental to the work and no additional compensation will be allowed .
planting will not be permitted during periods when the ground is frozen .
c digging and transportation .
num .
all plants shall be dug with reasonable care and skill immediately before shipping avoiding all possible injury to or loss of roots .
plants shall be of the size and with balls or roots spread as shown on the plans .
after plants are dug their roots shall not be permitted to dry out and they shall not be exposed to artificial heat or freezing temperatures .
num .
during transportation all plants shall be packed or protected in such a manner as to insure adequate protection from sun wind and climatic or seasonal injuries .
all bareroot plants shall have their roots carefully protected by wet straw moss or other suitable material .
tarpaulins or other covers shall be placed over plants when transported by truck or in an open freight car .
shipments made in box cars shall be adequately ventilated to prevent sweating .
the head of each tree shall be tied in carefully to prevent fracturing or cracking the branches .
num .
previous to shipment and after delivery to the project all plants shall be properly protected .
bareroot plants shall be heeledin in trenches with the bundles opened and the plants spaced separately and all roots covered .
balled and burlapped and balled and platformed plants shall have their earth balls protected by earth or wet cloth or straw .
where possible all plants shall be stored in a wellventilated and shaded place and protected from wind and sun .
d trees .
num .
trees shall be of the size and kind designated by the plans have a straight trunk with a wellbranched symmetrical top and with leader intact .
trees shall have no fresh cuts of limbs over num of an inch num mm which have not completely calloused over no cut back trees and no abrasions of the bark .
trees must be free from insect and disease injury .
trees injured in transit or delivered in an unsatisfactory manner will be rejected .
trees must have good fibrous root systems .
all root cuts must be cleanly cut .
num .
at the time of digging bareroot trees b.r .
must be puddled in a clay solution of proper consistency to coat and adhere to all parts of the root system .
any tree may be supplied balled and burlapped instead of bareroot at the unit price bid .
num .
balled and burlapped trees b b shall be adequately balled with firm natural balls of sufficient size to insure the growth of the plants or cut to size shown on the plans .
balls shall be firmly wrapped with burlap or other approved strong cloth and firmly tied with rope or other satisfactory material .
no balled plant will be acceptable if cracked or broken before or during the process of planting and no plant will be acceptable which is handled by the plant itself and not by the ball .
all fibrous and pliable roots encountered in trenching around the ball shall be cut off flush with the outer side of the trench the ground in the trench loosened with spading fork and the flexible roots shall be immediately wrapped in burlap moss or straw and bound against the side of the ball .
only stiff roots may be cut off flush with the ball .
the ball of earth for each tree shall be of sufficient depth to include all lateral roots .
num .
balled and platformed trees b p shall be balled as provided for balled and burlapped trees .
platforms shall be square or octagonal shaped in a size slightly larger than the diameter of the bottom of the soil weight mass inserted under each ball and securely lashed to the ball by means of ties from the platform corners to the rope collar on top of the ball .
e shrubs .
shrubs shall be of the size and kind designated by the plans .
bareroot shrubs shall have good fibrous root systems .
balled and burlapped shrubs shall be vigorous well furnished plants of uniform quality and must have fibrous root systems .
plants provided as sods or clumps shall be collected from good soil which has produced a fibrous root system typical of the nature of the plant .
the sods shall be dug with earth and incidental vegetation adhering to the roots .
if the soil or habit of the root growth is such that the roots are not adequately protected the sods shall be wrapped in burlap or other suitable material .
section num roadside improvement materials num f vines and perennials .
vines and perennials shall be of the size and kind designated by the plans .
bareroot vines shall be vigorous well furnished plants with good vigorous root systems puddled before delivery or otherwise protected by an acceptable method .
potgrown plants p.g .
shall be vigorous welldeveloped plants well established in pots with sufficient roots to hold the earth together intact after removal from containers and at the same time not to be rootbound .
upon permission of the engineer due to lateness of planting in the spring season causing a holdover of the planting of vines to the next season the contractor may furnish and plant potted plants of the kinds of vines designated as bareroot provided the potted plants are at least one year old the pots num inches num mm minimum diameter and two plants for the one ordered are furnished and planted in the same pocket holes or beds as specified .
the two plants will be paid for at the unit price for one plant .
balled and burlapped vines shall be vigorous welldeveloped plants .
perennials shall be field grown unless otherwise provided .
g pine seedlings .
pine seedlings shall be loblolly pine for the north alabama planting zone and slash pine in south alabama planting zone unless otherwise shown on the plans or in the proposal .
seedlings shall be approximately one year old and num to num inches num to num mm high except that any longleaf seedlings shall be root pruned and needle clipped .
pine seedlings that are shipped in bales shall be protected from the sun wind and freezing weather at all times before planting .
the bales shall be stacked loosely to permit free circulation of air and not more than two bales high .
they shall be watered on arrival and every two days thereafter or as directed .
seedlings from damaged or broken bales shall be heeled in by cutting vbottom trenches approximately num inches num mm deep spreading the pines along the trench with the roots down .
roots shall be covered with fine soil leaving the tops exposed .
seedlings shall be watered frequently enough to keep the soil moist .
num seed inoculating material .
inoculating materials as required for coating certain legume seed immediately before sowing shall be an approved commercial culture manufactured by a reputable concern and of the culture group appropriate for the kind of seed to be treated .
the material as received on the work shall be fresh stock designated for the current season packaged and sealed to protect bacteria and insure against moisture loss .
num plant topsoil topsoil for backfilling plant pits .
plant topsoil shall be composed of four parts of soil containing not more than num clay and not less than num nor more than num sand one part mulching material as defined in subarticle numc num pounds num kg of num commercial fertilizer and num pounds num kg of agriculture limestone per cubic yard cubic meter mineral additive may be adjusted to fit soil test results .
in lieu of the offsite topsoil noted above with the approval of the engineer material from the plant pit modified with mineral additives as directed may be used .
num tree root protection material .
the material for root protection shall be aggregate of approved quality suitably graded from num to num inches num to num mm in size .
the material may be any suitable aggregate broken to suitable size or may be gravel crushed stone slag or broken concrete .
num miscellaneous materials for general planting operations .
a bracing and anchor stakes .
bracing stakes shall be of southern yellow pine or other approved wood sized in accordance with plan requirements .
stakes shall have a minimum allowable deflection of ten percent .
all stakes shall be free from insects and fungi .
anchor stakes or deadmen shall be of the quality and sizes required for the operations calling for their use .
b wire and bracing materials .
wire shall be galvanized steel or aluminum no .
num no .
num or no .
num a.s.w .
gage as specified .
the size and quality of cables turnbuckles thimbles lag hooks eye bolts rods washers and nuts shall be as approved .
section num roadside improvement materials num c paper and twine .
wrapping paper for trees shall be krinklekraft or equal waterproof paper num in num inch num mm strips .
the tying material to be used in wrapping trees shall be jute twine not less than two ply for trees num inches num mm or less in diameter and three ply for trees over num inches num mm in diameter .
d tree paint .
paint used for tree wounds shall be approved antiseptic waterproof adhesive and elastic such as asphaltum water emulsion gutta percha and certain oils with a fungicide and which remains tacky for four hours and retains elasticity after setting when tested under the heat of the hand .
it shall not contain kerosene coal tar creosote or other material harmful to cambium or living tissue .
e wire protective hose .
hose shall be num num or num of an inch num num or num mm in diameter suitable for the purpose intended or other approved material hose may be secondhanded .
f burlap .
burlap shall have a weight mass of at least num ounces per square yard num kgm .
g drain tile pipe .
drain tile pipe shall meet the requirements of section num .
the diameter of the tile shall be num inches num mm unless otherwise specified on the plans .
num rolled and hydraulic erosion control products .
a types of erosion control products .
num .
temporary rolled erosion control products recps .
temporary recps shall be composed of photodegradable or biodegradable mesh netting fibers yarns or twines .
components shall be mechanically interlocked or chemically bonded together to form a continuous matrix of material .
num .
temporary hydraulic erosion control products hecps .
temporary hecps shall be composed of photodegradable or biodegradable natural or polymer fibers that chemically bond together and form a continuous matrix of material .
num .
permanent rolled erosion control products recps .
permanent recps shall be turf reinforcement mats and shall have sufficient thickness strength and void space for permanent erosion protection .
permanent recps shall have a minimum uv stability of num retention of tensile strength at num hours of exposure measured in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num standard test method for deterioration of geotextiles by exposure to light moisture and heat in a xenon arc type apparatus .
b required performance of erosion control products .
the types of erosion control products and the performance requirements for each product are given in the following table .
section num roadside improvement materials num performance requirements of erosion control products product application ecp type maximum allowable cfactornum minimum shear stress capacitynum pounds per square foot minimum vegetation enhancementnum slope snum num num snum num snum num snum num channel cnum num num cnum num cnum num cnum num cnum num note num the cfactor shall be measured in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num standard test method for determination of rolled erosion control product recp performance in protecting hillslopes from rainfallinduced erosion .
the cfactor is the cover factor as commonly used in the revised universal soil loss equation and is defined as the ratio of the soil loss from a slope protected by the ecp to the soil loss from an unprotected or bare soil slope as reported by the american association of state highway and transportation officials national transportation product evaluation program erosion control products aashto ntpep .
note num the shear stress capacity of an ecp shall be measured in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num standard test method for determination of rolled erosion control product recp performance in protecting earthen channels from stormwaterinduced erosion .
the shear stress capacity is defined as the limiting shear stress which causes an average of num inch of soil loss over the entire channel bottom as reported by the american association of state highway and transportation officials national transportation product evaluation program erosion control products aashto ntpep .
temporary products shall at a minimum be tested under unvegetated conditions .
permanent products shall be tested under vegetated conditions .
note num the vegetation enhancement of an ecp is defined as the percentage of vegetation improvement compared to the control .
the vegetation enhancement of an ecp shall be measured in accordance with the requirements given in astm d num determination of temporary degradable rolled erosion control product recp in encouraging seed germination and plant growth .
num fertilizer .
a general .
the fertilizer or fertilizers used shall be of the type and grade provided herein on the plans andor the proposal form and when tested by current methods adopted by the association of official agricultural chemists shall comply with alabama fertilizer laws title num sections num alabama code of num as amended .
b manure .
lot or stable manure shall consist of animal droppings which may be mixed with not over num percent by volume of bedding material and shall be free of materials toxic to plant growth and reasonably free from refuse .
it shall be well rotted and not have lost its strength by leaching or injurious fermentation .
it shall not contain an excess amount of water and shall be of such consistency as to mix readily with soil and capable of being broken down or made fine .
c manufactured fertilizers .
num .
manufactured fertilizer shall be standard commercial products and shall contain not less than the percentages by weight mass of the ingredients set out in the following table section num gas pipe valves and appurtenances num type nitrogen n phosphorus pnumonum potash knumo num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num super phosphate num ammonium nitrate num ammonium sulphate num sodium nitrate num potassium chloride num num .
an allowance of five percent variation or tolerance of the above proportions will be permitted based on relative commercial value .
num .
nitrogen may be derived from any nitrogencarrying material approved by the state commissioner of agriculture and industries .
num .
cottonseed meal shall contain num percent protein or num percent nitrogen .
num .
all fertilizers shall be transported in containers which will insure proper protection handling and which are commonly used with such fertilizers .
num .
fertilizers containing pesticide materials produced by a recognized responsible manufacturer and prequalified for use by the state department of agriculture and industries or the u.s. department of agriculture may be used with the approval of the engineer .
d agricultural limestone .
all limestone for agricultural liming purposes shall be crushed or ground to such a degree of fineness that num percent of the material will pass through a num num mm mesh screen and not less than num percent of the material will pass through a num num m mesh screen .
all such limestone shall also have a neutralizing value of num percent calcium carbonate or better .
e basic slag .
basic slag shall be ground open hearth basic slag containing not less than the percentage by weight mass of the following ingredients .
pnumonum available num iron oxide num magnesium oxide num calcium oxide num manganese oxide num neutralizing value num at least num percent shall pass through a num num m mesh screen and at least num percent shall pass a num num m mesh screen .
when basic slag is substituted for limestone in seeding sprigging andor solid sod planting operations the amount applied shall be adjusted to equal the neutralizing effect of the specified amount of limestone as defined in subarticle numd .
blends of basic slag and other elements such as num num .numb and num .num may be used and the added elements credited to the total element requirements for plant food .
num water .
water free from substances harmful to the growth of plantings will be approved as suitable for use with roadway improvement materials .
num blank .
section num gas pipe valves and appurtenances num steel gas pipe .
steel pipe shall meet the requirements of api numl ansi bnum and ansi bnum .
pipe coating shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
section num utility encasement pipe num num steel fittings and flanges .
buttweld fittings shall meet the requirements of ansi bnum .
steel fittings and flanges num inches num mm and smaller shall meet the requirements of ansi bnum .
steel fittings and flanges larger than num inches num mm shall meet the requirements of ansi bnum .
all bolts shall meet the requirements of astm a num grade b with semifinished heavy hex nuts .
fittings shall have a minimum pressure rating equal to the adjoining pipe installed .
fittings shall be coated meeting the requirements of awwa cnum .
num flanged gaskets .
flanged gaskets shall be compressed material meeting the requirements of ansi bnum .
flanged gaskets shall be num inches num mm thick composition type .
num polyethylene pe plastic pipe and fittings .
pipe and fittings shall be made of penum astm d num cell classification numc or penum astm d num cell classification numc .
the wall thickness shall be determined by the depth of bury loading on the pipe and the pipes internal pressure .
num valve .
valves shall be as described in the project plans and specifications .
valves shall be selected from the utilities approved materialmanufacturer list .
num valve boxes and stem extensions .
valve boxes shall be cast iron with screw or slidetype adjustments and provided with all valves that are installed vertically .
valve boxes shall have a minimum diameter of num inches num mm .
box covers shall be marked gas .
valve boxes shall be selected from utilities approved materialmanufacturer list .
valve stem extensions including lubrication fitting shall be provided with all valves that are greater than num feet num m below the adjacent ground surface .
the extension stem shall be of the same size as the valve stem and shall be provided with a stem guide .
num tapping valve .
tapping valves shall be as described in the project plans and specifications .
where required the tapping valve shall include a sleeve to hold the valve in place .
tapping valves and sleeves shall be selected from the utilities approved materialmanufacturer list .
section num utility encasement pipe num welded steel encasement pipe .
welded steel encasement pipe shall comply with the appropriate requirements for the size shown in the following table unless local codes or ordinances are more stringent pipe diameter inches mm minimum wall thickness inches mm pipe requirements num num sch .
num astm a num grade b num num num num num astm a num grade num num num num num num num astm a num grade num num num num num astm a num grade num all pipe shall be coated inside and out with at least one shop coat of an approved primer paint .
in addition the external surface shall be treated with one coat of asphaltum paint meeting the requirements of federal specification ttcnumb type ii composition g. fusionbonded epoxy coating meeting the requirements of awwa cnum may be used as an alternative to the shop coat primer and asphaltum paint .
other approved protection material may be used with prior approval by the department .
hydrostatic pressure test is not required for this pipe .
num encasement spacers .
spacers shall be stainless steel or as approved by the engineer .
the spacer shall be sized for the carrier pipe and encasement pipe used .
section num water pipe fire hydrants valves and appurtenances num num encasement end seals .
encasement end seals shall be synthetic rubber with a stainless steel zipper or closer .
the seal shall be secured to the encasement with a stainless steel band clip or thumbscrew clip with a polyethylene strip placed under each clip .
proper flexibility between the carrier pipe and the encasement pipe shall be provided .
num vent pipes .
vent pipes shall be num inch welded steel meeting the requirements of section num .
num high density polyethylene hdpe pipe .
hdpe pipe and bends num inches num mm and smaller shall meet the requirements of astm dnum astm d num pe num cell classification numc and astm f num .
the hdpe pipe shall have a minimum wall thickness of sdr num .
section num water pipe fire hydrants valves and appurtenances num ductile iron water pipe .
ductile iron pipe shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum with a minimum working pressure of num psi num kpa .
the pipe shall have an inner cement mortar lining meeting awwa cnum and an outer bituminous coating .
the pushon joints shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
restrained joints shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
lock joint pipe shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
the pipe length shall be a minimum of num feet num m. num ductile iron fittings .
ductile iron fittings shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum awwa cnum or awwa cnum when approved by the engineer .
fittings shall have an inner cement mortar lining meeting awwa cnum and an outer bituminous coating .
fittings shall have a minimum pressure rating equal to the adjoining pipe installed .
for fittings sizes num inch num mm through num inch num mm the minimum pressure rating shall be num psi num kpa .
num copper water pipe .
pipe and fittings shall meet the requirements of astm bnum type k. num poly vinyl chloride pvc plastic pipe .
pipe sizes num inch num mm to num inch num mm shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum class num dr num or heavier .
pipe sizes num inch num mm to num inch num mm shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum pressure class num dr num or heavier .
pipe and fittings sizes smaller than num inch num mm shall meet the requirements of pvc num pvc num or pvc num with a minimum cell classification numb for astm dnum sdr num or heavier or astm num schedule num num or num .
joints and gasket material shall be as recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
solvent welding of field joints shall only be allowed for pipes num inches num mm in diameter and smaller .
num polyethylene pe tubing .
pipe and fittings num inches num mm and smaller shall be made of penum meeting the requirements of astm d num minimum sidr num astm dnum and awwa cnum .
num high density polyethylenehdpe pipe .
hdpe pipe and bends shall meet the requirements of astm dnum astm dnumpe num and astm fnum .
the hdpe pipe shall have a minimum wall thickness determined by the pressure rating required for use .
section num water pipe fire hydrants valves and appurtenances num num crosslinked polyethylene pex type a pipe .
pipe num inches num mm and smaller shall meet the requirements of awwa c num standard dimension ratio sdr num and standard copper tube sizes cts .
fittings shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum and for brass compression sleeve fittings .
the pipe shall only be used below ground .
num gate valve .
gate valves shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
gate valves shall have oring seals .
gate valves shall have a nonrising stem that opens counterclockwise with a num inch num mm square nut .
gate valves shall have mechanical joints meeting the requirements of awwa cnum .
the disc shall be sbr coated and the valve body shall be fusion bonded epoxy inside and out .
valves shall be furnished complete with necessary gaskets bolts and nuts as needed for mechanical joint ends .
gate valves shall be selected from the utilities approved materialmanufacturer list .
num butterfly valve .
butterfly valves shall be rubber seated and meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
the valve body shall meet the requirements of astm anum class b or astm anum class num .
butterfly valves shall open counterclockwise with a num inch num mm square nut .
butterfly valves shall have mechanical joints meeting the requirements of awwa cnum .
the disc shall meet the requirements of astm anum or astm anum class num .
the rubber mating seat shall be stainless steel .
all butterfly valves shall be provided with oring seals nonadjustable stuffing boxes and shall be selfsealing or selfadjusting to allow for replacing without removing the valve or the valve shaft .
butterfly valves shall be selected from the utilities approved materialmanufacturer list .
num valve boxes and stem extensions .
valve boxes shall be cast iron and provided with all valves that are installed vertically .
valve boxes shall have a minimum diameter of num num inchesnum mm .
box covers shall be marked water .
valve boxes shall be selected from the utilities approved materialmanufacturer list .
valve stem extensions shall be provided with all valves that are greater than num feet num mm below the adjacent ground surface .
the extension stem shall be of the same size as the valve stem and shall be provided with a stem guide .
num tapping valve sleeve .
tapping valves shall meet the requirements for gate valves as described in section num .
tapping sleeves shall be ductile iron cement mortar lined meeting the requirements of awwa cnum and have a bituminous exterior coat .
num air release valve .
air release valves shall be as detailed by project plans and specifications .
num corporation stop and curb stop .
corporation stops shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
curb stops shall have full port openings .
corporation stops and curb stops shall have compression type connections and shall be selected from the utilities approved materialmanufacturer list .
num fire hydrant .
fire hydrants shall meet the requirements of awwa cnum .
fire hydrant shall have a minimum working pressure of num psig num kpa and a minimum test pressure of num psig num kpa .
fire hydrants shall have two each num inch num mm nozzles and one each num inch num mm pumper nozzle .
fire hydrants shall have a num inch pentagon onepiece operating nut that opens left .
the fire hydrant main valve shall close with pressure .
fire hydrants shall have a num inch num mm mechanical joint inlet .
all operating parts including the drain ring operating nut holddown nut upper valve plate seat ring drain lever and nozzles shall be made of bronze .
the bonnet assembly shall provide for an oil or grease reservoir and lubricating system that lubricants all stem threads and bearing surfaces each time the hydrant is operated .
the reservoir shall be completely sealed from the waterway and all external contaminants by two each oring stem seals .
fire hydrants shall be factory prefilled with a lubricant suitable for a working temperature range of num f num c to num f num c. fire hydrant shall be painted and seal coated as required by the project plans and specifications .
num flush hydrant .
flush hydrants shall be the type shown on the plans or designated by the engineer .
section num guardrail and barrier rail materials num num line stop .
a line stop to stop the flow of water in a portion of the main without interruption of water service shall be manufactured and installed by either t.d .
williamson inc. severn trenthydrastop ipsco or an engineer approved equal .
the line stop and appurtenances shall be pressure rated for a minimum of num psi to safely cease the flow of water in the existing water main .
the line stop shall be designed for the water main material shown on the plans and field verified prior to installation .
the thrust restraint shall be as detailed in the project plans .
the contractor performing the installation of the line stop shall have successful experience in water main tapping and line stopping .
section num guardrail and barrier rail materials num rail elements .
a beam plate guardrail .
num .
steel .
steel rail elements and accessories shall conform to the requirements given in aashto m num .
zinc coating shall be type ii num ounces per square foot num gm minimum triple spot test .
chemical composition for type num beams shall conform to one of the following based on ladle analysis .
chemical composition type num beams blend c mn p s si cu cr ni zr no .
num num max .
num to num num to num num max .
num to num num to num num to num num max .
no .
num shall conform to the requirements of astm a num for type num high strength low alloy hot rolled sheet or strip .
members or accessories for beams meeting astm a num which require welding shall meet the requirements of astm a num for grade a or b material .
in addition for type num beams after fabrication all steel shall be blast cleaned or pickled to remove all mill scale .
blast cleaning shall conform to steel structures painting council surface preparation specification no .
num nearwhite metal blast cleaning sspcspnum .
all pickling acid shall be thoroughly rinsed off .
all fabricated steel parts shall be handled with care to avoid gouges scratches and dents .
the steel shall be kept clean of all foreign material such as paint grease oil chalk marks crayon marks concrete spatter or other deleterious substances .
natural oxidation of the steel will not be considered foreign material .
storage in transit in open cars and trucks for an extended period will not be permitted .
steel parts stored outside in yards or at jobsites shall be positioned to allow free drainage and air circulation .
num .
aluminum .
aluminum alloy rain element shall be aluminum alloy num tnum conforming to the requirements of astm b num .
the rail shall be of such thickness as will meet strength requirements of aashto m num for the strength class designated however in no case will the tensile strength of the full size beam including a splice at the center be less than num pounds num kn for class a or num pounds num kn for class b .
the shape shall meet aashto m num requirements .
b barrier rail .
the barrier rail elements including all accessories shall conform to the material requirements shown on the plans for the type material of which the barrier rail is to be constructed .
section num adhesives num num posts .
a treated timber posts .
timber posts shall be sawed to within plus or minus num inch num mm of the length and plus or minus num of an inch num mm of the full end dimensions shown on the plans .
timber blockouts shall be sawed to within num of an inch num mm of the length and plus or minus num of an inch num mm of the full end dimensions shown on the plans .
holes shall be drilled slightly smaller than the designated bolt size so as to provide a driving fit .
all timber shall be southern yellow pine grade no .
numsr or better in accordance with the southern yellow pine inspection bureaus grading system .
post and blockout treatment shall be in accordance with awpaunum as applicable to guardrail posts .
the preservative shall be one recommended under awpaunum except that within a contract only one type will be permitted unless otherwise permitted in writing by the engineer .
all timber posts and blockouts should be fabricated and holes drilled before treatment but where field modifications of necessity are made after treatment the new surfaces shall be given a preservative treatment in accordance with the provisions of awpamnum using a method approved by the engineer .
b metal posts .
steel posts including blockouts for guardrail shall comply with the requirements of astm a num modified to waive the maximum tensile strength .
all material shall be new and of the size shape etc .
noted by the plan details hotdip galvanized after fabrication .
metal posts for barrier rails shall be steel meeting the requirements noted in paragraph one above or when aluminum barrier rail is used aluminum posts conforming to the requirements of astm b num alloy numtnum or numtnum of the size shape etc .
noted by plan details .
num anchors .
concrete for anchors shall be constructed of class a concrete in conformity with the requirements given in section num .
all surfaces shall be given a class num finish with all exposed surface given a class num surface finish .
metal parts used in anchors shall comply with the appropriate requirements for metals noted elsewhere in this section or other portions of these specifications .
wire rope cable for anchors shall be num inch num mm nominal diameter meeting the requirements of aashto m num type ii having a class a galvanization coating .
num galvanization .
all metal required by the plans or specifications to be galvanized shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with aashto m num amended to cover the weight mass of the zinc coating specified in article num .
shop fabrication shall be considered to include all work necessary to prepare the unit for immediate and complete installation .
no punching cutting burning or welding will be permitted in the field except for special details in exceptional cases as may be directed by the engineer however in such cases holes shall be drilled and cutting done by sawing and the area treated as provided in subarticle numc .
section num adhesives num description .
this section shall cover the requirements for adhesives used in the following phases of highway construction .
num adhesives for pavement markers .
a permanent marker adhesive .
adhesives furnished for use to affix permanent pavement markers to the pavement shall be listed on list vnum permanent pavement markers marker adhesive delineators and hazard markers of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
section num fencing materials num b temporary marker adhesive .
adhesives furnished to affix temporary markers to the pavement shall be any suitable type of adhesive for the intended purpose except that in those locations where the markers will be required to be removed the adhesive shall be a type that will allow for the complete removal of the marker without scarring or disfiguring the pavement .
num epoxy adhesives for bonding concrete to concrete and concrete to other materials .
epoxy adhesive furnished for use in bonding concrete and other materials except pavement markers shall meet the appropriate requirements of aashto m num for the type of work for which the adhesive is to be used .
the volatile content cured system requirement of aashto m num shall be waived .
the type grade and class of the epoxy adhesive to be used in the work will be shown by plan details by these specifications or as ordered by the engineer .
adhesives furnished for use shall be listed on list iinum epoxies for use with portland cement concrete of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
num adhesives for concrete anchoring systems .
adhesives furnished for use to anchor tie bars in concrete or other concrete anchoring systems shall be listed on list iinum concrete anchoring systems of the departments materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
refer to subarticle numf and aldot num concerning this list .
section num fencing materials num chain link fence .
materials for chain link fence unless specified otherwise on the plans shall conform to the following a fabric .
fence fabric shall meet the requirements of aashto m num using num inch uniform square mesh made from num inch num gage num mm wire with either a type i class d zinc coated steel or type ii aluminum coated steel finish .
when a polyvinyl chloride coating is specified either a class a or a class b coating will be acceptable .
b supports .
supports shall meet the requirements of aashto m num and be either metallic coated steel grade num or grade num or aluminum .
minimum sizes and weights of posts rails and framing for all steel elements shall be as follows section num fencing materials num steel fence supports framing line post num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe numft .
num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num x num x .num c section num ft. num mm x num mm x num mm c section num kgm line post num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num x num x .num c section num ft. num mm x num mm x num mm c section num kgm num x num x .num h section num ft. num mm x num mm x num mm h section num kgm corner pull posts num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num x num sq .
tubing num ft. num mm x num mm sq .
tubing num kgm corner pull posts num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num x num sq .
tubing num ft. num mm x num mm sq .
tubing num kgm gate post for gate leaf width num ft. num m and less num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num x num sq .
tubing num ft. num mm x num mm sq .
tubing num kgm gate post for gate leaf width over num ft. to num ft. num m to num m num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm gate post for gate leaf width over num ft. to num ft. num m to num m num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm gate top middle rail num o.d .
grade numpipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm gate frames num o.d .
pipe num ft num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num numft .
num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num x num sq .
tubing num ft. num mm x num mm sq .
tubing num kgm section num fencing materials num tolerances for steel tubing and shapes shape and size dimension weight mass tubular to and incl .
num num num mm num num num mm num mm num tubular larger than num num num mm num num c section to and incl .
numx num num mm x num mm num num mm num h section numx num num mm x num mm larger num num mm num minimum sizes and weights masses of posts rails and framing for all aluminum elements shall be as follows aluminum fence supports framing line post num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm num x num h section num ft. num mm x num mm h section num kgm line post num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm num x num sq .
tubing num ft. num mm x num mm sq .
tubing num kgm corner pull posts num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm corner pull posts num ft. num num m high fence num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm gate post for gate leaf width num ft. num m and less num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm num x num sq .
tubing num ft. num mm x num mm sq .
tubing num kgm gate post for gate leaf width over num ft. to num ft. num m to num m num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm gate post for gate leaf width over num ft. to num ft. num m to num m num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm gate top middle rail num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm gate frames num o.d .
pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
pipe num kgm num x num sq .
tubing num ft. num mm x num mm sq .
tubing num kgm c hardware and fittings .
hardware and fittings shall meet the requirements of aashto m num and be either metallic coated steel or aluminum .
d miscellaneous wire .
tension wire shall be metallic coated steel or aluminum as per aashto m num .
wire used for tying shall be either no .
num gage num mm metallic coated steel or aluminum .
num woven wire fence .
materials for woven wire fence unless specified otherwise on the plans shall conform to the following section num fencing materials num a fabric .
fence fabric shall meet the requirements of astm a num zinc coated steel woven wire fabric num grade num class num or astm a num aluminum coated steel woven wire fabric num .
when so designated on the plans for replacement of farm fencing or fencing placed as a rightofway consideration etc .
the contractor may at his option use fabric as listed above or zinc coated steel wire astm a num num  class num coating unless otherwise noted on the plans .
b supports and framing .
supports for woven wire fence shall be either wood or steel as noted on plan details and if not specified either may be used .
support requirements are as follows num .
steel .
steel supports shall meet the requirements of either aashto m num metallic coated steel posts rails or gate frames grade num or grade num or posts meeting aashto m num num feet num m long galvanized to aashto m num with anchor plates .
when so designated on the plans for replacement of farm fencing or fencing placed as a rightofway consideration etc .
the contractor may at his option use posts as listed above or painted steel posts meeting aashto m num unless otherwise noted on the plans .
minimum sizes and weights of posts braces and framing for all steel elements shall be as follows steel fence supports framing line post num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num x num x .num c section num ft. num mm x num mm x num mm c section num kgm studded t post with spade plate num post studded t post with spade plate num kgpost corner end pull posts num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm brace posts num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm gate post hinge side num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm gate post latch side num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm gate frames num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm num o.d .
grade num pipe num ft. num mm o.d .
grade num pipe num kgm tolerances in dimensions and weight shall be the same as specified in subarticle numb .
weight tolerance for t posts shall be num .
num .
wood .
wood supports shall meet the requirements noted herein except as modified by details shown on the plans .
posts shall be sound and free from decay other defects or loose knots .
section num fencing materials num posts may be round or square sawed meeting the applicable requirements of section num .
the slope of the grain in sawed posts shall not exceed one in ten .
all posts shall be reasonably straight .
round posts shall be free of multiple crooks and in no case will posts where the geometric center lies more than num inch num mm outside of a straight line drawn from the center of the post at the butt end less the burying depth to the center of the tip end be acceptable .
square sawn posts shall not have crooks in excess of num inch in num feet num mm in num m. the length and sizes of wood posts shall be as detailed on the plans within the following tolerances .
when so designated on the plans for replacement of farm fencing the contractor may at his option use posts as listed above or wood posts purchased from local dealers unless otherwise noted on the plans .
a .
round posts .
the furnished posts may include posts from the minimum diameter specified up to but not to include those num inch num mm or larger than the minimum diameter designated .
when tapered posts are furnished the diameter at the butt end should not be more than one and onehalf inches larger than the diameter measured at the tip end .
b. sawed posts .
the furnished posts shall be of the dimensions shown on the plans plus num inch num mm or minus num inch num mm .
c. lengths .
the furnished posts shall not measure over one inch less than specified on the plans .
lengths greater than those shown on plans may be acceptable at the discretion of the engineer if not detrimental to the appearance of the fence .
all posts shall be pressure treated in accordance with the provisions of section num .
all job cuts shall be painted with three coats of hot preservative composed of num percent creosote oil and num percent roofing pitch .
the contractor shall have the choice of selecting one of the types of treated timber posts shown on the plans .
once a choice is made and erection begun the contractor will not be permitted to change to another type without the written permission of the engineer .
c fasteners .
fasteners for attaching fencing fabric and wire to wooden posts shall be staples formed from num inch num gage num mm diameter galvanized wire approximately num inches num mm long .
fasteners for attaching wire to steel posts shall be as designated in subarticle numd .
num barbed wire fence .
materials for barbed wire fence shall be as follows except as modified by plan details a barbed wire .
barbed wire shall meet the requirements of aashto m num with a class num galvanized coating or aluminum coated steel barbed wire type i standard astm a num .
when so designated on the plans for replacement of farm fencing or fencing placed as a rightofway consideration etc .
the contractor may at his option use wire as listed above or substitute wire meeting aashto m num with a class num coating unless otherwise noted on the plans .
b supports and framing .
supports and framing shall meet the requirements of item numbnum .
c fasteners .
fasteners shall meet the requirements of subarticle numc .
num gates .
gates where required shall be swinggates as detailed or specified on the plans .
the gate frames shall be the height of the top of the posts and covered with the same wire and fabric used on the fence .
the frames shall be formed from tubular shapes meeting the requirements noted in subarticle numb complying with plan details with all joints welded or otherwise constructed to form a rigid unit .
section num sign materials num gates for woven wire fencing of another acceptable design may be permitted provided that the gates are so constructed that they will not sag and the design has been approved in writing .
all gates shall be furnished complete with approved tamperproof hinges latches auxiliary braces and all other necessary fittings including a heavy padlock with two keys and one master key for each gate furnished .
num concrete for setting posts .
concrete for setting posts etc .
shall be class a concrete complying with applicable portions of section num with the following modifications .
the concrete may be dry batched at a central mixing plant and delivered to the project .
before the concrete is placed water shall be added .
this may be done in small amounts as needed and mixed on a mixing board or mortar box .
after water is added the mix shall be used within sixty num minutes .
posts braces and brace struts shall be held in proper position until the concrete hardens .
the concrete for all corner brace and line posts shall have cured for num hours before any strain is placed on them .
section num sign materials num sign panels .
a aluminum sign materials .
num .
general .
aluminum sign materials shall conform to the details and thicknesss shown on the plans and the following the materials used unless otherwise noted by plan details shall meet the requirements noted below and in addition the material used shall be free from corrosion white rust water stains dirt and grease with the panels processed as noted in item num below .
aluminum sign materials use alloy temper designation sign panels astm b num alloy numhnum or numtnum extruded shapes sign panels bars or rods astm b num alloy num tnum angles structural shapes including stiffeners astm b num alloy numtnum bolts astm b num alloy numtnum tamper proof nuts  astm b num alloy num tnum spring lock washers astm b num alloy numtnum washers astm b num alloy alclad num tnum rivets astm b num alloy num tnum shims astm b num alloy num flange splicing material astm b num alloy num tnum weld filler wire astm b num alloy er num or er num hex .
nuts plain astm b num alloy numtnum hex .
lock nuts astm b num alloy numtnum unless otherwise specified section num sign materials num aluminum bolts nuts and washers shall have an anodic coating of at least num inch num mm in thickness and shall be chromate sealed .
galvanized bolts nuts and washers as specified under galvanized signs or stainless steel hardware meeting the requirements of astm f num will be acceptable in lieu of the above .
num .
special treatment of aluminum sign material .
each panel shall receive a chemical conversion treatment that will produce an acceptable etched surface suitable for either porcelainizing or attachment of reflectorized or nonreflectorized sheeting .
num .
tests and samples .
the contractor shall furnish certified test reports confirming compliance with the requirements noted and in addition shall furnish samples of all materials used in the signs in accordance with current departmental policy for evaluation and verification tests .
num .
recycled aluminum sign panels .
recycled aluminum sign panels will be allowed for installation in accordance with the following requirements .
recycled sign panels shall be the same alloy and temper required for new sign panels .
they shall be free of corrosion and white rust and shall meet the required tolerances for flatness and thickness for new sign panels .
the process for removing the old reflectorized or nonreflectorized sheeting shall not damage the chromate coating .
smelting sanding and chemical stripping processes for recycling will not be allowed .
recycled signs will be inspected sampled and tested in accordance with current departmental policy except certified test reports will not be required .
the contractor shall furnish a materials guaranty that the materials conform to the requirements for recycling the sign panels .
b metal and galvanization requirements .
num .
metal and galvanization requirements .
galvanized steel sign sheets shall conform to the details and thickness designated on the plans and the following the materials used for galvanized steel signs unless otherwise noted by plan details shall meet the following specifications use astm for metal astm for galvanizing sign panels a numa numm ss grade num and a num a numm a num angles including stiffeners a num a num bolts nuts and washers unless otherwise specified .
a num a num aluminum bolts nuts and washers as specified under aluminum signs or stainless steel hardware meeting the requirements of astm f num will be acceptable in lieu of .
galvanized steel sheets and parts other than bolts nuts and washers shall be mill galvanized with a num ounce per square foot num g per num m coating in accordance with astm a numa numm gnum .
the galvanizing shall be a continuous coat extra smooth minimum spangle process .
after galvanizing the sheets are to be given a light tight crystalline phosphate coating .
no galvanizing of any steel part may be done until all welding cutting milling punching and drilling of the part has been completed .
this includes all holes necessary for attaching demountable copy .
num .
tests and samples .
the contractor shall furnish certified test reports confirming compliance with the requirements noted and in addition shall furnish samples of all materials used in the signs in accordance with current departmental policy for evaluation and verification tests .
section num sign materials num c aluminum laminated panels .
num .
general .
panels shall consist of sheet aluminum laminated to a honeycomb core sealed completely around the perimeter with an extruded aluminum frame to form a surface of the length width and depth required .
these panels may be used either with sign face sheeting meeting the requirements of article num or a porcelain enameled face sheet .
these laminated panels shall be fabricated in accordance with these specifications and to sizes and shapes as shown on the plans .
the minimum number of panels shall be used for each sign .
panels shall be mounted horizontally on all signs having widths up to and including num feet num m panels may be mounted vertically on signs having widths exceeding num feet num m. the span between supports on num inch num mm thick panel shall not exceed num feet num m with overhang not in excess of num feet num m. the span for a num inch num mm thick panel shall not exceed num feet num m with overhang not in excess of num feet num m. all metal materials shall meet the requirements of subarticle numa unless otherwise specified in this subarticle .
num .
panel face and backing .
the face sheet shall be fabricated in one piece from a sheet meeting the following requirements for porcelainized panels the face sheet shall comply with the requirements of item numdnum .
for panels to be covered with sign sheeting the face sheet shall meet the requirements specified for the back sheet .
the back sheet shall be fabricated in one piece from a sheet of num alloy tempered to provide a minimum tensile strength of num psi num mpa and a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa and otherwise meeting the requirements of astm b num .
sheets shall not be less than num inches num mm thick and free from all soil or corrosion prior to lamination .
num .
perimeter frame .
each panel section shall be provided with a perimeter frame .
frames shall be fabricated of extruded shapes of numtnum aluminum with all joints mitered and firmly affixed together with the exterior framing sealed against moisture penetration .
the horizontal top and bottom frame members shall have an integral retainer track for affixing mounting bolts with an additional slot milled in the frame for field insertion of post clip bolts .
if the horizontal finished dimension of the sign exceeds num feet num m and vertical panels are used the vertical frame members shall have an integral retainer track for mounting bolts .
on the perimeter of the finished sign a num inch num mm tolerance from flush between the sheets and frame will be allowed and all edges shall be straight within num inch num mm from a straight plane .
all sharp edges that would present a hazard in handling shall be smoothed .
num .
core material .
core material shall be of the appropriate thickness as required and shall be phenolic impregnated paper honeycomb .
thickness of core materials shall be held within a tolerance of plus or minus num inch num mm .
core material shall meet specification mildnum for resistance to fungus .
cell size approximately num of an inch num mm weight mass of paper num pounds num kg impregnation num percent by weight mass minimum .
a. laminating adhesive .
the laminating adhesive shall be a thermoplastic neoprene rubber base solvent type or a thermosetting type exhibiting a permanent oil and water resistant bond .
b. tensile strength .
the tensile strength of the honeycomb type laminated construction shall have a minimum of num psi num kpa when tested in accordance with astm designation c num and aged in accordance with astm designation c num cycle b .
num .
flatness .
all adhesively bonded panels shall have an exterior face of such flatness that when measured at normal room temperature of num to num f num to num c. the maximum wave slope of the surface at any point measured from the nominal plane of the surface shall not exceed num for panel to which sign face sheeting is to be attached or num for panels which section num sign materials num have porcelainized face sheets .
wave slope shall be computed in the following manner measure the distance between high points dimension a .
place a straight edge across the points and measure the depth of slope dimension b. divide one half of a into b to determine percentage of wave slope .
num .
seam closure .
where multiple panels adjoin the face and edges shall be milled to a tolerance of plus or minus num of an inch num mm from a straight plane so that when adjoining panels are assembled no gap over num of an inch num mm shall be visible between panels .
panels may be milled up to num of an inch num mm on each side in order to achieve edge uniformity .
seam closure extrusion between panels shall be as provided by the manufacturer of type numtnum aluminum .
seam closure extrusion may be set in num inches num mm from edge of panels for clearance of rivets and frame .
num .
rivets .
rivets appearing on the face side of the panel shall be anodized a color similar to that required for the face of the panel .
rivets for mounting letters shall be as specified .
num .
weep holes .
weep holes of approximately num of an inch num mm in diameter shall be drilled in the perimeter frame at the bottom of each panel .
holes are to be spaced approximately num inches num mm in from either end and in the center of each panel .
num .
fabrication of laminated signs .
each completed sign face shall comply with the requirements noted in this section with the legend and border laid out on the sign face in accordance with the approved shop drawing signs that do not meet these requirements shall be corrected or removed and replaced in acceptable condition without additional cost to the state .
num .
tests and samples .
the contractor shall furnish certified test reports confirming compliance with the requirements noted in this section in addition to samples of materials used in the manufacturing of the signs in accordance with current departmental policy for evaluation and verification tests .
d porcelain enamel signs .
num .
general .
porcelainized signs may be fabricated from flat aluminum or steel sheets or aluminum laminated panels .
materials shall meet the requirements of subarticles numa b or c unless otherwise modified in this subarticle .
porcelain enamel surfaces shall be in accordance with the following requirements .
these requirements are basic manufacturing quality controls and certified test reports will be accepted in lieu of samples .
however samples of each color to be used and for each separate production run shall be furnished for verification of tests of requirements as required by current testing schedule .
a .
coating .
porcelain enameled signs shall have a base or ground coat designed to develop minimum adherence applied to all surfaces which are to be porcelainized .
at least one separately fired cover coat in addition to the base or ground coat shall be applied to all surfaces being porcelainized .
all porcelain enamel shall conform to the porcelain enamel institutes specification als num .
the thickness of the enamel coating shall not be less than num inches num mm .
b .
color .
the finish color shall be uniform colors matching the alabama green chip and the standard interstate colors within the hue value and chroma ranges of the color tolerance charts published by the federal highway administration .
c. gloss .
the porcelain enamel shall have a gloss reading of num to num units at an angle of num when measured on a photovoltmeter or a meter capable of giving equal results .
reference federal test method num and current astm standard method c num .
section num sign materials num panels shall be checked for gloss every num square feet num m of production run .
d. adherence .
adherence shall be checked by accelerated spall test in accordance with porcelain enamel institute process bulletin cnum alnuma section num spall test to determine retention of adherence .
this test conforms with current astm c num method of test for spalling resistance of porcelain enameled aluminum .
tests shall be performed on process evaluation test specimens num inch x num inch num mm x num mm processed with the production run .
test samples shall be processed at a minimum rate of one set of samples per every num square feet num m of the production cycle or total order whichever occurs first and marked with the date and time of the production run .
extra process evaluation test specimens shall be processed to check any change in processing such as cleaning enamel formulation firing etc .
the number of specimens constituting one set of samples shall be three unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
failure of any process evaluation test specimen to satisfactorily pass the spall test shall be cause for holding and retesting the num square feet num m of the production cycle the specimen represents .
for the purpose of retesting process evaluation test specimens shall be taken from production pieces of the production cycle being held .
failure of any one of the process evaluation test specimens taken from production pieces to satisfactorily pass the spall test prescribed by these specifications shall be cause for total rejection of that num square feet num m of the production cycle or total order being retested .
e. acid resistance .
the porcelain enamel shall have a mass loss of less than num mgsquare inch num mgnum mm in the boiling num citric acid test .
reference test is described in astm standard c num standard method of test for resistance of porcelain enamels to boiling acid .
tests shall be performed on process evaluation test specimens num inch x num inch num mm x num mm processed with the production run .
test samples shall be processed at a minimum rate of one set of samples per every num square feet num m of the production cycle or total order whichever occurs first and marked with the date and time of the production run .
extra process evaluation test specimens shall be processed without any change in processing such as frits mill formula fineness of grind firing etc .
the number of specimens constituting one set of samples shall be three unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
failure of any process evaluation test specimen to satisfactorily pass the acid resistance test shall be cause for holding and retesting the num square feet num m of the production cycle the specimen represents .
for the purpose of retesting process evaluation test specimens shall be taken from production pieces of the production cycle being held .
num .
aluminum or steel flat or multiple flat panels .
a .
metals .
all materials shall meet the requirements of subarticles numa or b unless otherwise specified in this item .
aluminum panel sheets shall be an aluminumalloy or aluminum clad alloy numcore especially designed for enameling and capable of being porcelain enameled to meet the specifications noted herein .
the aluminum sheets after enameling shall have a minimum ultimate strength of num psi num mpa a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa and an elongation of not less than four percent .
if the porcelain enameling process materially alters the temper of the aluminum sheets such that the minimum yield point of the material is below num psi num mpa they shall be artificially aged or processed to raise the yield point of the panels to the required minimum stress .
steel sheets and backing strips shall meet the requirements of astm designation a num type ii and be capable of being porcelain enameled to meet the specifications noted herein .
all steel sheets and backing strips shall be shaped and formed before section num sign materials num porcelainization .
the exposed surfaces shall be provided with a protective coating of either porcelain or galvanization .
b. porcelain coverage .
in addition to the requirements of item numdnum the following shall apply .
the base or ground coat may be applied to the entire exposed surface area of the sheets including face and back .
if both sides are covered the coating thicknesss shall be equal and rack marks will be allowed on the back of panels .
the face and back shall be of the same color .
c. flatness .
each completed sign face after erection shall not vary more than num inch num mm in any num foot num m length with the maximum variation of num inch num mm from a flat surface in any num foot num m length .
num .
porcelainized aluminum laminated panels .
all materials shall meet the requirements of subarticle numc except as noted .
porcelainization of the face sheet shall be as specified in item numdnum .
aluminum face sheets shall be an aluminum alloy or aluminum clad alloy numcore especially designed for enameling and capable of being porcelain enameled to meet the specifications noted in this section .
the aluminum sheets after enameling shall have a minimum ultimate strength of num psi num mpa a minimum yield strength of num psi num mpa and an elongation of not less than four percent .
if the porcelain enameling process materially alters the temper of the aluminum sheets such that the minimum yield point of the material is below num psi num mpa they shall be artificially aged or processed to raise the yield point of the panels to the required minimum stress .
face sheets shall not be less than num inches num mm thick after porcelainization .
num .
fabrication of porcelain enameled signs each completed sign face shall comply with the surface flatness requirements noted in this section with the legend and border laid out on the sign face in accordance with the approved shop drawings signs that do not meet these requirements shall be corrected or removed and replaced in acceptable condition without additional cost to the state .
num .
tests and samples .
the contractor shall furnish certified test reports confirming compliance with the requirements noted in this section and in addition samples of materials used in manufacturing of the signs in accordance with current departmental policy for evaluation and verification tests but in no case less than one num inch x num inch num mm x num mm sample of each color used shall be furnished for each separate production run of the porcelain enameled panels .
verification of the porcelain colors by comparison with the alabama green chip and the color tolerance charts published by the fhwa shall be made on all samples .
noticeable variation of color in a production run shall be cause of ordering inspection of all sign faces and the rejection of any sign face outside of the tolerances provided by the color charts .
e aluminum louvered panels .
num .
general .
aluminum louvered sign panels shall consist of aerodynamically designed louvers assembled into a sign panel which is selfsupporting internally braced and capable of withstanding the wind loading indicated by plan requirements .
the complete design assembly shall provide for an efficient flow of air in a horizontal direction with at least numpercent reduction in wind loading normal to sign face than that of a solid sign panel of the same size and yet display a solid opaque background when viewed from an angle of num or less below the horizontal line of sight .
louvers shall be of such dimensions as to help maintain the panel rigidly and provided with sufficient internal support and bracing to support and retain the stacked louvers along with preventing aeolian vibrations .
the front face of the sign panel shall have provisions for affixing standard demountable copy borders and legends in a firm rigid manner .
the back face of the sign panel shall have provisions for attachment of the panel to the departments standard supports ground or overhead .
section num sign materials num the contractor shall obtain departmental approval of the panel design he proposes to furnish under this specification before such will be allowed on the project .
to obtain approval drawings of the proposed design along with any necessary supporting data to verify the design must be submitted .
num .
materials .
aluminum shall meet the requirements of subarticle numa and the following use alloy and temper designation louvers astm b num alloy numtnum miscellaneous parts astm b num alloy numtnum castings astm b num alloy scnumb all exposed parts of the sign panel shall have a baked enamel finish consisting of primer coat and at least two finish coats providing not less than a num mil num mm coverage .
the enamel shall be made of first class materials providing colors within the color tolerance charts published by the fhwa except that the highway green shall be the same shade etc .
as used on the departments porcelain enameled sign a color sample will be made available upon request .
num .
fabrication of sign panels .
a .
each completed sign face shall be assembled in accordance with the approved design and accepted shop drawings and shall after erection provide a rigid panel firmly attached to the sign supports .
sign panels not meeting these requirements shall be corrected or removed and replaced in acceptable condition without additional cost to the state .
b .
the legend and border shall be laid out on the sign face in accordance with the contract plans .
spacing and layout of legend and border shall be approved by the engineer before affixing of the legend and borders to the sign face .
num .
tests and samples .
the contractor shall furnish certified test reports confirming compliance with the requirements noted in this subarticle and in addition samples of materials used in the manufacturing of the signs in accordance with current departmental policy for evaluation and verification tests but in no case less than one num inch x num inch num mm x num mm sample of each color used shall be furnished .
verification of color by comparison with color tolerance charts etc .
as noted in item num above will be made on all samples .
noticeable variation of color in a panel shall be cause for ordering inspection of all signs and the rejection of any sign face outside the tolerances provided by the color charts .
all signs shall be inspected for faulty application blemishes or other faults that might impair the serviceability of the sign .
any noticeable color mismatching when viewed from a distance of num feet num m under both daylight or nighttime conditions shall be cause for rejection of the sign face .
num reflective and nonreflective sheeting .
a general .
retroreflective sheeting used in the fabrication of sign faces shall meet the requirements for astm d num .
all retroreflective sheeting shall be the astm type classification shown on the aldot standard highway drawings for standard highway signs unless otherwise required by plan details or the proposal .
nonretroreflective sheeting type in shall be a smooth flat durable gloss plastic film meeting the requirements of astm d num type i with the specific intensity requirements waived .
sheeting will be classified by type in accordance with the following section num sign materials num types and descriptions of sign sheeting materials type i a mediumintensity retroreflective sheeting referred to as engineering grade and typically enclosed lens glassbead sheeting .
typical applications for this material are permanent highway signing temporary traffic control devices and delineators .
type in nonreflective sheeting type ii a mediumhighintensity retroreflective sheeting sometimes referred to as super engineering grade and typically enclosed lens glassbead sheeting .
typical applications for this material are permanent highway signing temporary traffic control devices and delineators .
type iii a highintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically encapsulated glassbead retroreflective material .
typical applications for this material are permanent highway signing temporary traffic control devices and delineators .
type iv a highintensity retroreflective sheeting .
this sheeting is typically an unmetallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
typical applications for this material are permanent highway signing temporary traffic control devices and delineators .
type v a superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting .
this sheeting is typically a metallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
this sheeting is typically used for delineators .
type vi an elastomeric highintensity retroreflective sheeting without adhesive .
this sheeting is typically a vinyl microprismatic retroreflective material .
this sheeting is typically used for orange temporary rollup warning signs traffic cone collars and post bands .
type vii sheeting previously classified as type vii has been reclassified as type viii .
the designation of type vii has been discontinued .
astm d num type viii a superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting astm d num table num .
this sheeting is typically unmetallized microprismatic with the highest values of retroflection attained at long and medium roadway distances .
typical applications are temporary traffic control devices delineators and permanent highway signing .
type ix a veryhighintensity retroreflective sheeting which is typically unmetallized microprismatic with the highest values attained at short roadway distances where viewing angles may be critical .
typical applications are permanent highway signing temporary traffic control devices and delineators .
type x sheeting previously classified as type x has been reclassified as type viii .
the designation of type x has been discontinued .
astm d num type xi a superhighintensity unmetalized cube corner microprismatic sheeting astm d num table num .
typical applications are temporary traffic control devices delineators and permanent highway signing .
b tests and samples .
the departments product evaluation board has established a list of sheetings vnum materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
only the materials on this list shall be furnished for use .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum general information concerning materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements for further information .
in addition these materials will be inspected sampled and tested in accordance with the departments testing manual and laboratory manual .
c application of sheeting .
application of sheeting shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations splicing of sheeting will be allowed on sign faces provided such splices have a minimum overlap of num inch num mm and are held to a minimum .
more than one splice per num square feet num m of panel is considered excessive .
on signs which consist of one panel only the sheeting shall extend to the edge of the sign panel except where indicated in the plans .
on all signs which are sufficient size to require two or more panels sheeting shall be applied separately to each panel .
no attempt shall be made to extend the sheeting from one panel to adjacent panels .
sheeting shall be applied in strict conformity with the recommendations of the manufacturer .
section num sign materials num d color and luminance requirements .
the chromaticity and luminance of fluorescent retroreflective materials shall be determined in accordance with the requirements given in astm e num using instrumentation which complies with the requirements given in e num and which has circumferential viewing illumination .
the instrumentation shall illuminate the specimen with light having the spectral irradiance criteria for cle standard llluminant dnum as set forth in section num of e num for the testing of fluorescent specimens .
the reflectance data for the cie num num observer shall be computed in accordance with astm e num .
fluorescent retroreflective materials shall meet the requirements for chromaticity coordinates given in the following table .
chromaticity coordinates color num num num num x y x y x y x y fluorescent orange num num .
num num num num num num .
num num .
num num .
num fluorescent yellow num num num num num num num num fluorescent yellowgreen num num num num num num num num fluorescent retroreflective materials shall meet the luminance requirements given in the following table .
luminance requirements color luminance factor limits y minimum maximum yf fluorescent orange num none num fluorescent yellow num none num fluorescent yellowgreen num none num fluorescent luminance factors yf are typical values and are provided for quality assurance purposes only .
yf shall not be used as a measure of performance during service .
num sign copy .
a applied copy .
num .
general .
applied copy is classified as copy applied directly to the sign background as distinguished from demountable copy which is affixed to the sign background by approved fasteners .
unless noted otherwise all standard class num num num num and num signs shall have the sign copy applied by either the direct or reverse screening silk screen method as noted in items num and num below .
route shields and markers with blue background and yellow symbols typically a class num or a portion of a class num or num sign shall use the cutout copy process as noted in item num below .
special class num num num num and num signs may utilize cutout copy as noted in item num below if so noted by the plans or on the approved shop drawings .
num .
direct screening process .
this method is used for applying a nonreflective copy to a sign background .
num .
reverse screening process .
this method is used for applying white reflectorized copy to a reflectorized colored background by utilizing a transparent color stencil paste applied to a white reflectorized background .
num .
screening material and application .
material for application by the silk screen method shall be a top quality exterior baking screen enamel or stencil paste manufactured especially for use on roadway signs and compatible with the type sign background material being used .
application of screened copy and curing thereof shall be in strict compliance with the manufacturers recommendations of the background material .
section num sign materials num colors shall be durable and consistent with the requirements of the fhwa standards colors charts for signs .
the color shall be uniform in acceptable hue when viewed in daylight and under normal headlights at night .
num .
substitution of cutout copy for screen copy .
certain signs for which standardization is impractical such as destination signs may be authorized to use cutout copy unless noted otherwise on the plans .
said cutout copy shall be fabricated from the appropriate class sheeting by individually cutting of the borders legends numerals and symbols and applying them to the required background in strict compliance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendation .
when cutout copy is authorized borders legends symbols or numerals shall be either screened or cutout copy mixing of the two to form a border a legend a symbol or numerals will not be permitted except when authorized on construction warning signs .
white copy shall be formed from type iii sheeting unless noted otherwise on the plans .
nonreflective copy shall be formed from type in sheeting .
b demountable copy .
num .
general design .
letter design shall meet the federal standard alphabet series digits arrows borders and other accessories shall be of approved design all in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
all items shall be fabricated from sheet aluminum of alloy num b num or equal of not less than num inches num mm in thickness .
mounting holes shall be provided within the frames in accordance with the manufacturers directions to permit the use of rivets or other acceptable fasteners .
the demountable copy shall be fastened to sign panels either by aluminum rivets or galvanized selftapping sheet metal screws with heads of the same color as the copy .
the number of rivets or screws with heads shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the demountable copy and as approved by the engineer .
border sections shall be full standard length except where it is necessary to use less than a standard length to fit a sign dimension .
border units shall fit snugly together without visible gaps .
all items shall be reflectorized unless otherwise specified by plan details by one of the following methods num prismatic reflectors installed in the copy frame as noted in item num below or num encapsulated lens reflective sheeting mounted on the copy frame as noted in item num below .
nonreflectorized demountable copy when specified shall be finished in the same manner as provided in subitem numbnumb meeting the same requirements except that the finished color shall be black or white porcelain enamel as required .
the type of reflectorization for the demountable copy will be at the option of the contractor except when num a specific type is designated by plan details or num when repairing or adding to an existing sign the new copy shall be consistent with that retained .
the type of reflectorization once selected shall be consistent throughout the project .
num .
prismatic reflectorization .
a .
general .
prismatic reflectors shall be supported by embossed frames with reflectors installed so as to be an integral part of the character or otherwise securely affixed to prevent displacement by handling or servicing the use of tape to hold reflectors in place is not acceptable .
the size and spacing of the reflectors shall be such as will provide maximum night legibility and visibility of the unfinished cutout figure .
b. finishing of frame .
after the metal fabrication has been completed the finishing process shall be as follows preparation aluminum frames shall be degreased etched neutralized and treated as specified in item numanum .
enameling after treating frames shall be finished in white porcelain enamel unless otherwise specified by plan details .
the porcelain finish shall section num sign materials num be in accordance with the porcelain enamel institute specification alsnum .
when subject to porcelain enamel gloss test tnum the enamel shall have a gloss reading at num of num to num units .
c. prismatic reflectors .
num general .
the reflectors shall consist of a transparent acrylic plastic face hereafter referred to as the lens and an opaque back hermetically sealed to form a unit permanently sealed against dust water and water vapor .
the reflector lens shall be crystal or as designated on the plans .
reflectors shall meet the requirements of aashto m num with sampling and qualification requirements being governed by the departments testing manual laboratory manual and materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual .
num sampling procedure and test requirements .
the departments product evaluation board has established a list vnum materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements manual for reflectors .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum general information concerning materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements for further information .
num .
encapsulated lens reflectorization .
encapsulated lens sheeting used for demountable copy shall be of a white or silverwhite color mounted on an aluminum frame as noted in item num above .
the reflective sheeting shall meet all the requirements of subarticle numa for type iii reflective requirements .
fabrication of the cutout character shall be such that the entire exposed surface of the character will be covered by the reflective sheeting .
num sign supports .
a ground mounted sign supports .
num .
general .
ground mounted supports shall fall into two categories a light weight mass or bendaway post and a standard or rigid post .
the light weight mass or bendaway posts are normally single u channels aluminum or steel and tubular shapes round square etc .
of such size and design that when hit by a moving vehicle will easily bendaway from the vehicle without seriously damaging it .
the standard or rigid posts shall be of various designs shapes tubular etc .
which by size and design will not easily bendaway when hit by a moving vehicle .
this type post unless otherwise noted by plan details will require a breakaway feature to be incorporated with the post .
the material and design of the breakaway features for the various shapes of standard posts shall be shown by the plan details .
breakaway features constructed of steel shall have all elements galvanized unless otherwise provided by the plan details .
damage to galvanization or any bare spots developed during construction shall be treated with two coats of approved galvanizing paint section num or approved zinc spelter paint .
aluminum elements will require no special treatment unless so specified by plan details .
all materials furnished for use shall be new unless otherwise specified by plan details or provisions of the contract .
all tubular post shapes whose design will have a tendency to collect water shall be provided with an approved type of tight fitting post cap fabricated of material compatible with that of the post .
num .
steel posts .
a. tubular type std .
this type of post shall be fabricated from standard steel shapes of the size and weight mass shown by plan details .
round shapes shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade b schedule num or better no pressure test required .
other shapes and materials shall be as noted by plan details .
b. beam type std .
section num sign materials num this type of post shall be fabricated from standard beam shapes of the size shape and weight mass shown on the plans .
the material shall conform to the requirements of either astm a num or a num grade num unless otherwise noted by plan details .
c. light weight mass or bendaway type .
num this post shall be fabricated to acceptable shape and design to provide the moment of inertia and section modulus for the requirements of the designated post size shown by the plan details .
the posts shall be made of rerolled rail steel meeting the requirements of astm a num grade num or a comparable new billet steel meeting the requirements of astm a num grade num .
the steel in the posts shall meet the chemical requirements of astm a num for rails having a nominal weight mass of num pounds per yard num kgm or greater .
shaped sections shall be provided with num inch num mm diameter holes placed on num inch num mm centers starting num inch num mm from the top of the post and extending the full length of the post .
num tubular sections shall be fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of astm a num ss grade num and astm a num a numm .
tubular sections shall be provided with num inch num mm diameter holes placed on num inch num mm centers starting num inch num mm from the top of the post and extending the full length of the post holes shall extend through the opposite walls .
in lieu of the above tubular steel posts may conform to astm a numa numm ss grade num or better .
the posts shall be provided with num inch num mm diameter diecut knockouts on num inch num mm centers on all four sides .
d. post finish .
standard posts shall be hot dipped zinc galvanized after fabrication in accordance with astm a num for beam shape and astm a num for tubular shape .
light weight mass or bendaway posts shall be zinc galvanized in accordance with the following u channel section astm a num after fabrication .
tubular section astm a num grade gnum or better .
an alternate coating may be an inline hot dip galvanized zinc coating per astm b num followed by a chromate conversion coating and crosslinked polyurethane acrylic exterior coating with the inside surface given a double inline application of a full zincbased organic coating .
num .
aluminum posts .
a. tubular type std .
this type of post shall be fabricated from extruded tubing to the size shape and wall thickness shown on the plans and shall conform to the aluminum association alloy numtnum astm b num. b. beam type std .
this type of aluminum support shall be fabricated from extruded shapes of the size shape and weight mass shown on the plans and shall conform to the aluminum association alloy numtnum astm b num. c. light weight mass or bendaway type .
this type of aluminum support shall be fabricated from acceptable extruded shapes meeting the design requirements moment of inertia and section modulus for the designated post size shown in the plan details .
materials shall conform to the requirements of alloy numtnum of astm b num .
holes num inch num mm in diameter shall be placed on num inch num mm centers starting num inch num mm from the post top and extending the full length of the post or within num feet num m or less of the bottom of the post holes in tubular sections shall extend through the opposite walls d. finish .
aluminum supports shall be provided with a smooth nonglare finish .
num .
bolts nuts washers and miscellaneous hardware .
high strength bolts nuts and washers shall meet the requirements of article num .
bolts nuts and washers other than highstrength shall meet the requirements of astm a num section num delineators and hazard markers num for bolts and the appropriate requirements noted in subarticle numa for nuts and washers .
all bolts nuts and washers shall be galvanized utilizing zinc in accordance with the provisions of astm a num class c or aashto m num class c. other miscellaneous hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with astm a num class b. b overhead sign supports .
the materials required for overhead sign supports shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num protection of sign material .
all sign panels shall be protected by packaging after fabrication and during shipment and storage .
packaging and packing shall be adequate to prevent damage to any part of the sign panel legends copy or borders .
before packaging all paint shall be thoroughly dry and all signs free of moisture .
adhesive tapes shall not be used on any sign face .
all packaged signs shall be kept entirely dry .
all assembled or partially assembled signs other than flat sheet signs shall have sufficient braces securely attached to prevent buckling or warping at all times from after assembly has begun until the signs have been attached to their permanent supports .
num sampling inspection and testing of sign materials .
sampling and inspection of sign materials will be done in accordance with the requirements given in aldotnum procedures for sampling and inspection of roadway signs and overhead sign structures .
all hardware such as nuts bolts washers angles channels etc .
sign panels along with the samples of the materials used in the panels and any certified test reports required and sign supports shall be shipped to the project site .
inasmuch as certain tests require actual inspection of all sign panels the contractor shall supply at the time of inspection the necessary personnel for uncrating and movement of the panels .
until test reports are issued on the sign materials the contractor will not be permitted to install the sign materials unless written approval for such has been obtained from the central office .
should any material samples fail or any question arise concerning submitted samples being representative of those on the project additional samples shall be selected from those on hand at the job site .
failure of resamples shall be cause for rejection of all items of the type involved .
verification of color by comparison with color tolerance charts published by the fhwa shall be made .
noticeable variation in color shall be cause of ordering inspection of all sign faces and the rejection of any sign face outside the tolerances provided by the color charts .
all signs shall be inspected for faulty application blemishes or other faults that might impair the serviceability of the sign or any noticeable color mismatching when viewed from a distance of num feet num m under both daylight and nighttime conditions shall be cause for rejection of the sign face .
section num delineators and hazard markers num standard delineators.error bookmark not defined .
a general .
a delineator shall consist of one or more colorless or colored reflector units mounted as shown on the plans .
a reflector unit shall consist of a hermetically sealed acrylic plastic prismatic reflex reflector with a sealed plastic back or housed in an embossed aluminum housing .
b reflector units .
num .
reflector lens .
the reflector lens shall be methyl methacrylate meeting the requirements of federal specifications lpnum type num class num or astm d num grade num and shall be of clear or colored transparent plastic with a minimum of num square inches num mm of reflective area .
the lens shall have a smooth front surface free from projection or indentation other than a central mounting hole and identification and a rear surface bearing a prismatic section num delineators and hazard markers num configuration such as will effect essentially total reflection of light .
the manufacturers trademark shall be molded legibly on the face or back of the reflector unit .
the backing shall be a heat sealable plastic or metallic foil fused to the lens under heat and pressure around the entire perimeter of the lens and the central mounting hole to form a unit permanently sealed against dust water and vapor .
num .
reflector housing .
to retain the acrylic reflector the delineator shall have a sealed plastic back or aluminum housing conforming to the following the housing shall be a minimum num inch num mm aluminum conforming to astm b num alloy numto or alloy numto and formed as shown on the plans .
delineators shall have either a plastic or metal gromet num of an inch num mm in diameter .
num .
optical requirements .
the specific intensity per unit area of each reflector shall be equal to or exceed the following minimum values when tested in accordance with aashto m num .
measurements shall be made with the reflector spinning to obtain an average reading .
observation entrance specific intensity candle powersquare inchfoot candle candelasluxm angle angle crystal amber red green num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
seal requirements .
when tested in accordance with aashto m num the reflector shall show no evidence of moisture intrusion .
num .
heat resistance requirements .
the reflector shall show no signs of deformation or change in shape nor loss of reflective quality when tested in accordance with aashto m num .
num .
prequalification .
all types of reflectors must be evaluated for conformance with the mutcd requirements as well as the physical requirements listed above prior to use .
the department maintains a list vnum of reflectors meeting these requirements in the manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
other reflectors may be used upon evaluation and approval of the departments product evaluation board .
num .
sampling and testing .
sampling and testing shall be done in accordance with the departments testing manual .
num .
packaging .
the reflectors shall be supplied in suitable containers which will protect the units from damage during shipment and storage .
containers shall be legibly marked with the name type lot etc .
of the contents .
c posts .
the posts shall be of the design and weight mass as shown on the plans .
posts shall be straight with no bending warping splits or other defects .
mounting holes shall be punched or drilled on the centerline of the web as shown on the plans .
steel posts shall be manufactured from rerolled rail steel meeting the requirements of astm a num grade num or a comparable new billet steel .
the steel in posts shall meet the chemical requirements of astm a num for rails having a nominal weight mass of num pounds per yard num kgm or greater modified to require the carbon content to be between num and num percent .
the posts shall be hot dip galvanized after forming cutting punching or drilling has been completed .
galvanization shall be in accordance with astm a num .
aluminum posts shall be manufactured from aluminum alloy numtnum .
other types of posts may be used upon evaluation and approval of the departments product evaluation board .
section num pavement markers num num reflective hazard markers .
a general .
a hazard marker may be either a series of reflector units three or more mounted on a backup plate or a designated standard or special reflectorized sign panel .
b reflectors .
the reflectors shall comply with the requirements for delineator type reflectors noted in subarticle numb except the metal housing and metal center grommet will not be required .
c backup plates .
the backup plates for the hazard markers shall be at least num inch num mm thick aluminum sheets .
the surface of the marker facing traffic shall be treated with a coating of baked on yellow enamel highway yellow .
attachment of the reflectors to the backup plate and of the backup plate to the post or mounting surface shall be in accordance with the details shown on the plans or an approved substitute .
d posts .
posts used for mounting hazard markers shall be in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of subarticle numc .
e mounting .
mountings other than on posts shall be in accordance with plan details .
f sampling and testing .
sampling and testing of the reflector units shall be as prescribed in subarticle numb .
g standard or special sign panels .
the panel shall comply with the requirements of section num for signs with the legend or marking as required by plan details .
sign panels shall be sampled and tested as prescribed in section num .
section num pavement markers num general .
a sampling procedure and test requirements .
num .
permanent markers .
the department has established list vnum permanent pavement markers temporary pavement markers marker adhesive delineators and hazard markers of the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements for permanent pavement markers .
only markers on this list shall be furnished for use .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning this list .
num .
temporary markers .
all markers on list vnum may be used as temporary markers .
only markers on this list shall be furnished for use .
refer to subarticle numf and aldotnum concerning these lists .
b packaging .
the markers shall be supplied in suitable containers which will protect the units from damage during shipment and storage .
containers shall be legibly marked with the name and type etc .
of the contents .
num reflective markers .
a class a marker .
class a pavement markers shall meet the requirements of astm d num with surface characteristics no designation marker with plastic lens surface .
b class ah marker .
class ah pavement markers shall meet the requirements of astm d num with surface characteristics designated h marker with hard abrasionresistant lens surface .
section num pavement markers num num nonreflective markers .
a general .
class b pavement markers shall be formed of heat fixed ceramic base material constructed in such a manner as to form a solid watertight unit .
the markers shall be of the general size and shape shown on the plans with smooth rounded corners .
any change in the curvature shall be gradual .
the top and sides of the marker shall be smooth and free from mold marks pits indentations air bubbles or other objectionable marks or discolorations .
the base of the marker shall be flat deviation from a flat surface shall not exceed num inch num mm rough textures comparable to at least that of a fine grade sand paper and free from gloss or substances which may reduce the markers bond to the adhesive .
b materials .
ceramic heat fired vitreous ceramic base and a heat fired opaque glazed top surface .
the bottom surface shall be unglazed suitable for cementing to the road surface .
the marker may be produced from any suitable combination of intimately mixed clays shales talcs or other inorganic material .
the marker shall be thoroughly and evenly matured and free from defects which will affect the appearance and serviceability .
c tests .
num .
color .
white brightness relative to magnesium oxide num minimum .
yellow brightness relative to magnesium oxide num minimum and match the standard shade within the red and green balances when compared with color chip num of federal standard no .
num .
num .
water absorption num max .
astm c num num .
hardness moh hardness num min .
num .
autoclave test shall not craze spall or peel when subjected to one cycle at num psi num kpa astm c num .
num .
glaze thickness num inch num mm min .
num .
strength markers shall be capable of supporting a load of num pounds num kg applied as follows a marker shall be centered over the open end of a vertically positioned hollow metal cylinder .
the cylinder shall be at least num inch num mm high with an internal diameter of approximately num inches num mm and with a minimum thickness of num inch num mm .
loading shall be slowly applied to the top of the marker through a num inch num mm diameter by num inch num mm high metal plug centered on the top of the marker .
an average compressive strength of three markers shall be obtained however any individual marker which fails under a compressive load of less than num pounds num kg shall be cause for rejection of the marker lot being tested .
num .
adhesive bond strength the adhesive tensile bond strength to the bottom of the marker accepted for use on the project and the epoxy adhesive accepted for use on the project shall be not less than num psi num mpa .
num adhesives for pavement markers .
bituminous adhesive used to affix permanent pavement markers to the pavement shall be one of those listed in list vnum of the departments manual materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements .
the adhesive used to affix the temporary markers to the pavement shall be any suitable type of adhesive for the intended purpose except that in those locations where the markers will be required to be removed the adhesive shall be a type that will allow for the complete removal of the marker without scarring or disfiguring the pavement .
section num sign lighting materials and services num section num sign lighting materials and services num general .
the following requirements for materials and services will govern the construction of roadway sign lighting unless otherwise specified by plan details or special provisions .
all construction and installations shall be made by workmen skilled in this type of work and under the supervision of an experienced and qualified electrical supervisor .
all work shall be executed in a neat and workmanlike manner and shall present a neat and mechanical appearance when completed .
upon completion of the contract the contractor shall deliver to the engineer a corrected plan showing in detail all changes on construction from the original plans especially location and depth of conduits complete schematic circuit diagrams and the like .
a codes permits and inspections .
installation shall comply with all laws applying to electrical installations in effect in this community with the requirements of the latest edition of the national electrical code and the latest edition of the national electrical safety code handbook hnum where such requirements do not conflict with those laws and with the service rules of the utility company furnishing electricity .
the contractor shall obtain and pay for all permits required by the local ordinances at the time of bidding .
after completion of the work the contractor shall verify by certificate of final inspection and approval from the local inspector where there is a local inspector that the installation complies with all local regulations governing same .
b drawings and specifications .
the approved electrical drawings and any plan detail drawings along with these specifications are complementary to each other .
what is called for by one shall be as binding as if called for by both .
in case of difference between drawings and these specifications the specifications shall govern .
omissions from the drawings and specifications or the misdescription of details of work which are evidently necessary to carry out the intent of the drawings and specifications or which are customarily performed shall not relieve the contractor from performing such omissions and details or work but they shall be performed as if fully and correctly set forth and described in the drawings and specifications .
in any case of discrepancy in the figures catalog numbers or descriptions in the drawings or in the specifications the matter shall be promptly submitted to the engineer who shall promptly make a determination in writing .
any adjustment in the plans by the contractor without written approval shall be at the contractors own risk and expense .
c changes and additional work .
no change shall be made from the work called for by these specifications and drawings except on the written order of the engineer .
no charges for extra work will be allowed unless such work has been authorized by a written order of the engineer stating the charge to be made for the work .
num systems of wiring .
sign lighting systems shall be of one of the following classes a class num a three wire grounded single phase service for a nominal voltage of num volts num hertz .
b class num a two wire grounded single phase service for a nominal voltage of num volts num hertz .
num service feeders .
for a class num wiring system extend conductors and conduit of the sizes shown on the drawings underground or overhead from service pole to sign bridge .
extend underground conduit up pole to overhead service and up sign bridge support to control mounted thereon .
raceway running under roadway including usable shoulder and raceway exposed about grade may be rigid galvanized conduit or type num heavy wall pvc at the contractors option .
the service raceway shall be buried to provide a minimum depth of num feet num mm along its entire run .
terminate feeder near top of service pole with service entrance fittings .
service fitting shall be type f as manufactured by crousehinds appleton or killark .
section num sign lighting materials and services num for a class num wiring system extend num num awg insulated and num num awg bare conductors in num inch num mm or larger conduit underground from flush junction box as shown on drawings to control on sign bridge .
conduit shall be rigid galvanized conduit .
conductors shall be crosslinked polyethylene insulated copper conductors .
underground portion of feeder shall be num feet num mm or more below grade .
num control and protection of equipment .
a general .
num .
class num wiring system .
service control and protective equipment shall consist of not fusible switch mounted on service pole a circuit breaker loadcenter and magnetic multiple relay mounted on sign bridge unless shown otherwise on the drawings .
a. fusible switch .
a switch shall be mounted approximately num feet num m above grade on the service pole .
this switch shall be nema type hd quickmake quickbreak in nemanumr raintight enclosure num pole solid neutral fusible type switch of the size shown on the drawings square d company i.t.e .
westinghouse or approved equal .
a not fusible switch of the same type shall be provided on the structure to serve as disconnect .
b .
multiple lighting relays lighting relays shall be num ampere num pole num volt relays with builtin lighting arrestors mounted in cast aluminum weatherproof case with receptacle for photo control and with hanger for mounting .
the relays shall be mounted in the vicinity of the bottom chord of the sign bridge .
relays shall be south bend current controller company inc .
type mroi spec .
no .
num or equivalent as manufactured by westinghouse or mcgraw edison company .
c. protective device .
where shown on the drawings provide a circuitbreaker loadcenter in nemanumr raintight enclosure with raintight hub .
circuit breakers shall be single pole thermalmagnetic circuitbreakers with an interrupting capacity of not less than num amperes rms .
loadcenter shall be type qnumarb as manufactured by the square d company or equivalent as manufactured by general electric company i.t.e .
or westinghouse .
num .
class num wiring system .
control and protective equipment shall consist of a not fusible switch and magnetic multiple relay mounted on sign bridge .
a .
not fusible switch .
the switch shall be mounted approximately num feet num m above grade .
the switch unless otherwise noted on the plans shall be nema type hd quickmake quickbreak in nema numr raintight enclosure num ampere num pole num volt solid neutral not fusible square d company i.t.e .
westinghouse or approved equal .
b .
multiple lighting relays .
lighting relays unless otherwise noted on the plans shall be south bend current controller company type mrph specification num num volt a.c. street lighting control or approved equal as manufactured by westinghouse or mcgraw edison company .
control shall be mounted in cast aluminum weatherproof case with receptacle for photoelectric control hanger for mounting builtin lighting arrestor fuses control transformer and control switch .
control shall be mounted in the vicinity of the bottom chord of the sign bridge .
fuses shall be num ampere dual element fuses .
b photoelectric control .
num .
general .
the contractor shall furnish and install on the receptacle provided on the multiple lighting relay a photoelectric control with a factory setting for turn on of approximately num footcandles num lux and a turn off of approximately num footcandles num lux .
the control shall satisfactorily withstand an ambient temperature range of num f to num f num c to num c and shall be moisture proof .
the housing shall be approximately num inches num mm high with a base diameter of not more than num inches num mm .
the chassis shall be molded section num sign lighting materials and services num phenolic with three locking type blades and neoprene gasket conforming to ee num publication no .
num nema publication no .
sh num .
the housing shall be weatherproof clear acrylic internally sprayed .
the control shall be suited for the class of wiring being used as noted in this subarticle .
num .
class num wiring system .
the control shall operate on a supply voltage of num volts num hz ac with an inrush rating of num amperes at num volts and num amperes at num volts and a lamp load capacity of num voltamperes for mercury vapor lamps .
rated life at full load shall be num onoff operations minimum .
relay contacts shall be spst nc .
dielectric strength shall be num volts minimum between any current carrying part and metal mounting surface .
control shall be fisherpierce series numb modified or approved equal as manufactured by general electric company or crousehinds .
num .
class num wiring system .
the control shall be the same as noted in item num above .
c grounding .
num .
general .
all exposed noncurrent carrying metallic parts of electrical equipment including raceways shall be grounded with driven ground rods and copper conductor .
where nonmetallic raceway is used a separate continuous ground conductor shall be extended from the service ground to all equipment and shall be used for grounding purposes only .
where a continuous metallic raceway system is used the raceway properly bonded to provide a continuous system may be used in lieu of the separate conductor .
ground rods shall be copperclad or hotdipped galvanized steel rods .
conductor shall be num awg soft drawn copper .
connections to rods shall be made with ground wire clamps with safety screws .
rods and connectors shall be as manufactured by mcgrawedison joslyn manufacturing and supply company or a .
b .
chance company .
all connections required to give such continuous connection shall be provided .
num .
service grounds .
provide a minimum of one num inch x num foot num mm x num m rod driven full length plus num foot num mm into the earth not less than num feet num mm from pole .
after installation is completed tops of ground rods and horizontal conductors shall be approximately num foot num mm below finished grade .
vertical conductors shall be protected by a halfround wood molding from the ground line to a point at least num feet num m above grade .
staple conductor to pole at intervals of num feet num m or less .
staple molding to pole at intervals of num feet num mm or less .
staples shall be galvanized steel of types designated for specific purposes of its use .
minimum conductor size shall be num awg .
num types of wiring .
a options .
underground service feeder shall be of the following types the type used shall be the contractors option .
num .
type i. metallic conduit with insulated conductors .
num .
type ii .
nonmetallic conduit with insulated circuit conductors and a bare grounding conductor .
b conductors .
all conductors in the underground circuit shall be annealed copper with not less than num conductivity and shall be insulated for num volts or more with rubber insulation and a neoprene jacket or with crosslinked polyethylene insulation .
the type used shall be at the contractors option .
conductors num awg and larger shall be class b stranded .
grounding conductors may be bare .
if insulated they shall be identified by a continuous green color or a continuous green color with a yellow stripe .
all above ground lighting and control circuits shall be installed in rigid galvanized or rigid aluminum conduit .
conductors shall be as specified for underground circuits or polyvinyl chloride insulated conductors meeting the requirements of ul no .
num for thw insulation and ul no .
num for uf insulation .
types thw or uf conductors shall not be used for underground circuits .
section num sign lighting materials and services num all conduit systems shall be complete before conductors are pulled in .
splices and taps shall be made with solderless split bolt or pressure type connectors as manufactured by o.z .
manufacturing company burndy corporation thomas betts company or approved equal .
a minimum of three layers of rubber tape shall be applied to each splice or tap in uniform halflap wrapping .
on top of this apply not less than three layers of high dielectric high tensile strength plastic tape in uniform halflap wrapping over the rubber tape .
tape shall be as manufactured by okonite company minnesota mining and manufacturing company johnsmanville corporation or equal .
selfinsulating connectors of a type approved by the engineer may be used in lieu of taping .
phase or current carrying conductors for underground feeder shall be of the following type or types num .
type a rubber insulation meeting the requirements of ul no .
num for rhw insulation with a neoprene jacket applied over the insulation .
conductors shall meet the requirements of ipcea standard snum .
thickness of insulation shall be not less than num inch num mm .
neoprene jackets shall be not less than num inch num mm .
cable shall be single conductor as manufactured by anaconda phelpsdodge general electric company or equal .
num .
type b crosslinked polyethylene meeting the requirements of interim standard num ipcea publication no .
snum nema publication no .
wcnum phelpsdodge thermolene general electric company vulkene anaconda unicon or equal .
thickness of insulation shall be not less than num inch num mm .
num conduit systems .
a metallic conduit .
all metallic conduit shall be rigid thickwall hotdipped galvanized or sherardized conduit as manufactured by national electrical products pittsburgh standard conduit company triangle conduit and cable company or approved equal or rigid aluminum conduit as manufactured by kaiser aluminum and chemical sales reynolds metal company or national electric products corporation or approved equal .
aluminum conduit shall not be installed below grade or in contact with earth .
bends and offsets shall be avoided where possible but where necessary shall be made with proper hickey pipe bender or conduit bending machine .
conduit which has been crushed or deformed due to improper bending or handling shall not be installed .
conduits shall be installed in a manner to insure against trouble from collection of trapped condensation where possible .
conduits shall be supported and substantially fastened to structural members at intervals of not more than num feet num m. all exposed conduits shall be supported with twohole hotdip galvanized straps secured by means of bolts and expansion anchors or inserts in concrete or masonry machine screws or bolts on metal surfaces or lag screws on wooden surfaces .
straps shall be heavy duty steel pipe supports for standard pipe as manufactured by elcen metal products company grinnel company or fee mason .
expansion anchors shall be of the selfdrilling expansion shell type or of the machine screw drivein leadexpansion anchor type .
lag or machine bolt shields and percussion driven anchors in concrete or masonry will not be accepted .
exposed conduit shall be installed with runs parallel or perpendicular to walls structural members or intersections or vertical planes with right angle turns consisting of cast metal fittings or symmetrical bends .
conduit shall be capped to prevent entrance of deleterious materials during construction .
all metallic conduit below grade or in contact with the earth unless encased in concrete shall be completely coated with asphalt bituminous or other paint suitable for the service .
all exposed conduits shall be painted to match adjacent structure or as directed by the engineer .
rigid metallic conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved jacking or drilling methods .
pavement shall not be disturbed .
jacking and drilling pits shall be kept at least num feet num mm clear of the edge of any type pavement whenever possible .
excessive use of water that may cause undermining of the pavement will not be permitted .
excavation and backfill incidental to the operation will not be paid for separately .
where conduit is used for raceway for installation section num sign lighting materials and services num of combination cable and duct such conduits shall be provided with appropriate bushings at the ends .
b nonmetallic conduit .
conduits run underground may be type ii type num plastic conduit and fittings conforming to the requirements of federal specification wcnum february num num with conductors of the type specified under conductors .
where nonmetallic conduits join metallic conduit stubouts connections shall be made using appropriate couplings to form a watertight raceway .
num sign lighting fixtures .
sign lighting fixtures shall be provided in quantities and sizes to produce uniform illumination of the signs to be lighted .
the lighting system shall provide a minimum maintained average intensity of num footcandles num lux with a maximum to minimum brightness ratio of not more than num to num at num f num c ambient temperature .
for basis of calculating to determine the maintained illumination a maintenance factor of num shall be used .
lamps used shall be num watt num watt or num watt mercury vapor deluxe white or metal additive lamps as required to provide specified intensity and true color rendition of the lighted signs .
minimum size lamps required to provide the specified lighting intensity shall be installed .
information shown on the drawings is based on the use of crousehinds catalog numbers slnum and slnum knightlight .
sign light shall consist of alzak aluminum reflector which shall also serve as the lamp housing tempered glass lens held to reflector by watertight rubber gasket lamp socket with projecting male contacts to mate with quick disconnect receptacle designed for preset aiming angle .
the female part of the disconnect shall be threaded for num inch num mm conduit and shall be provided with a locking screw set .
lighting fixtures shall be mounted on conduit and supports as shown on the drawings .
where necessary conduits shall be bent up or down to provide proper tilt of fixture to give proper light distribution for full coverage of the lighted sign .
this fixture is individual in type and style .
mercury vapor fixtures suitable for sign lighting as manufactured by westinghouse holophane or general electric company will be considered .
in any event the contractor shall furnish to the electrical engineer for approval calculations photometric data and detailed drawings of equipment proposed for use in this installation .
acceptance of the contractors proposed installation does not preclude the measured illumination requirements .
transformers or ballast shall be of the types as shown on the drawings and shall be suitable for use with the lamps furnished .
ballasts shall be as manufactured by one of the above listed manufacturers or an approved equal .
num service poles .
when required a treated southern pine service pole of the class and size shown on the drawings conforming with american standards specification num shall be provided .
preservative shall conform to american wood preservers association standard specification for creosote oil .
each pole shall be marked on the face num feet num m above butt showing size class and manufacturer .
guy wires shall be utilities grade num strand num inch num mm galvanized wire with a line material cat .
no .
wevnumm num way malleable iron expanding anchor and a line material cat .
no .
danumsnum num inch x num foot num mm x num m hotdip galvanized steel anchor rod .
a half round type hotdip galvanized guy protector with rolled edges shall be provided on the guy cable line material cat .
no .
dgnumgnum or similar and equivalent guying material as manufactured by joslyn chance or hubbard will be accepted .
num operational check and adjustment of equipment .
after completion of all work under this section and prior to final acceptance of the project the electrical equipment shall be put through a full operational check .
the period of test shall cover num calendar days .
during the test period the contractor shall perform any necessary adjustments and replace any malfunctioning parts of the equipment required to place the equipment or system in an acceptable operational condition .
no extra compensation will be allowed for work so required such being considered incidental to the furnishing andor installation of the equipment .
during the test period provided all other work of the contract is complete and the project is ready for acceptance subject to completion of the operational check of the equipment time charges may be suspended and the state may assume the responsibility of any damage caused to the work by the traveling public .
section num roadway lighting materials num num guarantee .
the contractor shall guarantee all work performed under this section against defective materials except lamps and workmanship for a period of six months after the final acceptance of the project .
section num roadway lighting materials num general .
electrical materials shall conform to the requirements given in the current edition of the nfpa num national electrical code nec .
electrical materials shall also conform to the standards of the american national standards institute ansi the national electrical manufacturers association nema and the underwriters laboratories inc. ul in every case where a standard has been established .
all materials shall be listed by one or more of these organizations .
the mark of the listing organization shall appear on electrical material and equipment .
units of any one item such as poles luminaires lamps control devices enclosures circuit breakers etc .
shall be made by the same manufacturer .
num conduit .
a rigid metal conduit rmc .
rigid metal conduit couplings and fittingsshall be galvanized steel meeting the requirements given in ul num .
couplings and fittings shall be threaded .
b liquidtight flexible metal conduit lfmc .
liquidtight flexible metal conduit shall meet the requirements given in ul num .
the thermoplastic covering shall be oil resistant .
c liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit lfnc .
liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit shall meet the requirements given in ul num. d rigid nonmetallic conduit rnc .
rigid nonmetallic conduit shall be schedule num pvc and shall meet the requirements given in ul num. e nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors nucc .
nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors nucc shall meet the requirements given in ul num .
num lighting circuit conductors .
a general .
all conductors in the lighting circuits shall be stranded copper with num voltac insulation rating .
insulated conductors shall be type rhw rhwnum xhhw or xhhwnum meeting the requirements given in ul num .
the size of the conductor voltage rating and insulation type shall all be clearly marked on the conductor in a color that contrasts with the insulation color .
b conductor identification color .
unless designated otherwise by the requirements given in the nec conductors shall be identified as follows .
equipment grounding conductors shall be bare or shall be identified by a continuous green color insulation .
grounded conductors neutrals shall be identified by continuous white or gray color insulation .
current carrying conductors may be identified by any color insulation other than white gray or green and shall have a consistent color for each conductor .
c splicing and termination of conductors .
splices and terminations shall be made with materials which are listed for that purpose .
grounding conductors shall be connected to structures using materials specifically listed for grounding .
section num roadway lighting materials num d conductors in luminaire poles .
the contractor shall furnish and install the conductors connectors and fittings in the luminaire poles for supplying power to the luminaries .
the required details of the conductors connectors and fittings are shown on the plans .
num fuses and fuse holders at breakaway luminaire supports .
a fuses fuses for installation within fuse holders for the protection of lighting branch circuits shall be smalldimension cylindrical fuses designed for fast acting current limiting .
the fuses shall be rated for num volts ac and shall have a ul listed interrupting rating of not less than num rms symmetrical amperes at rated voltage .
fuses for luminaires shall be rated at num of the starting or operating current whichever is greater but in no case greater than the branch circuit conductor ampacity .
b fuseholders .
the fuse holder shall be capable of disconnecting upon sufficient tension in the connected wires as in a pole knockdown .
the fuse shall remain enclosed in the deenergized portion of the fuse holder upon disconnection .
the fuse shall not be utilized as the disconnection means a separate plug and receptacle shall be utilized for the disconnection means .
the fuse holder assembly shall connect to the loadside quick disconnect receptacle .
num junction boxes .
a nonmetallic box .
nonmetallic junction boxes shall be made from polymer concrete .
with approval of the engineer slight deviations to a larger size box may be allowed to conform to a standard manufacturers production size .
the cover shall be attached with stainless steel hexhead bolts factory coated with antiseize compound .
a box installed at grade shall be capable of withstanding an anum loading in accordance with the requirements given in astm c num .
the box and lid shall be a light gray color to match the surrounding concrete .
the box shall be constructed with an open bottom .
the cover shall fit flush with the surface shown on the plans .
a box installed in a structure such as concrete barrier rail shall have the exposed face of the box flush with the surface of the structure .
if the size of the box is not shown on the plans the minimum size shall be num inches num mm long by num inches num mm wide by num inches num mm deep .
conduit openings may be factory cut .
b metallic box .
metallic junction boxes shall be aluminum or stainless steel nema type num unless shown otherwise on the plans .
a grounding lug shall be provided for the connection of the equipment grounding conductors .
metallic boxes shall be installed only above ground and shall be suitable for surface mounting .
num service pole .
service poles shall be treated in accordance with the requirements given in section num .
num lighting control center .
a cabinet .
an aluminum identification plate shall be permanently affixed to the outside of the cabinet door .
the identification plate shall be sized to provide the message alabama department of transportation lighting control center either etched or embossed in num inch num mm high letters .
the identification a b c etc .
of the lighting control center shown on the plans shall be placed on the identification plate where is shown in the description of the wording required on the identification plate .
the letters shall be delineated in black enamel .
the control cabinet shall be constructed of num inch num mm thick aluminum unless shown otherwise on the plans and shall be rated nema type numr .
each cabinet shall be provided with a num gauge steel interior panel for mounting of components .
the cabinet shall not be smaller than the minimum dimensions shown on the plans .
the cabinet shall be large enough to adequately house all required components with room for section num roadway lighting materials num arrangement and termination of wiring and room for the inclusion of space for two future lighting circuits .
the cabinet door shall be mounted to the cabinet with a continuous hinge located on either side of the cabinet righthand or lefthand door opening .
the cabinet door shall also have a handleoperated threepoint latching system located on the opposite side of the continuous door hinge .
the door handle shall contain a corbin or an approved equal lock with two keys keys shall match state keying system .
the contractor shall give the keys to the engineer when the project has been completed tested and accepted .
b photocell control .
the photocell shall consist of a metal electrode molecularly bonded to a ceramic wafer and coated with cadmiumsulfide .
the photo cell shall be highly corrosion resistant without plastic dipping .
color response of the cell shall be such that a maximum sensitivity is in the bluegreen portion of the color spectrum .
the photocell shall be of a solid state design .
in addition the photocell shall meet the requirements of ul num .
the onoff switching operations shall be accomplished by a normally closed contact which will be operated by means of an electromagnetic relay .
the response time shall be less than one second time delay for turnon and three to thirty seconds time delay to prevent the turnoff due to lightning flashes .
if the photocell fails the luminaires shall remain on as a notification of needed maintenance .
over voltage protection shall be provided for the control components and the load circuit by the means of an expulsion type surge arrester capable of passing the surge outlined in ansi cnum except follow current is num a .
the base of the unit shall be manufactured on a num inch num mm wide solid thermoset phenolic base .
the bottom of the base shall have an integral locking type brass num prong plug according to nema specification shnum .
the gasket shall be of a crosslinked polyethylene to assure moisture proof seal to the luminaire socket .
the control must be able to operate over the range of numv num hz .
ac num v nominal .
its direct load rating shall be num watts incandescent load and num va mercury vapor high pressure sodium or other h.i.d .
load .
the control shall be stable and reliable over an operating temperature range of num f num c to num f num c. each control furnished shall be calibrated for a turnon setting of num footcandles and the turnoff setting shall not exceed num times the turnon setting .
c surge arrestor .
the surge arrestor shall be weatherproof .
it shall be capable of withstanding a surge current of num amps and a surge voltage of num volts .
d circuit breakers .
all feeders branch circuits and auxiliary and control circuits shall have overcurrent protection .
the overcurrent protection shall be by means of circuit breakers .
circuit breakers shall be standard ullisted molded case thermalmagnetic bolton type with tripfree indicating handles .
circuit breakers shall have a ullisted interrupting rating of not less than num rms symmetrical amperes at rated circuit voltage for which the breaker is applied unless otherwise noted on the drawings .
multipole circuit breakers larger than num ampere size shall have adjustable magnetic trip settings .
the number of branch circuit breakers shall be as indicated on the control cabinet detail drawing or as indicated in the lighting system wiring diagram whichever is greater plus space for num spare circuit breakers .
circuit breakers shall be installed so that they will be in sequential order from left to right top to bottom when the circuit breakers are viewed in the open cabinet .
the sequential order shall be based on the identifying designation shown on the plans for each lighting circuit .
e contactors .
contactors shall be electrically operated mechanically held as specified with the number of poles required for the service and with operating coil voltage as indicated .
ampere rating of contactors shall be not less than required for the duty shown and shall otherwise be rated as indicated .
contactors shall be complete with a nonconducting inorganic nonasbestos subpanel for mounting .
contactors shall be mechanically held and shall be complete with coilclearing contacts to interrupt current through the coil once the contactor is held in position .
the main contactor contacts shall be the double break silver to silver type .
they shall be springloaded and section num roadway lighting materials num provide a wiping action when opening and closing .
the contacts shall be renewable from the front panel selfaligning and protected by auxiliary arcing contacts .
the line and load terminals shall be pressure type terminals of copper construction and of the proper size for the ampere rating of the contactor .
a lever for manual operation shall be incorporated in the contactor .
protection from accidental contact with currentcarrying parts when operating the contactor manually shall be provided .
the contactor operating coil shall operate at num v ac single phase .
the number of lighting contactors shall be as indicated on the control cabinet detail drawing or as indicated in the lighting system wiring diagram whichever is greater plus space for num spare contactors .
all contactors shall be connected to the conductors with the line side on top of the contactor and the load side on bottom .
f ground and neutral buss bars .
separate ground and neutral bus bars shall be provided .
the ground bus bar shall be copper mounted on the equipment panel fitted with num connectors minimum of the type shown on the plans .
the neutral bar shall be similar .
the heads of connector screws shall be painted white for neutral bar connectors and green for ground bar connectors .
g interior power lighting and receptacle .
the cabinet shall have an auxiliary device circuit at num v ac single phase to supply a ground fault interrupting duplex convenience receptacle a fluorescent cabinet light and photocell for the lighting system .
the num v single phase ac power shall be provided by a nema numr rated dry type num voltac stepdown transformer not less than num kva which shall be mounted on the num gauge steel interior panel in the cabinet .
the auxiliary device circuit including transformer primary and secondary shall have overcurrent protection according to nec requirements .
the fluorescent light shall be a num w minimum surface mounted fixture with protected lamp cover and directly connected to a door actuated switch .
the receptacle shall be a num a ground fault interrupting duplex receptacle in a weatherproof box with appropriate cover .
h wiring and identification .
power wiring within the cabinet shall be of the size specified for the corresponding service conductors and branch circuits and shall be rated rhhrhw num voltsac .
control and auxiliary circuit wiring shall be rated rhhrhw or mtw with jacket num voltsac .
all power and control wiring shall be stranded copper .
when the contract drawings do not specifically indicate assigned wire designations the manufacturer shall assign wire designations and indicate them on the shop drawings .
all switches controls and the like shall be identified both as to function and position as applicable by means of engraved numcolor nameplates attached with screws or where nameplates are not possible in the judgment of the engineer by the use of clothbacked adhesive labels as approved by the engineer .
the cabinet with all of its electrical components and parts shall be assembled in a neat orderly fashion .
all of the electrical conductors shall be installed in a trim neat professional manner .
the conductors shall be trained in straight horizontal and vertical directions and be parallel and adjacent to other conductors .
conductors in common paths shall be tied together in a bundle to reduce the number of loose conductors .
i test switch .
the test switch selector switch shall be a standard duty maintained contact control station and shall have double break contacts rated for use on num volt ac .
the switch shall be labeled manual off and auto .
suitable accessories shall be provided for mounting the test switch in the lighting control cabinet .
j schematic diagram .
the contractor shall furnish and install a schematic diagram of the control center wiringfor each lighting control cabinet .
the schematic shall be overlaid with a num mil clear laminate and attached to the inside of the control cabinet door using double stick tape or other approved method .
the maximum size of the schematic diagram shall be num inches by num inches .
num roadway luminaire assembly .
a luminaire .
num .
general .
the bottom outside of each luminaire shall be marked as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer with a permanent marking to provide an identification of the section num roadway lighting materials num wattage of the luminaire .
this designation shall be large enough so that it can easily be seen from the ground after the luminaire is installed .
all luminaires shall have a die cast aluminum housing a weather resistant gray finish coat applied to the housing unless otherwise stated a precision formed aluminum reflector coated to prevent tarnish and corrosion and a pressed borosilicate glass refractor to provide the ies lighting pattern indicated .
all hinges bolts nuts washers screws and miscellaneous hardware shall be stainless steel .
all luminaires shall have labels indicating it is suitable for use in wet locations suitable for num c ambient temperatures and suitable for num c starting .
luminaires other than those shown on the plans may be proposed for use on this project .
these luminaires shall produce the lighting levels and ratios shown on the lighting design criteria table in the plans .
if a table is not shown the levels and ratios shall conform to the aashto requirements given in the booklet an informational guide for roadway lighting .
luminaire light distribution classifications are as described in the aashto lighting design guide publication num .
offset luminaire .
the luminaire shall be an offset type roadway fixture specifically designed for roadway lighting .
support shall be by means of a nominal numinch num mm knuckle fitter or trunion yoke that allows the luminaire to be easily aimed in both a vertical and horizontal direction .
the lamp socket shall be provided with a quick disconnect for removal of the reflectorsocket assembly .
all electrical control components shall be completely removable without tools .
a terminal block shall be provided for connection to the power source .
the luminaire shall be sunlight resistantshall be provided with num v ac rated conductors and shall be provided with seals and gaskets to prevent entry of contaminants .
num .
segmented reflector luminaire .
the general requirements for a luminaire shall be modified as indicated herein for a segmented reflector luminaire only .
the housing shall be square or round heavy gauge aluminum with a vinyl coating or equal means of corrosion protection .
the tempered clear glass lens shall be gasketed and securely fastened .
a gasketed cast aluminum slip fitter shall accept a num inch num mm o.d .
pipe for mounting .
the housing and slip fitter shall be substantially made to withstand the anticipated wind loads .
the entire unit shall be ul listed as suitable for wet locations and sealed sufficiently to prevent the entrance of insects especially into the lens area .
the luminaire optical assembly shall produce an asymmetrical square or rectangular pattern as required by its location .
the pattern shall be field adjustable to provide maximum utilization .
the hps lamp shall mount in a vertical base position and produce a cutoff lighting pattern .
the maximum candlepower at nadir for a num watt hps lamp shall be less than num .
the angle of peak candlepower shall be between num and num degrees in the vertical plane .
the ballast shall be easily removable for maintenance and all wiring shall terminate on a terminal strip .
the luminaire shall be mounted as shown on the plans .
the luminaire shall be designed for a high pressure sodium clear lamp of the wattage specified in the plans .
num .
light emitting diode luminaire .
the housing shall be die cast aluminum with a weather resistant gray finish coat applied to the housing .
the luminaire shall be provided with a hinged door assembly underneath the fixture .
the door shall contain all of the electronic components with quick disconnect connectors .
input supply wires should not need to be bent or rerouted around components to make the electrical terminations .
only copper wire shall be used to connect electronics within the fixture .
no wire nuts shall be used within the luminaire assembly .
the luminaire shall utilize heat sink fins that are integrally cast with the housing to maximize heat transfer and minimize thermal impacts of environmental conditions such as debris clogged fins .
thermal management must be passive with no fans or other mechanical devices .
the luminaire shall have a minimum heat sink surface such that the led manufacturers maximum junction temperature is not exceeded at maximum rated ambient section num roadway lighting materials num temperature .
all exposed hinges bolts nuts washers screws and miscellaneous hardware shall be stainless steel .
all luminaires shall have labels indicating it is suitable for use in wet locations suitable for num c ambient temperatures and suitable for num c starting .
the luminaire shall be designed for lightemitting diodes to be mounted on removable modular boards with quick disconnect connectors and mounted to heat sinks using screws .
thermal grease shall not be used .
each led module shall be fitted with a nonremovable lens or individual lenses may be used on each led die .
no additional lens shall be used for the luminaire .
all leds shall provide the same optical pattern such that catastrophic failures of individual leds will not constitute a loss in the distribution pattern .
the luminaire shall be protected by an integral surge protection device tested in accordance with ansiieee standard cnum for standard and optional waveforms defined in ansiieee cnum location category c high for num kv basic impulse level bil .
both common and differential mode protection shall be provided .
the failure mode of the surge protector shall be to turn the luminaire off .
the protector shall be field replaceable in the event of failure and shall automatically reset after operation with no manual intervention required .
luminaires shall be provided with a numyear manufacturers warranty covering replacement and repair of leds drivers and paint finish .
the warranty shall not be affected by opening the power door and accessing the electrical cavity .
the manufacturer must have tested the luminaire model in a suitable testing program incorporating high heat high humidity thermal shock and vibration testing to ensure reliability and substantiate lifetime claims .
luminaire compliance and performance claims shall be independently certified by an approved u.s. department of energy national voluntary laboratory accreditation program nvlap accredited laboratory in accordance with illuminating engineering society of north america iesna lmnum and lmnum .
the luminaire will have long term lumen maintenance documented according to the most current version of illuminating engineering society of north america iesna tmnum .
b ballast .
the ballast shall be capable of starting and operating one lamp of the indicated size from a numhz source at the proper voltage .
the ballast shall be in full compliance with the lampballast specifications from the lamp manufacturer .
the igniter shall be a protected starter designed to remove the ballast from the circuit three to ten minutes after lamp fails to ignite or the igniter may be a type which directs the voltage spike to the lamp without being circuited through the ballast windings .
a cycling or extinguished lamp shall not adversely affect the igniter or ballast which shall have an expected life exceeding five years in normal use .
the ballast design center shall not vary more than num from rated lamp watts for nominal line voltage and nominal lamp voltage .
the lamp wattage regulation spread at any lamp voltage from nominal through end of rated life shall not exceed num for num line voltage variation .
the ballast must reliably start and operate the lamp in ambient temperatures down to num c for the rated life of the lamp .
the ballast primary current during starting must not exceed normal operating current .
the ballast shall be capable of sustaining lamp operation with a line voltage dip or sag of num for up to num seconds when operating a nominal voltage lamp with nominal line voltage applied to the ballast primary .
the line power factor of the lampballast system shall not drop below num for num line voltage variations at any point in the lamp life .
c light emitting diode driver .
the driver shall be capable of starting and operating the led modules of the indicated size from a numhz num hz source at the designed voltage num .
the driver output shall not vary more than num from rated output watts for nominal line voltage and nominal lamp voltage .
driver shall have a minimum power factor of num and a maximum total harmonic distortion thd of num at full power output .
the operating frequency should be high enough to avoid visible flicker in the light output .
the driver shall be ul certified for use in dry or damp locations .
driver life expectancy shall be num hours at num c and num hours at num c. the driver will not be adversely affected by the cycling or failure of one or more led modules during the life of the driver .
section num roadway lighting materials num the driver must reliably start and operate the lamp in ambient temperatures from num c to num c for the rated life of the lamp .
the driver shall be capable of sustaining led operation with a line voltage dip or sag of num for up to num seconds .
d lamp .
each luminaire shall have a clear high pressure sodium hps lamp of the required wattage installed .
average lamp life shall be num hours .
initial lumen output shall be num watts num lumens num watts num lumens num watts num lumens num watts num lumens num watts num lumens num watts num lumens e light emitting diode .
each led should be rated for a minimum operational life of num hours at num c and comply with iesna lnum standards at num c ambient temperature .
photometry must be in compliance with iesna lmnum when operating at an ambient temperature of num c. the led module shall lose no more than num optical intensity when operating at num c than its initial delivered lumens at num c. all led modules shall be constructed so that the failure of one led will not result in the loss of the entire luminaire and so that modules can be replaced without replacing the entire luminaire .
each led die or the led module should be enclosed in a nonremovable transparent lens of either glass or acrylic .
the led module shall produce a nominal correlated color temperature of numk numk with a color rendering index of at least num and a minimum output of num lumens per watt efficacy .
f roadway luminaire lowering device .
num .
reliability of lowering device .
any lowering device proposed for use shall have been proven reliable through previous acceptable performance .
lowering devices that are unreliable and have excessive maintenance costs in previous installations will not be approved for installation .
upon request by the engineer the contractor shall furnish a list of at least ten installations locations and telephone numbers of persons to contact to verify the performance of the lowering device .
any delays in the progress of construction due to the contractors failure to furnish the requested information concerning the proposed lowering device shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num .
required configuration of lowering device .
the lowering device for a roadway luminaire assembly shall be configured to simultaneously raise or lower two or more luminaires that are attached to a single rigid assembly .
all exterior metal components of the lowering device shall be of corrosive resistant materials including stainless steel aluminum or galvanized steel unless otherwise specified .
other metal parts of the lowering device shall be of the quality recommended by the manufacturer for the proper functioning of the device .
the lowering device shall be capable of being latched at the top of the luminaire assembly to take the load of the luminaires and mounting hardware off of the cables at the final mounting height .
the latching system shall be designed to impart no more than one g of force to any component of the roadway luminaire assembly .
the lowering device shall have a centering mechanism that will reliably keep the orientation of the luminaires in the proper position at all times until final latching is complete .
the raising and lowering shall be accomplished by the use of a portable winch and motor assembly that is connected by cord and plug to the electrical power for luminaires .
the winch shall have a gear reduction assembly to allow a smooth slow raising and lowering operation .
the raising and lowering shall be accomplished by the use of stainless steel aircraft cables .
the number of required cables shall be determined by the lowering device manufacturer .
each cable shall have at least num strands of num wires .
the contractor shall provide one portable winch and motor assembly for state retention .
the safety factor for the winch motor cables raising and lowering assembly and mounting hardware shall have a loading capacity of at least five times the weight that is carried by the cables .
section num roadway lighting materials num e luminaire poles and pole foundations .
the details of the luminaire poles and foundations are shown on the plans .
additional requirements are given in sections num and num. f breakaway supports .
a frangible base that meets the requirements given in nchrp num shall be installed on each luminaire assembly when shown on the plans .
breakaway couplings will be allowed if shown on the plans .
the contractor shall assure the compatibility of the pole base breakaway support and foundation .
num high mast luminaire assembly .
a high mast luminaire .
the lighting distribution requirements for a high mast luminaire shall be the same as those given for a roadway luminaire .
each high mast luminaire shall consist of cast aluminum housing built in ballast and a one piece reflector assembly .
the housing shall contain a slip fitter for a numinch num mm horizontal pipe tenon which allows adjustment for leveling .
all ballast components shall be accessible from the top with the luminaire mounted and aimed .
the ballast shall be prewired to a terminal block using quick disconnect fittings .
the luminaire and ballast shall be from the same manufacturer .
the optical assembly reflector shall be borosilicate glass encased within a spun on sealed aluminum cover or a formed aluminum reflector with a chemically bonded lightweight non breakable num silica glass finish .
the reflector shall be designed to direct light away from the lamp arc tube .
the lamp shall operate in the vertical base up position .
if an enclosed and filtered optical assembly is shown to be required on the plans it shall include a hinged lens ring and a heatimpactresistant flat glass lens held in place by four spring clamps .
the luminaire shall provide the ansiies type distribution as required by the plans and have a minimum efficiency of num of base lamp lumens in the num degree zone .
lamps shall be the same as those required for a roadway luminaire assembly .
the performance requirements for ballast shall be those given for a roadway luminaire assembly .
b light emitting diode high mast luminaire .
the requirements for a light emitting diode high mast luminaire shall be the same as those for a light emitting diode roadway luminaires .
the housing shall contain a slip fitter for a numinch num mm horizontal pipe tenon which allows adjustment for leveling .
all drivers and internal components shall be accessible from the top with the luminaire mounted and aimed .
the driver shall be prewired to a terminal block using quick disconnect fittings .
the luminaire and driver shall be from the same manufacturer .
the requirements for high mast light emitting diodes shall be the same as those required for roadway light emitting diodes .
the requirements for light emitting diode high mast drivers shall be the same as those given for a light emitting diode driver .
c high mast luminaire lowering device .
num .
reliability of lowering device .
any lowering device proposed for use shall have been proven reliable by satisfactorily performing its function .
failure to operate properly or undue maintenance costs history in previous installations shall be grounds for disqualification of a particular product .
upon request a list of up to ten installations locations and telephone numbers of persons to contact to verify this shall be provided .
any delays in the project schedule due to meeting these requirements shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num .
required configuration of lowering device .
each high mast lluminaire assembly shall be furnished with a lowering device suitable for lowering a luminaire mounting ring which will allow the complete luminaire and associated electrical and mechanical apparatus to be serviced from not more than num feet num m above the base plate .
the luminaire mounting ring shall be raised and lowered by multiple stainless steel wire rope cables each of which shall be capable of supporting the entire mounting ring assembly under design wind loading conditions .
the wire rope cables shall be stainless steel with each cable having at least num strands of num wires .
section num traffic signal equipment num the power feed conductors shall beterminated in an aluminum or stainless steel nema num junction box using strain relief conductor clamps .
kellums type grips are not acceptable .
the luminaire ring shall provide a totally enclosed wireway in which to route the conductors to each luminaire mount .
an approved means shall be provided to insure smooth and non damaging travel up and down the pole .
the ring shall be securely positioned in its final location at the top of the pole .
the drive assembly for each high mast luminaire assembly shall consist of a single or twin drum at least num nominal wire rope diameters in size .
it shall have an agma rated winch assembly with sufficient reduction to obtain selflocking when traveling in either direction .
the use of sprockets and chains will not be accepted .
the winch shall be driven by a drill motor or other motor equipped with a torque limiting safety clutch and a remote operator on a minimum num foot num m long cord .
power for the motor shall be obtained through the circuit breaker conductors using an appropriate stepdown transformer with a matching connector .
the drive unit and complete lowering assembly shall be designed for the operator to raise the ring to the point the safety clutch begins to slip without damage to the mounting ring the wire rope cables or the pole top assembly .
the contractor shall provide one electric motor and lowering apparatus for state retention .
minimum thread diameters of the sheaves over which run the lowering cables shall be at least num times the nominal rope diameter.the nominal rope diameter of nylon jacketed wire rope shall be the core or unjacketed rope nominal diameter .
the sheave grooves shall be semicircular in cross section .
the radius of the groove shall be onehalf the nominal diameter of the rope plus num th of an inch num of a mm .
provisions shall be made to prevent the lowering cables from leaving the sheave grooves .
all components and hardware shall be galvanized or stainless steel .
num .
latch device .
all latching devices shall be at the top of the pole .
the pole top latch shall hold the lowering ring securely in position at the top of the pole by means of three symmetrically placed latches located on the head assembly with flags to indicate the locked or unlocked position .
each of the three latches shall latch and unlatch independently of the other two latches .
num .
high mast poles and foundations .
the details of the high mast poles and foundations are shown on the plans .
additional requirements are given in sections num and num .
section num traffic signal equipment num general .
the following are the requirements for traffic signal equipment .
these requirements may be supplemented or amended by the requirements given elsewhere in the proposal on the plans and on the details in the special and standard highway drawings .
requirements specified in these specifications shall comply with the latest editions of the nec and nesc .
all equipment shall conform to the requirements in the nema standards publication no .
ts num traffic control systems or latest revisions and shall conform to the requirements specified within these specifications .
all equipment shall meet the latest nema environmental and operating standards .
in case of conflict with cited standard publications and these specifications the requirements of these specifications shall govern .
for purposes of these specifications wherever the following terms or abbreviations are used the meaning shall be interpreted as follows section num traffic signal equipment num a amps ac alternating current ansi american national standards institute astm american society for testing materials awg american wire gage dc direct current hz hertz imsa international municipal signal association ite institute of transportation engineers led light emitting diode mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufactures association nesc national electrical safety code ul underwriters laboratories v volts va volt amps w watts descriptions and definitions of the equipment words and terminology used in these specifications are given in the mutcd the nema ts num standards publication ite publications and the nec .
num controller assembly .
the controller assembly shall be configured and benchtested prior to installing the controller assembly .
a traffic signal technician from the state signal shop shall inspect the controller assembly prior to turning on the system .
a description .
a controller assembly shall consist of a controller unit conflict monitor auxiliary devices electrical devices and other equipment as specified in these specifications plans or proposal mounted and wired into a cabinet to make a complete operational traffic controller assembly .
b cabinet design .
the cabinet shall be an approved weatherproof enclosure .
it shall be designed for base mount or pole mount as shown on the plans .
the cabinet shall be cleancut in design and appearance .
num .
fabrication material .
the cabinet shall be fabricated from cast aluminum or shaped sheet aluminum .
num .
cabinet dimensions .
the cabinet shall be large enough to provide ample space to house the controller unit conflict monitor auxiliary devices electrical devices and other equipment as specified in these specifications plans or proposal .
the cabinet shall accommodate the largest controller dimensions for the specific number of phases required by the plans or proposal .
the minimum size of pole mounted controller cabinet shall be num inches num mm in height num inches num mm in width and num inches num mm in depth .
the minimum size of base mounted controller cabinet shall be num inches num mm in height num inches num mm in width and num inches num mm in depth .
num .
doors .
when closed the doors shall fit closely to gasketing making the cabinet weatherresistant and dusttight .
door hinges bolts and pins shall be of stainless steel or equivalent corrosion resistant material .
main cabinet door a hinged main cabinet door shall be provided permitting complete access to the interior of the cabinet .
when opened this door shall be provided with a device designed to hold the door in an opened position .
auxiliary cabinet door a small hinged auxiliary door police compartment door shall be provided on the outside of the main cabinet door .
the auxiliary door shall permit access to a switch panel but shall not allow entrance to the controller mechanism nor to exposed electrical terminals .
num .
gasketing .
section num traffic signal equipment num gasketing shall be provided on all door openings and shall be dust tight .
gaskets shall be permanently bonded to the metal .
the mating surface of the gasketing shall be covered with a silicone lubricant to prevent sticking to the mating .
num .
locks and keys .
the main cabinet door shall be equipped with a sturdy brass or stainless steel lock .
the lock shall be a traffic industry conventional lock and operate with a no .
num key .
the lock shall be permanently lubricated and shall be covered with a weatherproof tab .
the small auxiliary door police compartment door shall be equipped with a lock .
the auxiliary door police compartment door shall use a standard skeleton key .
two keys shall be furnished for each lock .
num .
shelves .
the cabinet shall be supplied with two mounting shelves .
one shelf shall be used for storage of the controller and its associated hardware and the other shelf for storage of detectors .
num .
finish surface preparation .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the cabinet shall be aluminum finish .
when painting of the cabinet is specified the cabinet shall be primed and finished with two coats of highgrade enamel paint complying with the requirements of section num .
num .
pole mount hardware .
a cabinet intended for sideofpole mounting shall be provided with an adapter exclusive of lag bolts or banding necessary to permit mounting to a num inch num mm diameter or larger pole .
the adapter shall accommodate lag bolts up to num inch num mm diameter or banding up to num inch num mm wide .
mounting holes shall be provided at or near the top and bottom of the cabinet .
num .
grounding .
ground electrodes at controllers shall be a copper clad rod num feet num m in length and num inch num mm in diameter driven to a depth of num feet num m and bonded by copper wire or strap of the same cross sectional area as no .
num awg num mm wire .
num .
cabinet ventilation .
louvered vents shall be located on the main cabinet door .
vents shall allow the release of excessive heat and any explosive gases that might enter the cabinet .
a cabinet vent air filter minimum size of num inches x num inches num mm x num mm shall be mounted on door and held in place by a spring .
a thermostatically controlled power vent and fan shall be provided .
the thermostat shall activate the fan at num f num c and deactivate the fan at num f num c with an accuracy of num f num c. num .
serial number .
a serial number shall be engraved or stenciled on the cabinet .
the serial number shall be the same number as the controller unit serial number .
num .
data label .
a data label shall be placed on the inside of the cabinet door to provide the following information manufacturers name all equipment installed cabinet date of manufacture wiring schematics number controller model number controller serial number conflict monitor model number conflict monitor serial number time base coordinator model number if applicable time base coordinator serial number if applicable communication unit model number if applicable communication unit serial number if applicable master model number if applicable master serial number if applicable section num traffic signal equipment num time clocks model number if applicable time clocks serial number if applicable project number or transportation department p.o .
number .
c auxiliary devices .
num .
general .
auxiliary devices shall conform to the requirements of nema standard publication no .
ts num traffic controller assemblies .
num .
solid state flashers .
the flasher shall be jack mounted .
num .
flash transfer relay .
the flash transfer relay shall be a heavyduty relay designed for continuous duty .
it shall mount on an eight pin spade plug base .
num .
solid state load switch .
the signal load switches and signal load base plate shall be furnished and wired in place for each phase provided .
load switches shall be triple signal nema input light indicating rated for num a at num f num c. the actual switching component shall have a minimum num v piv rating .
num .
detector test swithces .
when specified detector test switches shall be furnished to check all detector control circuits .
num .
mercury contactor .
a mercury contactor input power relay shall be a num a relay for num phase and num phase controllers and a num a relay for num phase controllers .
d terminals and facilities .
num .
general .
the following define the performance and construction requirements of cabinet terminals and facilities that are considered to be of the attached or nonplugin type .
these additional specifications cover the physical requirements electrical requirements interface cabling supporting terminal facilities and labeling .
num .
openings .
the cabinet shall be provided with necessary openings for mounting and connection as specified .
num .
arrangement of devices .
the controller equipment and terminal blocks shall be so arranged within the cabinet that they will not upset the entrance training and connection of the incoming conductors .
num .
terminal and panel wiring .
no printed circuit boards will be allowed in the cabinet wiring facility every panel and terminal shall be hardwired .
each controller assembly is to be furnished with panels in the cabinet mounted in such a way as to provide visibility and accessibility .
all panel wiring shall be neat firm and hardwired .
num.terminal panel .
as a minimum the panel shall be provided with the following terminal blocks terminal block to provide connections for the circuit breaker and power supply line .
terminal block unfused for neutral side of power supply line .
terminal blocks for conductors of signal control cable .
one terminal for each signal circuit and one or more terminals for the common conductor shall be provided .
the terminal blocks shall be located at least num inches num mm from the bottom of the base mount cabinet and arranged for adequate electrical clearance between terminal blocks .
num .
power terminal strip .
terminal strip shall be supplied for incoming power .
section num traffic signal equipment num num .
insert terminals .
all components connectors plug terminals and insert terminals shall be clearly annotated .
num .
terminal strip shielding .
if terminal points are located adjacent to a shelf so that possible shorting can be accomplished by shifting of components the terminal strips shall be shielded .
num .
terminal points and terminal strips .
all terminal points and terminal strips shall be the double tie type and shall be clearly annotated .
there shall be no more than two connections made on any terminal point .
connections shall be made by using ring tongue terminal connections stamped from one piece of pure copper .
the barrel will be formed with a brazed butted seam and shall be preinsulated with an appropriate sleeve .
the terminal connections shall be required to be the correct size for the wire and terminal strip bolts .
terminal connections used on solid wire shall be soldered .
num .
wiring .
wiring with controller cabinet shall be neatly laced and identified .
all wires shall be cut to a proper length before assembly .
no wire shall be doubled back to take up slack .
the outgoing traffic control signal circuits shall be of the same polarity as the line side of the power supply the common return of the signal circuits shall be of the same polarity as the grounded side of the power supply .
all wiring to ac shall be colored black .
all wiring to ac shall be colored white .
all wiring to chassis ground shall be colored green .
num .
cables .
all cables shall be selfcontained and have continuous jackets from terminal facility into connector .
the jacket shall be solid flexible sleeving or expandable selffitting polyester sleeving .
spiral wrap type sleeving will not be accepted .
the position of cables between the components must be such that when the door is closed it does not press against the cables or force the cables against various components inside the cabinet .
all cables shall be selfcontained and shall not be split to feed more than one connector .
num .
detector panel .
a separate panel shall be furnished for detector wiring with all nema functions available and wired to the terminal strips .
the panel shall also include an earth ground buss with terminal points parallel and adjacent to the loop connection terminals for lightning protection .
a twelveposition double tie blank terminal strip shall be mounted on detector panel for future use .
num .
switch panels .
an internal switch panel shall be mounted on the inside of the main door .
all switch functions shall be permanently and clearly labeled .
num .
grounding .
all logic ground ac neutral and chassis ground within the equipment and cabinet shall be isolated split with separate ground buses being required for ac neutral and earth ground .
all lightning protection shall be grounded to the chassis ground .
lightning protection shall be installed before the power service to the cabinet is turned on .
all neutral conductors shall be grounded at the controller and at each terminal point .
num .
line filters .
line filters shall be furnished to protect the controller from line voltage surges .
line filters for two phase controllers shall be rated at num a and four phase controllers shall be rated at num a through eight phase shall be rated at num a .
num .
radio interference suppression .
section num traffic signal equipment num each cabinet shall be equipped with a radio interference suppressor installed .
the suppressor shall be connected to filter interference completely from the controller and associated equipment .
num .
convenience receptacle .
a convenience outlet shall be provided as part of the terminals and facilities .
the convenience receptacle shall be a duplex three prong nema type num numr grounding type outlet and shall have independent ground fault circuit protection .
num .
light fixture .
each cabinet shall be provided with a florescent lighting fixture mounted on the inside top of the cabinet near the front edge .
the fixture shall be provided with an fnumtnum cool white lamp operated from a normal power factor ul or etl listed ballast .
num .
door actuated light switch .
a cabinet door actuated switch that turns the light off when the door is closed shall be provided .
num .
police panel switches .
the police door switch panel shall contain only two switches a power onoff switch and a flash onoff switch .
the power onoff switch shall be a signal head off switch and not an ac power off switch for the cabinet .
this switch shall not interrupt the controller power nor interrupt the controller cycling .
the flash onoff switch shall apply a flash mode to the flasher relay and shall neither interrupt the controller power nor interrupt the controller cycling .
there shall be no remote plugin contained within the police panel area .
num .
maintenance panel switches .
these switches shall be mounted on the inside of the main door on the back side of the auxiliary compartment police compartment .
all switch functions shall be permanently and clearly labeled .
the switches shall be of a rocker type and protected to prevent accidental switching .
the following switches shall be provided stoptime autoflash nema tsnum section num signal onoff heads only .
the stoptime switch shall be connected to a three position switch that is labeled as followed the top position shall be labeled as stoptime which shall set the stoptime bit to the controller stopping the controller cycle holding it in its current state the middle position shall be labeled as disabled which disables the stoptime bit in the monitor the bottom position shall be labeled as run which enables the stoptime bit in the monitor .
the autoflash switch be installed and labeled in accordance with the specifications contained in nema tsnum section num .
the signal onoff switch shall be a two position switch the kills the power to the signal heads making the intersection dark .
this switch shall not interrupt the controller power nor shall it interrupt the controller cycling .
num .
main circuit breakers .
a circuit breaker shall be furnished .
circuit breakers shall be rated at num a for two phase controllers shall be rated at num a for three and four phase controllers and shall be rated at num a for five through eight phase controllers .
the main circuit breaker shall turn off all power to the cabinet and shall not be used for the power switch which is located in the service panel .
num .
controller cabinet power supply .
unless otherwise specified the controller unit and associated equipment shall operate reliably on num v num hz single phase alternating current .
any internal dc voltages required to satisfactorily operate a controller assembly shall be from a regulated power supply designed to generate all dc voltages required constructed as an integral part of the controller assembly .
the grounded side of the power supply shall be carried throughout the controller in a continuous circuit .
num .
timer connections .
the electrical connections from the timer to the outgoing and incoming circuits shall be made in such a manner that the timer may be replaced with a similar unit without the section num traffic signal equipment num necessity of disconnecting and reconnecting the individual wires leading there from .
this can be accomplished by means of a multiple plug and jack a springconnected mounting or equivalent arrangement .
num .
signal load switch arrestor .
the load switch output shall have a metaloxide varistor type vnumlanuma .
num .
replacing lightning protection .
all lightning protection devices shall be replaceable without removing any panels .
num .
indicator lights .
controllers having indicator lights with a design or in circuit life of less than num hours shall have a microswitch located on the cabinet door that will extinguish the indicators when the door is closed .
num .
nema indication wiring .
all nema functions plus nema coded status bits and voltage monitor outputs as listed in the nema standards publication no .
ts num .
outputs shall be brought out and wired to an individual tie point of a terminal strip before further routing .
num .
preemption priority control .
when preemption is required by the plans or proposal electrical devices logic circuits and special wiring shall be provided which will assume control over local traffic control equipment to require display of special safety modes giving preferential rightofway to emergency vehicles or protection at railroad crossings .
e conflict monitor .
num .
type .
conflict monitor shall be a nema type numl and conform to the requirements of nema standards publication no .
ts num section num conflict monitor specifications or any subsequent publication plus the following features num .
monitor removal .
the intersection shall remain in flash operation when the monitor has been removed .
num .
blown fuse monitor .
the intersection shall go to flashing operation when the monitor fuse blows .
num .
power supply malfunction .
the intersection shall go to flashing operation when the controller power supply malfunctions .
num .
controller power with tripped conflict monitor .
the conflict monitor shall not interrupt controller power when tripped .
num .
stop timing with tripped conflict monitor .
the conflict monitor shall apply stop timing on the controller when tripped .
num .
indication of drive failure .
the conflict monitor shall indicate which drive failure has occurred red fail .
num .
display and printing .
the unit shall have a lcd display it must also have a printer port rsnum and be capable of printing all memorystored failures with the type failure and date .
num clock .
the unit shall have a real time clock .
num .
event log .
the unit shall have an event log that contains the following data ac power interruptionrestoration logging logs reset after failure log num v values log cvm failure load switch failure log all faults with time and date .
num .
extended monitoring .
the unit shall have the following extended monitoring section num traffic signal equipment num dual indication monitoring per channel short vehicle clearance detection .
num .
display of intersection status .
the unit shall be capable of displaying intersection status .
num .
readback .
the unit shall have program card readback .
num .
termination of unused inputs .
all unused inputs will be brought out and terminated on a terminal strip .
num .
monitor input wiring .
monitor inputs shall be wired to field output terminals .
f wiring diagram .
three copies of cabinet wiring diagram shall be supplied as well as copies of the following three each of controller circuit diagrams and schematics controller operations manual conflict monitor diagrams and schematics .
two each of flasher diagrams and schematics load relay diagrams and schematics diagrams and schematics of any external hardware supplied template of base mounting if base mounted .
cabinet prints shall include flash color change instructions for all phases and all overlaps .
cabinet prints shall be keyed to show every input and every output from every terminal .
if prints use multiple ground and neutral busses busses shall be numbered .
all grounds and neutrals shall be keyed to the busses that they are connected to .
cabinet prints shall show every connector .
g controller unit .
num .
type .
the phase requirements required on the plans will indicate the physical and electrical construction of the controllers however controller unit shall conform to nema requirements .
controller units shall be classified in the following categories type ii solid state pretimed type iii traffic actuated solid state modular nema for type iii controller units controller indicators as outlined in nema standards publication no .
ts num section num shall contain information which shall be displayed simultaneously for both rings in a dual ring controller .
unless otherwise described in these specifications or required by the plans or the proposal the following requirements are applicable to all controller units .
num .
control logic .
unless otherwise required by the plans or proposal all control functions shall be performed by microprocessor logic num .
overlaps .
all overlaps shall be internally generated available and programmable .
num .
interconnection and coordination .
the controller shall be capable of being interconnected and coordinated in accordance with requirements of the plans or proposal .
any phase shall be capable of being coordinated .
num .
operational requirements .
phase skip the controller shall provide the ability to automatically skip any phase when there is an absence of demand .
signal operation plan the signal operating plan in the plans will determine the number of phases required and the necessary phase sequence requirements of the controller in accordance with nema standards .
section num traffic signal equipment num changing operation changes from flashing to stopandgo operation shall be made at the beginning of the major street green interval preferably at the beginning of the common major street green interval i.e .
when a green indication is shown in both directions on the major street .
programmed changes from stopandgo to flashing operation shall be made at the end of the common major street red interval i.e .
when a red indication is shown in both directions on the major street .
programmable flashing operations flashing operations shall be programmable by terminal strip jumpers for all phases and all overlaps .
type iii controller unit type iii traffic actuated solid state controller unit shall feature one or more of the following timing features as required by the plans or proposal .
standard timing density timing vehicle occupancy timing pedestrian timing preemption .
timing for phase modules shall be furnished in accordance with the plans and shall be accomplished by using the digital timing concept .
all phase timing modules shall be provided with dual maximum timing capabilities .
num .
time base coordination .
electrical devices logic circuits and special wiring shall be provided which will provide direct supervision of a local controller when time base coordination is shown on the plans .
the time based coordinator shall be a solid state digitally timed microprocessor device .
the unit shall contain a sealed battery capable of maintaining sufficient power to the ram to protect intact any operator programmed data for a period of at least sixty days without ac input to the controller unit .
the battery shall be maintained in a fully charged state through a trickle charge during normal operation .
an led shall be provided to indicate when the voltage of the battery is over or under tolerance levels .
there shall be means for automatic change for daylight savings time .
local coordination shall be accomplished by utilizing a time base coordinator capable of operating as a a yearly programmer with time of day day of week week of year programming b sync pulse generator with time of day day of week week of year programming c coordinator with time of day day of week week of year programming .
the unit shall be capable of the following coordination features four cycle lengths four split plans three offsets per cycle minimum of three permissive periods per split a minimum of four forceoffs per split .
num master controller assembly and secondary controller assembly .
a master cabinet and secondary cabinet .
the following additional requirements shall apply to the cabinet for a master controller assembly and a secondary controller assembly .
the master and secondary controller cabinet shall house a hardwire master interconnect panel to provide for seven wire interconnect num v to be complete with three nema load switches and complete with num v relays .
the required functions provided shall consist of three dials three offsets and flash outputs and inputs .
panels shall have all components mounted on num inch num mm sheet aluminum .
the panel shall be completely wired inplace to include all necessary harness and shall be wired to conform to the requirements of the mutcd for system flash .
terminal block facilities shall be provided for the interconnection .
b master controller unit .
num .
general .
the master controller for an interconnected traffic control signal system shall be the apparatus required to provide supervisory functions under normal operation as described for interconnected controllers .
num .
motor .
the master controller shall be driven by a synchronous motor or be provided with a synchronous control mechanism which will maintain a constant time cycle however when it section num traffic signal equipment num is not necessary to keep a traffic control signal system in step with adjacent systems or adjacent noninterconnected controllers an induction motor driven master controller may be specified .
num .
supervisory functions .
means for automatically establishing offset time relations of local controllers .
hand operated switch for turning off completely all traffic control signal lights at interconnected local controllers .
hand operated switch for transfer of traffic control signal lights at each local controller to give flashing indications .
hand operated switch for selecting offset at which all interconnected local controllers shall operate in accordance with three distinct timing plans .
hand operated switch for selecting two or three interval setups on which each of the interconnected local controllers shall operate .
the above requirements of shall be obtainable when specified by means of an automatic time switch in which case the automatic switching schedule shall be required .
num .
time cycle .
the variation of the time cycle settings of all interconnected local controllers shall be accomplished by a simple adjustment at the master controller .
there shall be at all times an accurate visual indication of the time cycle at which the traffic control signal system is operating .
it shall be possible to accurately set or adjust the time cycle between the limits of num and num seconds with accurate and definite settings within this range in num second steps up to num seconds and num seconds steps above num seconds .
num surge protection for controller assembly .
a protection of controller assembly cabinet .
all controller assembly cabinets shall be furnished with a surge protector on the ac service input which meets or exceeds the following performance requirements .
unit shall be capable of withstanding repeated num a surges a minimum of num times .
unit shall have internal followcurrent limiters resistive elements .
unit shall contain a minimum of three active clamping stages .
unit shall selfextinguish within num milliseconds after the trailing edge of surge .
parallel impedance of limiters shall be less than num ohms .
unit voltage shall be to the circuit breaker before cabinet voltage filters .
electrical connections on the unit shall be durable enough to accommodate a no .
num awg num mm wire .
the unit shall have a mounting plate for easy removal and replacement and shall be mounted in a neat workmanlike manner in the controller cabinet with as short a run as possible from the power input to the circuit breaker .
b protection of signal load switches .
each load switch shall be furnished with a gas tube or metaloxide varistor type numlanuma .
unit shall have an impulse breakdown of less than num v in less than num microsecond at num kv per microsecond .
unit shall be capable of withstanding num a ac for num second applied num times at num minute intervals on either section .
unit shall have a current rating of num a numimpulse one time .
unit shall have a striking voltage of num to num v dc .
unit shall have a minimum holdover of num v dc .
unit shall be installed across the triac of each section of the load switch .
the center electrode of the gas tube surge protector shall be connected to pin number num of the load switch plug .
the load switch receptacle pin number num shall be wired to a minimum no .
num num mm wire ground buss .
the ground buss shall be connected to the chassis ground and a ground rod .
connection terminal shall be provided a minimum distance possible from the physical center of the ground buss .
section num traffic signal equipment num c protection of controller unit and conflict monitor .
power and neutral for controller and conflict monitor shall be wired through a highspeed approved suppressor .
the output of the arrestor to failsafe controller etc .
shall be through shielded cable or twisted pair to the units ac plus and ac minus inputs .
the surge protection device shall meet or exceed the following performance requirements .
protectors after being subjected to twenty five num ka num x num s pulses must remain operative and exhibit less than num percent plus or minus change in clamp voltage before and after the test .
the protector clamp shall never exceed num v when subjected to the num ka surge .
the peak current shall be num a .
the continuous service current shall be num a maximum num v ac num hz .
filtering specifications milstdnum insertion loss test data insertion loss requirements frequency insertion loss db num hz num num khz num num khz num num khz num num khz num num mhz num num mhz num num mhz num num mhz num d protection of remote detector and interconnect cable .
each remote detector input line and interconnect line as it enters the cabinet shall be furnished with a surge protection device that meets or exceeds the following requirements .
unit shall be capable of withstanding num a num microsecond standard waveform surges a minimum of num times .
unit shall have internal followcurrent limiters resistive elements .
unit shall selfextinguish within num milliseconds after the trailing edge of surge .
unit shall not have thermal circuit breakers in place of limiters .
limiter resistance shall be between num and num .
unit shall have a mounting plate for easy removal and replacement and shall be mounted in the controller cabinet in a neat workmanlike manner .
e protection of loop detectors external surge protection .
external surge protection for each detector must meet the following requirements .
unit shall be a three terminal device capable of protecting the detector against differential between the loop leads surge and against common mode between leads and ground surges .
unit shall be of the inductive type with a maximum dc resistance of num m. unit inductance shall be able to protect the detector electronics when the detector is subjected to a num a surge across the detector leads .
unit shall be a two stage device .
unit shall clamp a num a surge to num v within num nanoseconds .
surge shall be applied between the two detector leads .
unit shall clamp a num a common mode between leads and ground surge to num v. these do not include protector lead ir drop .
unit shall withstand repeated surges .
unit and loop terminals to be physically mounted approximately num inches num mm from bottom of cabinet .
num vehicular loop detector .
a general .
vehicular detectors shall be capable of providing reliable detection of all vehicles present when the inductance shift of the loop is num percent of the total inductance of the loop and lead section num traffic signal equipment num in when operating in the high sensitivity mode of the detector .
sensitivity of the detector shall remain constant over the operating temperature of num f to num f num c to num c. vehicular detector operation shall not be affected by changes in the inductance of the loop resulting from environmental changes encountered in the state nor shall the sensitivity be markedly affected .
vehicular detector shall have a selfcontained power supply capable of furnishing all necessary power operate from a num v num hz source .
vehicular detector shall have a builtin lightning protection device and shall have a builtin failsafe relay to require a detector call to the controller upon failure of the detector .
vehicular detector shall have the ability of being connected to multiple loops of various sizes and shall detect vehicles of various sizes with the capability of continuously registering the presence of a conventional passenger car on a num foot x num foot num m x num m twoturn loop for a minimum time of ten minutes when in the presence mode .
vehicular detector shall operate on loops of various sizes located up to num feet num m from the loop .
vehicular detector circuit boards and power supply shall consist of printed circuit design on a gnum grade or equivalent fiberglass epoxy with num ounces num g copper track and coated with protective finish to minimize oxidation .
vehicular detector boards and power supply shall consist of flow or wave soldered copper connections including fixed components .
vehicular detector shall operate on an electronic tuned resonant circuit composed of lumped capacity and inductance provided by the loop embedded in the roadway .
the detector shall provide detection by phase comparison means with accuracy of better than num percent of all vehicles passing over the loop at speeds of num mile per hour to num miles per hour num kmhr through num kmhr .
the voltage across the loop combination reflecting any change shall be used as a signal for relay operation .
tuning capacitors shall be ceramic enclosed and epoxy filled .
vehicular detector shall have the capability to function when loops are shorted or leaking to ground at one point .
detection indication shall be provided in the form of indicator lamps on the face of the unit .
b single channel vehicular loop detector .
single channel vehicular loop detectors shall conform to the following additional requirements .
the loop detector shall be a digital solid state unit with the capability of automatic tracking of environmental changes after automatic or manual initial tuning .
the unit shall have pulse and presence modes all which are activated by wire loops embedded in the roadway .
loop influence shall be adjustable so as not to extend beyond the sawcut more than num inches num mm .
the loop detector shall have a minimum of two sensitivity modes two presence modes and two operating frequencies that will enable the detector to accommodate the usual configuration of loops and leadins .
total power consumption shall not exceed num w. the loop detector shall have a tuning inductance range of at least num to num hz .
a type msnumanump with ten male contacts shall be provided .
the pin functions of the connector shall be assigned as follows pin no .
use a num v ac connection b relay output common c num v ac line d input from loop e input from loop f relay output normally open g relay output normally closed h num v ac ground i not used j not used section num traffic signal equipment num c two channel vehicular loop detector .
two channel loop vehicular detectors shall conform to the following additional requirements .
the loop detector shall be a digital solid state unit with capability of automatic tracking of environmental changes after automatic initial tuning .
the two channel unit shall have pulse and presence modes for each channel which are activated by wire loops embedded in the roadway .
loop influence shall be adjustable so as not to extend beyond the sawcut more than num inches num mm .
the loop detector shall have a minimum of two sensitivity modes two presence modes and two operating frequencies for each channel which will enable the detector to accommodate the usual configuration of loops and leadins .
crosstalk between channels within the detector shall be eliminated by sequential scanning of loops .
each channel shall be capable of tuning to any effective loop inductance within the range of num to num hz .
total power consumption shall not exceed num w. two type msnumanump connectors with ten male contacts shall be provided .
the pin functions of each connector shall be assigned as follows pin no .
use a num v ac connection b relay output common c num v ac line d input from loop e input from loop f relay output normally open g relay output normally closed h num v ac ground i not used j not used d four channel vehicular loop detector .
four channel loop vehicular detectors shall conform to the following additional requirements .
the loop detector shall be a digital solid state unit with capability of automatic tracking of environmental changes after automatic initial tuning .
the four channels shall have pulse and presence modes for each channel which are activated by wire loops embedded in the roadway .
loop influence shall be adjustable so as not to extend beyond the sawcut more than num inches num mm .
the loop detector shall have a minimum of two sensitivity modes two presence modes and two operating frequencies for each channel which will enable the detector to accommodate the usual configuration of loops and leadins .
crosstalk between channels within the detector shall be eliminated by sequential scanning of loops .
each channel shall be capable of tuning to any effective loop inductance within the range of num to num hz .
total power consumption shall not exceed num w. a type msnumanump connector with nineteen male contacts shall be provided .
num interconnect cable .
a description .
interconnect cable shall be used to transmit information between intersections or other control points in a traffic control system .
b materials .
interconnect cable shall conform to the requirements of this specification unless otherwise specified on the plans or in the proposal .
if in such case that the plans designate fiber optic cable material be used for the interconnect cable then section num shall apply .
section num traffic signal equipment num c underground interconnect cable .
underground interconnect cable for closed loop systems shall be shielded and conform to the requirements of rural electrification administration r.e.a .
specification pe num filled telephone cable no .
num awg num pair .
underground interconnect cable for time base coordination shall conform to the requirements of imsa num no .
num awg num conductors .
d aerial interconnect cable .
selfsupporting aerial interconnect cable for closed loop systems shall be shielded and conform to the requirements of rural electrification administration r.e.a .
specification pe num no .
num awg num pair .
standard aerial interconnect cable for closed loop systems attached to a messenger strand in the field shall conform to the requirements of rural electrification administration r.e.a .
specification pe num no .
num awg num pair .
selfsupporting aerial interconnect cable for time base coordination shall conform to the requirements of imsa num no .
num awg num conductors .
standard aerial interconnect cable for time base coordination attached to a messenger strand in the field shall conform to the requirements of imsa num no .
num awg num conductors .
e interconnect cable support wire .
a support cable whether separate or integral to aerial interconnect cable having a minimum diameter of num inch num mm shall be provided for interconnect cable that is not self supporting .
support cable shall be steel wire strand class a double galvanized and conform to the requirements of astm standards publication no .
a num standard specifications for zinccoated wire strand .
f cable attachment hardware .
attachment hardware shall be stainless steel or noncorrosive material and shall be provided with tensile strength adequate for application .
num electrical power service assembly .
a description .
electrical power service assembly shall consist of equipment to provide a pole attached raceway and disconnect switch for use with power cable routed from the service entrance to the controller cabinet and nearest supporting structure with luminaire .
the electrical power service assembly shall include a weatherhead conduit and fittings a disconnect switch with enclosure and attachment clamps .
electrical power service shall be in accordance with these specifications nec requirements local utility codes and on the details shown in the special and standard highway drawings .
b materials .
materials shall be tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory and shall meet the following requirements .
num.service pole wood pole .
service pole shall be southern yellow pine treated in accordance with the latest american woodpreservers association awpa standards and shall conform with the requirements given in section num .
unless otherwise noted on the plans service pole used for service lateral drop shall be a num foot class num wood pole and shall conform to the requirements of ansi standards publication no .
num american national standards for wood poles specifications and dimensions .
the poles shall not have more than num degrees of twist in grain over the full length and the sweep shall be no more than num inches num mm .
num .
attachment hardware .
attachment hardware shall meet the requirements as shown on the details in the special and standard highway drawings .
num .
conduit .
conduit shall conform to the requirements specified in this section .
num .
weatherhead .
section num traffic signal equipment num weatherhead shall be made of a copperfree aluminum alloy or galvanized ferrous material .
num .
electrical cable .
phase or current carrying conductors shall be of the type rhh rhw use or xhhw .
conductors shall be stranded annealed copper with not less than num percent conductivity and shall be insulated for num v or more with rubber insulation and a neoprene jacket or with crosslinked polyethylene insulation .
the size of the conductor voltage rating and type of insulation shall be clearly marked on the conductor in a color that contrasts with the color of the insulation .
service wire to supply the controller shall be no .
num awg stranded copper two conductors rated for dry and wet conditions .
the equipment grounding conductor shall be a bare conductor or shall be identified by a continuous green insulation .
grounded conductors neutrals shall be identified by a continuous white color insulation .
service wire to supply the traffic signal luminaries shall be no .
num awg stranded copper three conductors rated for dry and wet conditions .
the equipment and pole grounding conductor shall be a bare conductor or shall be identified by a continuous green insulation .
grounded conductors neutrals shall be identified by a continuous white color insulation .
num .
meter base .
when a meter base is required meter base shall be a meter base approved by the local electric power company .
num .
service disconnect .
enclosure cabinet the cabinet shall conform to nema standards made of galvanized steel aluminum stainless steel or other material approved by the engineer .
the enclosure shall have a hinged door with a padlock .
padlock no .
num keyed for a no .
num key shall be provided .
one key shall be hung within the controller cabinet .
circuit breaker a manually resettable circuit breaker shall be installed which has a current rating of the circuit to which electrical power is provided .
transient protective device a surge lightning arrestor rated for a maximum permissible line to ground voltage of num v ac shall be installed meeting the requirements of nema standards for surge arrestors .
num .
photoelectric control units .
the photoelectric control shall meet the design and testing requirements of ansi cnum .
the photoelectric control unit shall also be a dusktodawn sensor attached to the service pole have relay contacts that are singlepole singlethrow spst normally closed nc contain builtin surge and lightning protection have a direct load rating of num watts incandescent load and num volt amperes for high pressure sodium have a rated life at full load of at least num onoff operations .
upon failure leave the luminaires turned on as a notification of needed maintenance be able to operate over the range of numv num hz .
ac num v nominal have over voltage protection for the control components and the load circuit by the means of an expulsion type surge arrester capable of passing the surge outlined in ansi cnum be calibrated for a turnon setting of num footcandles and a turnoff setting not exceeding num times the turnon setting have a control housing that is uv resistant .
the photoelectric control shall have a cadiumsulfide light sensitive element .
the base shall have an integral locking type brass num prong plug according to nema shnum and a neoprene gasket that meets ieeenema publications .
photoelectric control units shall be installed facing north however if obstructions are such that this is not possible then they shall be installed facing south .
section num traffic signal equipment num num span wire assembly .
a description .
messenger cable shall be attached to supporting structures to support traffic signal heads signs and electrical cables .
b materials .
num .
steel wire strand .
steel wire strand shall be class a double galvanized and shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
num .
messenger cable .
messenger cable used to support signal heads shall be num inch num mm nominal diameter num wires twisted into a single strand .
messenger cable shall be extra highstrength grade with a minimum breaking strength of num pounds num kn .
num .
tether cable .
tether cable attached to the bottom of signal heads shall be num inch num mm nominal diameter num wires twisted into a single strand .
tether cable shall be utilities grade with a minimum breaking strength of num pounds num kn .
num vehicular signal heads .
a ite standard publications .
all signal heads shall conform to the requirements given in the ite standards publications adjustable face vehicular traffic control signal heads and vehicle traffic control heads and the following assembled in accordance with the latest edition of the mutcd .
b separate illumination .
each lens of a signal head shall be illuminated by a separate optical unit .
c housing door and visor .
num .
housing .
the housing shall be constructed of cast corrosionresistant copper free nonferrous metal of not less than num psi num mpa with all parts clean smooth and free from flaws cracks blow holes and other imperfections .
the housing shall be of unitized sectional construction of as many sections as are optical levels rigidly and securely fastened together into one watertight assembly .
each housing shall be arranged with round openings in the top and bottom so as to be capable of being rotated about a vertical line between the waterproof supporting brackets or trunnions and of being securely fastened at increments of not more than num inches num mm of rotation .
num .
door .
the door shall also be cast units from similar material to that used for the main section housing suitably hinged and shall be forced tightly against the gasket on the body of the housing by simple stainless steel locking devices .
all other exterior hardware such as hinge pins lens clips etc .
shall be of stainless steel .
neoprene gaskets shall be provided between the body of the housing and the doors between the lenses and the doors and between the lenses and reflectors to exclude dust and moisture .
the lens opening in the doors shall provide a visible diameter of not less than num inches num mm nor more than num inches num mm for a nominal num inch num mm round lens .
the dimensions of the opening in doors for rectangular lenses shall provide for a visible area of not less than num inches x num inches num mm x num mm nor more than num inches x num inches num mm x num mm for a nominal num inch num mm rectangular lens and a visible area of not less than num inches x num inches num mm x num mm nor more than num inches x num inches num mm x num mm for a nominal num inch num mm rectangular lens .
num .
visor .
section num traffic signal equipment num each signal head shall have a tunnel visor for each signal indication .
the door shall have an integrally cast collar not less than num of an inch num mm around the lens opening and the visor shall be designed to fit tightly against the collar and door and shall not permit any perceptible filtration of light between the door and the visor .
the percentage enclosure of the lens shall be as specified by the purchaser .
the visor shall be a minimum of num inches num mm in length for num inches num mm diameter lenses and not less than num inches num mm in thickness with a minimum downward tilt of num degrees .
the visor shall be of corrosionresistant nonferrous material .
visors shall be mounted with twiston slots and stainless steel screws positioned for either vertical or horizontal mounting of the signal .
d trunnions brackets and suspensions .
all trunnions brackets and suspensions used for assembling and mounting vehicle traffic control signal faces shall be entirely weathertight .
wire entrance fittings for signal heads and span wire hangers shall be cast aluminum tristud with aluminum span wire hinge with stainless steel nuts bolts and washers .
wire raceway areas within brackets trunnions and suspensions shall be of adequate size to carry all necessary wires without crowding and raceway surfaces shall be free of sharp edges or protrusions that might damage insulation on wires .
suspensions for mast arm or span wire mounting shall include a device to permit adjustment for proper vertical alignment of the signal head .
e exterior finish .
all exterior parts of the signal head except the lens the insides of visors and the entire surface of louvers or fins shall be finished of the best quality of synthetic resin enamel that is colored black or federal highway yellow .
a combination color scheme may be used in lieu of either an all black or an all federal highway yellow .
a combination color scheme may consist of an all black face with an all federal highway yellow body .
no other combination color schemes or the mixing of allowed color schemes shall be used within an intersection or project unless noted otherwise on the plans .
the inside of the visors and the entire surface of louvers or fins shall be painted dull black using best quality synthetic resin enamel .
all enamel shall conform to the appropriate requirements of section num. f back plates .
backplates shall be installed if shown on the plans .
backplates shall have a num inch num mm border constructed of black metal .
g backing for arrow lenses .
the arrow shall be the only illuminated portion of the lens .
the arrow lenses shall be covered except for the arrow with dull or dark gray enamel of a thickness sufficient to totally hide the light from a num watt lamp placed behind it .
the enamel shall be baked or fired into the glass .
the enamel shall be hard and durable and shall not peel or flake when subjected to the heat of a signal lamp when the lens is either in use or when the lens is washed .
h signal head cover .
signal head covers shall be opaque black and cover the signal head .
the cover shall be weather and ultra violet resistant .
a garden or trash bag shall not be an acceptable cover .
the cover shall be so designed so that it will not collecthold water in the bottom of the cover .
the contractor shall submit the proposed cover and method of attaching the cover over the signal head to the engineer for approval .
i programmed vehicular signal head .
programmed vehicular signal heads shall provide an optical system of such design that will permit the required visibility zone of the indication to be determined optically .
the projected signal may be visible or selectively veiled anywhere within num of the optical axis .
indication shall not result from external illumination nor shall one indication illuminate a second .
the optical system shall provide an imaging surface at focus on the optical axis for objects num feet to num feet num m to num m in distance and permit an effective veiling system to be variously applied as determined by the desired visibility zone .
lamps shall be nominal num w num v ac three prongs sealed beam type with integral reflector having a rated life of num hours .
section num traffic signal equipment num the objective lens may be glass or hermetically sealed plastic within a flat lamination of weatherresistant acrylic .
the lens shall be symmetrical in outline allowing rotation to any num orientation about the optical axis .
the limiter andor diffuser shall be provided with a positive means of indexing and shall be formed of heat resistant material .
signal intensity controls shall be provided for each signal indication color .
all other components of the programmed vehicular signal heads shall conform to the requirements specified in this article .
j optical unit for incandescent lamps .
num .
lamps .
lamps used in traffic signal heads shall conform to the standards set forth in the ite latest standard for traffic signal lamps not smaller than num v num hour rated life clear bulb in accordance with the following num inch num mm red lens num or num w num inch light center length num inch num mm yellow lens num w num inch light center length num inch num mm green lens num w num inch light center length num .
wiring .
each lamp receptacle shall be provided with coded no .
num awg num mm or larger wires type tew num v securely fastened to the socket .
a suitable terminal block for connection of the wires from the socket and the incoming wires to the traffic signal head shall be provided in the signal housing .
num .
reflectors .
reflectors shall be specular alzak finished aluminum or an approved equal .
reflectors shall be mounted in a cast aluminum reflector support attached to the housing or shall be an integral reflector and support of formed sheet aluminum .
the reflector assembly shall be pivoted to the housing and shall be designed so that it can be swung out or easily removed without the use of any tools .
the method of mounting and fastening reflectors shall be sufficiently rigid to secure proper alignment between the lens and reflector when the door is closed .
the construction of the signal head and its components shall be such that the fit between the reflector and the lens will eliminate all possibility of false indicators .
reflectors shall have an opening in the back for the lamp socket .
num .
lenses .
lenses shall be of glass the quality and processing of which shall be the best for the purpose .
the composition must be durable on prolonged exposure to weather all lenses shall be uniformly colored throughout the body true to size and form and free from any streaks wrinkles chips or bubbles that in any way detract from their efficiency or use .
each lens shall have pressed on its flange the word top to indicate the proper positioning of the lens in the door for obtaining the light distribution required together with the diameter and other designations including the name or trademark of the manufacturer needed for proper application and help in purchasing replacements .
a nominal num inch num mm circular convex lens shall have an outside diameter of from num inches to num inches num mm to num mm .
a nominal num inch num mm rectangular lens shall have minimum overall dimensions of num inches by num inches num mm by num mm .
a nominal num inch num mm rectangular lens shall have minimum overall dimensions of num inches by num inches num mm by num mm .
all lenses shall comply with the design designated by ite for the use intended .
the color of the lens shall be of a color approved for use by ite for the use shown on the plans .
k optical units for leds .
num .
led technology .
the leds shall be manufactured using alingap aluminumindiumgalliumphosphorous technology or other leds with lower susceptibility to temperature degradation than algas aluminumgalliumarsenic .
algas leds will not be allowed .
section num traffic signal equipment num num .
photometric requirements .
each led traffic signal lamp including replacements for incandescent lamps shall produce num of the light intensity values shown in the following tables of minimum luminous intensity values .
each led shall also meet the color chromaticity and light output distribution described in ite vtcsh vehicle traffic control signal head standard part num of the specifications num num num num num and num .
the following tables of minimum luminous intensity values shall replace the values given in table num of section num of the ite vtcsh .
the num tests shall include an expanded view with the required minimum luminous intensity values .
minimum luminous intensity values in candelas for num inch diameter red leds grid values in bold text numd through num d are ite requirements for light intensity num num num num num num num num num num num num numu numu num num num num numu num num num num numu num num num num numu num num num num numd num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num numd minimum luminous intensity values in candelas for num inch diameter green and yellow leds grid values in bold text numd through num d are ite requirements for light intensity num num num num num num num num num num num num numu numu num num num num numu num num num num numu num num num num numu num num num num numd num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num num numd arrow indications shall be the light intensity shown in the following table .
arrow indication ligh intensity in candellas per square meter red yellow green arrow indication num num num leds for arrow indications shall be spread evenly across the illuminated portion of the arrow area .
the chromaticity of led signal modules shall conform to the requirements given in the following table for a minimum period of num months over an operating temperature range of numc to numc .
each led traffic signal lamp unit shall meet the minimum requirements for light output for the entire range of voltage from num to num volts .
section num traffic signal equipment num chromaticity requirements red y greater than num and less than num for y num x yellow y greater than num and less than num for y num x green y greater than num numx numxnum and greater than num numx numxnum and less than num x numxnum taken from the ite vtcsh standard chapter num paragraph num figure num .
num .
led production testing requirements .
each new led traffic signal lamp unit shall be energized for a minimum of num hours at operating voltage and at a temperature of num c in order to cause any electronic infant mortality to occur and to ensure electronic component reliability prior to shipment .
each led traffic signal lamp unit shall be tested for initial luminous intensity at rated operating voltage .
num .
quality assurance .
led signal modules tested or submitted for testing shall be representative of typical production units .
optical testing shall be performed with led signal modules mounted in standard traffic signal sections without visors or hoods attached to the signal sections .
after burnin led signal modules shall be tested for rated initial luminous intensity in conformance with the preceding photometric requirements .
before measurement led signal modules shall be energized at rated voltage with num percent ontime duty cycle for a time period of num minutes .
the current voltage total harmonic distortion thd and power factor pf associated with each measurement shall be recorded and made available for future reference .
photometrics luminous intensity and color measurements for yellow led signal modules shall be taken immediately after the modules are energized .
the ambient temperature for these measurements shall be num c .
the current voltage total harmonic distortion thd and power factor pf associated with each measurement shall be recorded and made available for future reference .
num .
physical and mechanical requirements .
the assembly and manufacturing process for the led traffic signal lamp unit assembly shall be configured to assure all internal led and electronic components are adequately supported to withstand mechanical shock and vibration from high winds and other sources .
each led traffic signal lamp unit shall comprise a uv stabilized polymeric outer shell multiple led light sources and a regulated power supply .
num .
electrical .
each unit shall incorporate a regulated power supply engineered to electrically protect the leds and maintain a safe and reliable operation .
the power supply shall provide capacitor filtered dc regulated current to the leds per the led manufacturers specification .
design of the power supply shall be such that the failure of an individual component or any combination of components can not cause the signal to be illuminated after ac power is removed .
any deviation without prior testing and approval from the department shall be grounds for removal from the materials sources and devices with special acceptance requirements listing .
the led traffic signal lamp unit shall operate on a num hz ac line voltage ranging from num volts rms to num volts rms .
the circuitry shall prevent flickering over this voltage range .
nominal rated voltage for all measurements shall be num volts rms .
the led traffic signal lamp unit shall be operationally compatible with nema tsnum tsnum and type num num controllers conflict monitors with plus features and malfunction management units currently used by the alabama department of transportation and any other state government entities .
two captive color coded num v num awg minimum jacketed wires num feet num inch long conforming to the national electric code rated for service at numc shall be provided for an electrical connection .
individual leds shall be wired so that a catastrophic failure of one led light source will result in the loss of only that one led light source .
the led signal shall operate with a minimum num power factor .
section num traffic signal equipment num total harmonic distortion current and voltage induced into an ac power line by a signal module shall not exceed num percent .
led signal modules and associated onboard circuitry shall conform to the requirements given in federal communications commission fcc title num subpart b section num regulations concerning the emissions of electronic noise .
num .
environmental requirements .
the led traffic signal lamp unit shall be rated for use in the ambient operating temperature range of num c to num c .
the unit shall be dust and moisture tight to protect all internal led and electrical components .
the unit shall consist of a housing that is a sealed watertight enclosure that eliminates dirt contamination and allows for safe handling in all weather conditions .
moisture resistance testing shall be performed on led signal modules in conformance with the requirements in nema standard num for type num enclosures .
evidence of internal moisture after testing shall be cause for rejection .
num .
warranty requirements .
all led traffic signal lamp units shall be warranted against failure due to workmanship and material defects during the first num months of field operation .
the led signal lamp units shall also be warranted to meet or exceed the minimum luminous intensity values during the first num months of operation .
this warranty shall be included with each led signal module in writing by the manufacturer .
the warranty shall include a commitment by the manufacturer to replace all failed leds at no cost the department .
l lenses for leds .
the lens for an led signal lamp unit shall be a uv stabilized polymeric lens that is sealed to the led housing to prevent dust and moisture from entering into the unit .
m leds for replacing lamps in existing incandescent signal heads .
the led traffic signal lamp unit shall be designed as a retrofit replacement for existing signal lamps which will not require any special tools for installation .
the num retrofit replacement led traffic signal lamp unit shall fit into existing traffic signal housings without modifications to the housing .
installation of a retrofit replacement led traffic signal lamp unit into an existing signal housing shall only require removing the existing lens and incandescent lamp fitting of the new unit securely in the dousing door and connecting the unit to existing electrical wiring or terminal block by means of simple connectors .
the led retrofit shall not require the removal of the reflector .
if proper orientation of the led unit is required for optimal performance prominent and permanent directional markings an up arrow for correct indexing and orientation shall exist on the unit .
the manufacturers name serial number model number manufactured date and other necessary identification shall be permanently marked on the backside of the led traffic signal lamp unit .
a label shall be placed on the unit certifying compliance to ite standards .
the led traffic signal lamp unit shall be a single selfcontained device not requiring onsite assembly for installation into an existing incandescent traffic signal housing .
n submittal data required for leds .
each led traffic signal lamp unit shall be provided with the following data complete and accurate installation wiring guide contact name address and telephone for the representative manufacturer or distributor for warranty repair schematics for all electronics .
the contractor shall submit a copy of a test report certified by an independent laboratory intertek testing services etl semko that the led traffic signal lamp model submitted meets ite standard for light distribution chromaticity and power consumption power factor and harmonic distortion .
in addition the independent lab report shall specify the drive current being supplied to individual leds within the unit .
designs which require leds to be operated at currents greater than the led manufacturers recommended drive current will not be allowed .
section num traffic signal equipment num o dual indication signal head .
the dual indication signal shall provide a dynamic means of selectively displaying two separate colored indications from the same section during different intervals of the signal cycle .
the dual indication signal heads shall conform to the applicable requirements for programmed vehicular signal heads including exterior finish and ite standards publication adjustable face traffic control signal heads .
no indication shall result from external illumination nor shall one light unit illuminate a second and only one indication shall be apparent to any viewer at one time .
num pedestrian signal heads .
a general .
all pedestrian signal heads shall conform to the requirements of the ite standards publication adjustable face pedestrian signal heads and the following assembled in accordance with the latest edition of the mutcd .
b incandescent pedestrian signals .
num .
housing door and visor .
housing housing shall be rectangular and constructed of lightweight die cast aluminum .
the housing assembly shall form a dust tight and moisture resistant compartment .
the top and bottom of the signal shall be provided with two holes suitable for entrance of num inch num mm conduit .
surrounding each hole shall be cast aluminum serration containing num teeth at num on center by num inches num mm deep .
the overall dimension of the pedestrian signal shall be num inches horizontal x num inches vertically x num inches front to back num mm horizontal x num mm vertically x num mm front to back including the visor .
a door hinge is provided at the bottom of the case and two upset flanges at the top to enable draw bolts to adequately draw down the door against the case .
a neoprene gasket shall be fitted around the front edge of the case to provide a waterproof compartment when the door is closed .
door the door shall contain an offset upon which an endless neoprene gasket will seat for the purpose of holding the lens and causing a watertight fit of door to housing .
all components shall be readily and easily accessible from the door .
two hinge lugs shall be cast at the bottom of the door which shall mesh with two pairs of hinge lugs cast in the bottom of the housing .
stainless steel drive pins shall connect these hinges to permit the door to rotate downward .
two reinforced lugs each with a vertical slot open at the top shall be cast integrally in the top of the door .
the top of the front of these lugs shall be slightly offset to prevent the hinge bolts from sliding out of the slots .
two pairs of lugs shall be cast integrally with the top of the housing compartment .
two stainless steel hinge bolts with captive stainless steel wing nuts and plain washers shall be attached to the housing lugs with the use of a stainless steel num inch num mm drive pin .
visor a single unit sun shield eggcrate type visor shall be attached to the cast door without the use of any screws and be capable of being removed only when the door is opened .
the visor shall sit directly on the door .
the visor shall consist of num vertical num inch num mm thick polycarbonate strips and num horizontal num inch num mm polycarbonate strips .
the strips shall be slotted such that they fit together in cross hatch fashion .
the polycarbonate strips when assembled shall be bordered by an extruded num inch num mm aluminum channel that shall be pop riveted together to provide a solid support for the polycarbonate strips .
the visor shall have two horizontal mounted num inch num mm diameter aluminum reinforcement rods .
the visor assembly shall be num inches num mm deep and the grid pattern shall measure approximately num inches x num inch num mm x num mm .
num .
optical unit .
the reflector shall be a onepiece reflector made of die cast aluminum with an alzak finish .
the inside surface of the reflector shall be metalized silver and overcoat for endurance .
the reflectors shall consist of two parabolic curves one situated behind the upraised hand symbol one behind the walking person symbol .
two lamp sockets shall mount directly to the back of the reflector .
the reflector shall be designed to accept num watt bulbs through num watt bulbs depending upon the light intensity required .
higher wattage lamp shall not cause any degradation to the die cast aluminum reflector or lens .
section num traffic signal equipment num internal illumination shall be used .
num .
hardware .
all screws bolts nuts washers hinge pins and other necessary fasteners shall be made of num stainless type num .
num .
exterior finish .
before painting housing shall be cleaned and treated in accordance with military specification mildtlnumf .
the housing door and visor channel shall be cleaned and etched prior to paint and then painted with one coat of primer and two coats of baking enamel .
when a visor is required the inside of the visor must be flat black .
the balance of the signal shall be federal yellow .
num .
lenses .
the symbols shall transmit light through a prismatic surface .
the prismatic surface shall be on the inside .
the molded lenses shall have the proper colors portland orange for the upraised hand and lunar white for the walking person molded in the glass .
the background shall be opaque black .
lunar white and portland orange shall conform to ite requirements .
the upraised hand indication shall be mounted directly above or integral with the walking person indication .
the lens size shall be num inches x num inches num mm x num mm .
the lens material shall be two pieces num inch num mm molded glass .
the letter height shall be num inches num mm .
num .
wiring .
each pedestrian signal shall be wired completely internally and ready for connection of field wiring .
there shall be a four point terminal block inside the housing to which a wiring harness consisting of num awg wiring shall be attached .
the other end shall be sufficient to allow the reflector to be fully removed from the signal .
c led pedestrian signals .
light emitting diode led pedestrian signal head shall conform to ites interim specifications for led pedestrian traffic signals .
num pedestrian detectors .
a general .
pedestrian detectors shall conform to the american with disabilities act accessibility guidelines section num crossing controls dated num. b materials .
pedestrian detector shall be capable of actuation by a force equal to or less than num pound force numn .
a control button shall be raised or flush and shall be a minimum of num inches num mm .
the microswitch shall be dustproof water resistant type .
the splice between the cable and the detector leads shall be waterproof .
the pipe or other protective cable covering to the detector housing shall be secure .
the detector shall be provided with a housing to prevent the entrance of water .
where a push button is attached to a pole the housing shall be shaped to fit the curvature of the pole and secured to provide a rigid installation .
saddles shall be provided to make a neat fit when required .
where a push button is to be mounted on top of a post the housing shall be provided with a slipfitter fitting and screws for securing rigidly to the post .
c hardware .
hardware and fittings shall be constructed of galvanized steel or noncorrosive metal .
num signal cable .
a description .
signal cable shall be used to supply electrical power to vehicle and pedestrian signal heads lane control signals electrically powered signs and pedestrian detectors .
section num traffic signal equipment num b materials .
signal cable shall conform to the requirements of imsa specification no .
num polyethylene insulated polyethylene jacketed communication cable .
unless otherwise noted on the plans signal cable conductors shall be solid copper no .
num awg .
the number of conductors shall be provided as follows pedestrian push button assembly num conductors pedestrian signal head num conductors flashing beacon num conductors num section signal head num conductors num section signal head num conductors num loop detector wire .
a description .
loop detector wire shall be used to provide a zone of detection sensor loop where the passage or presence of a vehicle in the zone causes a decrease in the inductance of the loop .
b materials .
num .
wire .
wire shall be type usenum type rhh or type rhwnum xlp num v crosslink polyethylene insulated cable .
all loop wire shall have an insulation thickness of num num mils .
wire shall be no .
numawg .
wire shall have a single conductor that is soft annealed stranded wire of not less than num percent conductivity seven strands shall make up this single conductor .
the outer jacket shall be surface printed indicating the manufacturer national research testing laboratory listing maximum rated voltage awg size the proper type letter or letters for the type of wire or the imsa specification number every two feet num m or less .
num .
loop sealant .
proposed loop sealant shall be included in the proposed material submittal as required in section num .
num loop detector leadin cable .
a description .
loop detector leadin cable shall be used to connect the sensor loop to the input of the loop detector unit .
b materials .
loop detector leadin cable shall conform to the requirements of imsa specification no .
num polyethylene insulated polyethylene jacketed shielded loop detector leadin cable .
the cable shall have stranded tinned copper conductors no .
num awg .
the cable shall have two conductors individually insulated in a twisted pair configuration .
num junction box .
a description .
junction box shall be provided to splice loop wires to shielded leadincable to allow access to ground rods located beneath sidewalks and to decrease friction drag of pulling underground cable through conduit .
b materials .
num .
junction box .
the junction box shall be constructed of nonconcrete plastic mortar reinforced with heavyweave fiberglass .
it shall be capable of withstanding a vertical load test of num pounds num metric tons over a num inch num mm by num inch num mm area .
junction box shall conform to the dimensions shown on the details in the special and standard highway drawings .
num .
junction box cover .
section num traffic signal equipment num all junction boxes shall be supplied with a heavy duty cover tested to num pounds num metric tons over a num inch num mm by num inch num mm area .
all covers shall conform to the american association of state highway and transportation officials aashto specification hnum num ton gvw ha cover rating .
all covers shall comply with the requirements given in astm standard publication no .
astm cnum practice for minimum structural concrete utility structures and conform to load test num pounds num metric tons performed as stated in aashto tnum standard method of testing for concrete pipe section or tile .
the junction box shall have a locking cover .
the junction box cover shall be embossed with traffic signals in standard block type not less than num inches num mm in height .
num conduit .
a description .
conduit furnished shall be metallic or nonmetallic of the size specified on the plans .
b rigid metal conduit rmc .
rigid metal conduit couplings and fittingsshall be galvanized steel meeting the requirements given in ul num .
couplings and fittings shall be threaded .
c rigid nonmetallic conduit rnc .
rigid nonmetallic conduit shall be schedule num or schedule num pvc and shall meet the requirements given in ul num. d liquidtight flexible metal conduit lfmc .
liquidtight flexible metal conduit shall meet the requirements given in ul num .
the thermoplastic covering shall be oil resistant .
connectors shall be either angle or straight and be ul listed for the intended use .
lfmc shall be installed where conduits cross an expansion or open joint on bridges barrier rails and other structures and shall be installed at other expansion locations as directed by the engineer .
the lfmc shall be a maximum of num inches num mm long and shall not sag more than num inches num mm between the fixed ends of the rigid conduit .
e liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit lfnc .
liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit shall meet the requirements given in ul num .
num supporting structures .
a general .
supporting structures metal traffic signal pole prestressed concrete traffic signal pole mast arm pole and pedestal pole used for mounting signal equipment shall conform to the requirements of section num and section num. b metal and concrete supporting structure features .
handholes with covers shall be provided to facilitate installation and wiring .
adapter with provisions for overhead wiring and wire entrance shall be provided for the top of the pole .
a grounding connection shall be provided adjoining the base .
when painting of the supporting structure is specified by the plans or proposal the supporting structure shall have two primer coats applied at the factory or point of fabrication and two additional coats of highgrade exterior grade enamel applied in the field .
paints shall conform to the applicable portions of section num. c timber poles .
timber poles shall be southern yellow pine treated in accordance with the latest american woodpreservers association awpa standards and conform to the requirements of section num .
unless otherwise noted on the plans timber poles used for supporting traffic signals shall be class num and shall conform to the requirements of ansi standards publication no .
num .
the poles shall not have more than num degrees of twist in grain over the full length and the sweep shall be no more than num inches num mm .
when required guy wires shall be provided of adequate strength and shall meet the requirements of astm a num .
guy wire anchors shall be expanding or screw type with a minimum guy tension of num pounds num kn .
section num traffic signal equipment num num luminaire extension assembly .
a description .
luminaire extension assembly shall consist of an extension arm housing reflector a refractor or lens a lamp socket an integral ballast a terminal strip and a lamp shall conform to the requirements of this specification unless otherwise specified on the plans in the proposal and on the details in the special and standard highway drawings .
b general .
the luminaire shall be of the horizontal type for ies type iii medium cutoff distributing an asymmetrical light pattern .
c materials .
num .
luminaire extension arm .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the extension arm shall be num feet num m in length .
stud mounting bolts and brackets shall be provided .
num .
photoelectric control unit .
a photoelectric control unit shall be provided and conform to the requirements of the institute of electrical and electronic engineers ieee and nema .
num .
housing .
the housing shall be fabricated from diecast aluminum .
if the housing is provided with a hole for the receptacle the hole shall be closed covered and sealed with weatherproof material in a permanent manner .
the housing shall be weathertight and shall be gasketed .
all hinges bolts nuts washers screws and miscellaneous hardware shall be stainless steel .
num .
lens .
the lens shall be a pressed borosilicate glass refractor to provide the ies lighting pattern indicated .
num .
ballast .
the ballast shall be a cwa type .
num .
lamp .
each luminaire shall have clear highpressure sodium hps lamp of the required wattage .
average lamp life shall be num hours .
initial lumen output shall be num lumens for num w and num lumens for num w. num .
field wires .
field wires connected to the luminaire shall terminate on a barrier type terminal block secured to the housing .
an ultra violet resistant no .
num awg cable shall be provided .
phase or current carrying conductors shall be of the type rhh rhw use or xhhw and shall be identified by a continuous black color or colors other than white gray or green .
if colors are used they shall be consistent for circuit and phase .
num .
surge arrestor .
the surge arrestor shall be enclosed in a watertight case with mounting ears so that no additional hardware will be required except attachment screws .
there will be no limitation as to proper orientation for mounting to insure that the unit is num percent functional .
the surge protection elements shall be metaloxide varistors with a total peak surge current rating numxnum microseconds of num ka for the num v mode .
certified response time shall be num nanoseconds max at num a and num v. certified test reports from an independent laboratory shall be submitted when requested by the engineer .
the arrestor shall provide protection from line to ground and neutral to ground .
it shall have a calculated surge life of greater than num occurrences at num a or num occurrences at num a .
there shall be no follow current and current drain shall be less than num a .
num .
led luminaire .
led luminaires shall meet the requirements of section num and the plans .
num concrete foundations .
all concrete foundations or footings shall conform to the requirements of section num .
section num traffic signal equipment num a ground rod of a nonferrous coating material num inch num mm in diameter by num feet num m in length shall be provided .
the ground rod shall be provided with a bonding copper wire or strip equivalent to the cross sectional area of a no .
num awg num mm wire .
num signs .
the rnum sign rnum sign rnumb sign and any sign as indicated on the plans as a part of the signal installation shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num video detection system .
a camera .
the camera enclosure shall have the following features and functionality provide real time detection operate from num to num humidity include a lens with an automatic iris be easily field replaceable shall be clearly identified with the focal length and aperture shall be resistant to vibration and resistant to shock when installed for operation .
b camera enclosure .
the camera enclosure shall have the following features and functionality shall be a nema type num enclosure shall be fabricated from corrosion resistant aluminum shall be finished in a light colored uv and weather resistant paint shall be provided with a sunshield shall have a sunshield shall be designed to divert water flow to the sides of the sunshield .
c camera and enclosure assembly .
the camera in the enclosure shall have the following features and functionality shall have a heater mounted toward the front of the enclosure weight of all components shall not exceed num pounds num kg .
all devices required for maintaining the internal temperature and faceplate temperature shall be integral to the environmental enclosure .
the heater shall not interfere with the operation of camera electronics and shall not cause interference with the video signal .
the weight shall include the environmental enclosure complete with camera fittings heater and transformers .
d camera mounting assembly .
the camera mounting assembly shall have the following features shall have all stainless steel or aluminum construction shall meet the support requirements of the camera manufacturer shall be equipped with lightening lightning protection connections shall be mounted on the rear of the enclosure all connections shall have liquid tight fittings .
e processor .
the processor shall be rack or shelf mounted in a controller cabinet and shall have a rsnum serial port .
the processor shall provide video output bnc for connecting a television monitor for testing purposes and for connection to video transmitter provided by others .
the video output bnc shall be located at the front of the processor .
the processor shall be plugged into a nemanumr receptacle located in the controller cabinet .
the processor shall be capable of detecting vehicle presence in num userdefined detection zones .
when the vehicle is in the detection zone the detection zone shall change color or intensify on the screen to verify proper operation of the detectable system .
section num traffic signal equipment num f video interface panel and cables .
the video interface panel shall provide facilities to protect against damage from lightning and to isolate the ground of the cables from that of the video detection system .
coaxial cable and power cable shall meet the requirements of vehicle detection manufacturer .
g two channel and four channel detector unit .
all detector units shall be card rack units suitable for mounting in a detector unit as specified in nema standard publication tsnum .
num priority control system traffic signal preemption .
a priority control systems .
the priority control system shall be either acoustically sound activated optically activated or gps global positioning system activated .
all equipment and components shall meet or exceed all national electrical manufacturers association nema tsnum and tsnum as well as type num and type num weather exposure durability requirements .
b operational requirements .
the priority control system shall be capable of providing preemption information to the standard nema tsnum nema tsnum type num and type num traffic controllers used by the aldot .
the priority control system shall be capable of setting time limits for how long a call can be held when the call is dropped after a vehicle passes or if the call is lost .
acoustically activated systems shall be able to detect and respond to a preemption call from an emergency or priority vehicle at a minimum of num feet num meters from a roadway intersection .
all other systems shall be able to detect and respond to a preemption call from an emergency or priority vehicle at a minimum of num feet num meters from a roadway intersection .
setup and programming of the priority control system shall be accomplished through the use of the current aldot computer operating software .
c log file .
the priority control system shall maintain a log file of at least num of the most recent priority calls .
this log file shall be downloadable in a standard ascii delimited format .
each call record for all systems shall contain the following four items time date shall indicate the time and date the call was made direction indicates the direction from which the call was made id identifies what vehicle or device made the request duration indicates the total amount of time the call was active .
the following are additional requirements for optical and gps activated systems user what department or agency that used the system level shows what priority level was used .
d software .
the manufacturers software shall be provided for the operation of the system .
one software package shall be provided for each detection system .
software updates and revisions shall be provided to the aldot as updated by the manufacturer at no additional cost .
the software shall not require a licensing fee .
all setup controller program and diagnostic software shall be provided and shall run on microsoft windows based operating systems .
software updates shall be provided free of charge .
online help screens shall be provided as an integral part of the system software .
interface software shall be capable of realtime viewing of the system activity .
e documentation requirements .
a minimum of num sets of operational and maintenance manuals shall be provided with the system .
these manuals shall cover all aspects of the system from the installation to maintenance .
the following data shall also be provided by the manufacturer model serial numbers shall be visible on all electrical components power and current requirements acceptable operational temperature ranges section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num weight and dimensions required mounting equipment operating frequency where needed detection range response time and sensitivity required software manufacturers advertised product capabilities any limitations requirements or potential hazards associated with the operation or maintenance of the device .
f warranty .
final payment will not be made until a written warranty is provided by the contractor and accepted by the engineer in writing .
the warranty shall be a written guarantee from the distributor or manufacturer that the priority control system will be fully functional and will remain free of defects in material and workmanship for a period of one year from date of acceptance .
during the warranty period the distributor or manufacturer shall repair with new materials or replace at no charge any device product or other material containing a warranty defect .
all materials returned from warranty repairs shall be made through the distributor or manufacturer at no additional charge .
warranty repairs and replacements shall not exceed two weeks from date of return to the distributor or manufacturer .
the warranty will not begin until the traffic signal installation num operation check period is complete section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num general .
all materials used in the fabrication of overhead roadway sign traffic signal luminaire and traffic surveillance structural supports shall meet the requirements of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num edition hereinafter referred to as the aashto sign specifications .
aashto material specifications shall govern in lieu of astm material specifications when an aashto equivalent specification exists for all references within any referenced specification .
num steel .
a general .
all grades of steel listed in the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges are applicable for welded structural supports for overhead roadway signs luminaries traffic signals and traffic surveillance and shall have a specified yield strength not less than num ksi num mpa unless otherwise specified on the contract plans or within this section .
the specifications for steels other than astm and aashto shall be submitted to the bridge engineer for approval prior to design .
the contractor shall supply the bridge engineer with a copy of the steel specification corresponding to the steel that is being used if the steel is not covered by astm or aashto specifications .
b fabrication .
within num days after the award of the contract the contractor shall notify the bridge engineer in writing of the name and address of the fabricator of the structural steel .
the notification shall include the fabricators proposed fabrication schedule .
evidence of the fabricators qualifications and experience shall be furnished if requested by the bridge engineer .
no material shall be fabricated before the department has been notified where the fabrication order has been placed and the shop drawings have been reviewed and approved for distribution .
the fabricator is responsible for notifying the bridge engineer of any fabrication work to be done outside of their facility the name and address of the outside fabricator and the proposed fabrication schedule .
section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num the fabricator of the structures shall give the bridge engineer at least num days notice by submittal of a bbfnum form notice of intent to begin fabrication prior to the beginning of fabrication to allow time for arrangements to be made for an aldot inspector to be present during fabrication .
all steel structures shall be fabricated in a plant certified by the american institute for steel construction for standard for bridge and highway metal component manufactures cpt .
welding of steel members shall be in accordance with the aws dnumdnumm num structural welding codesteel numrd edition hereinafter referred to as the aws structural welding code .
welders shall be certified in accordance with the aws structural welding code .
all welds shall be visually inspected and be free of cracking and undercutting .
high mast lighting assembly pole to base plate welds shall be magnetic particle or ultrasonically tested .
circumferential butt welds shall not be allowed on overhead roadway sign structure uprights .
all circumferential welds on steel poles shall be tested by ultrasonic for wall thickness of num inch num mm or greater or radiographic testing for wall thickness less than of num inch num mm .
all requirements of section num of the aashto sign specifications shall be observed when welding and testing the poles .
the longitudinal weld on the female section of lap splices shall be either one hundred percent full penetration with quality assurance by ultrasonic inspection per the aws structural welding code or shall be reinforced externally to ensure the development the full yield stress of the pole .
the handling and storing of materials during and after fabrication shall be done in such a manner that the metal or galvanized finish is not damaged .
material that is damaged may be rejected .
material shall be stored off the ground and properly drained .
loose members and fasteners shall be stored in boxes crates kegs or barrels .
support structures shall be free from sharp edges and irregularities and any misfits or structural deficiencies .
all members must fit together well and make for an easy and quick erection .
all components shall be protected from damage during fabrication handling and transportation to the site .
unless approved by the engineer none of the components shall be delivered to the site until such time as the entire structure less sign faces can be erected .
c overhead roadway sign structures .
material for overhead roadway steel sign structures shall be structural carbon steel or structural low alloy steel meeting the requirements of the aashto specifications for highway bridges latest edition .
steel pipe shall be in accordance with astm a num grade b schedule num or stronger .
nuts bolts and washers used in structural joints shall be in accordance with astm a num and shall be installed in accordance with item numdnum .
nuts and bolts used in nonstructural joints shall be in accordance with astm a num .
washers used in nonstructural joints shall comply with the requirements of astm f num .
all components of the structure assembly shall be galvanized with zinc after fabrication in accordance with aashto m num and aashto m num for fasteners .
hollow sections shall be galvanized on both exterior and interior surfaces .
closed hollow sections shall have appropriate sized galvanizing vent holes at each end of a member .
damage to galvanization or any bare areas developed before or during erection shall be painted with two coats of approved galvanizing coating in accordance with article num .
a uniform camber in accordance with section num of the aashto sign specification shall be provided for all horizontal members of the sign structure .
the minimum camber shall be equal to the dead load deflection lnum l in inches millimeters .
the maximum permissible camber shall be lnum l in inchesmillimeters .
num .
facilities for inspection .
the contractorfabricator shall provide aldot with adequate suitable office facilities and equipment when required for the inspection of materials and workmanship in the fabrication plant .
this office shall be conveniently located near the fabrication plant or work site shall be private and not shared with any other agency and shall be equipped so that it may be locked .
it shall be climate controlled water tight and include necessary office furnishings such as desktable chairs and file cabinet .
telephone is optional .
num .
quality control and nondestructive testing .
a current written copy of the fabricators quality control manual along with a listing of qualifications of personnel qualified to perform inspections andor nondestructive testing shall be submitted prior to any fabrication work .
all nondestructive testing personnel shall meet the requirements set forth in asnt standard for qualification and certification of section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num nondestructive testing personnel ansiasnt cpnum .
additionally current copies of asnt ndt level iii eye examinations are required .
no materials or members will be accepted by the bridge engineers representative or partial payments made until the departments bbfnum form the supporting mill test reports and galvanization certificates for the materials have been furnished and approved by the department .
this information shall be submitted for approval .
the bbfnum form shall be signed by a company official and notarized .
the contractor shall furnish certified copies of mill test reports covering steel materials .
these reports shall include chemical determinations and physical characteristics .
the fabrication shop shall have and maintain a master tape calibrated by the national institute of science and technology .
all tapes shall be calibrated with the master tape before being used on the project .
any master tape found damaged or with a certification over two years old shall be replaced or recalibrated .
a certified welding inspector cwi shall be present on all shifts where welding is ongoing .
num .
handling transportation and storage of materials the handling and storing of materials during and after fabrication shall be done in such a manner that the metal or galvanized finish is not damaged .
damaged material may be a cause for rejection .
material shall be stored off the ground and properly drained .
loose members and fasteners shall be stored in boxes crates kegs or barrels and kept dry .
num .
workmanship finish and detailing .
all work shall be performed in a neat workmanlike manner .
a buffer andor shield shall be utilized during fitting operations to protect base metals from damage caused by fitting tools or devices .
any damage incurred may be cause for rejection of the material .
heat straightening or hot bending is allowable provided the metal is not heated above num f num c. the maximum heat applied shall be controlled by the use of heat crayons or other approved means .
after straightening or bending the metal shall not be artificially cooled until the temperature of the metal reaches num f num c or less .
water or spray misting shall not be used as a means of artificial cooling .
heat cambering will only be permitted when making minor adjustments to the actual camber in a member .
steel may be thermal cut provided a smooth surface is secured by the use of a mechanical guide .
thermal cutting by hand shall be done only when approved .
the surface shall be smoothed by planing chipping or grinding .
other methods of cutting steel may be considered for use .
sheared edges of plates more than num inch num mm in thickness shall be planed to a depth of num inch num mm .
plates num inch num mm in thickness or less shall be ground to remove sharp corners and edges .
vent holes if required shall be cylindrical without ragged or torn edges or corners .
if vent holes are installed with a thermal cutting process they shall be reamed .
num .
accuracy of reamed or drilled holes .
reamed or drilled holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the member .
holes may be punched with a fullsize die provided the thickness of the material is not greater than the nominal diameter of the fasteners being used nor greater than num inch num mm for carbon steel num inch num mm for high strength steel nor num inch num mm for quenched and tempered alloy steel .
holes shall be clean cut and free of torn or ragged edges .
plug welding of any holes that are too large or slightly off location is prohibited .
completed holes shall be num inch num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the fastener being used .
all holes may be oversized or slotted by num inch num mm maximum .
in any connection no more than ten percent of all holes may be oversized or slotted num inch num mm .
edge distances of fasteners shall be as shown below .
the minimum distance from the center of any fastener to a sheared or flame cut edge shall be num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm .
section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num the minimum distance from the center of any fastener to a rolled or planed edge except in flanges of beams and channels shall be num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm .
in the flanges of beams and channels the minimum distance from the center of the fastener to a edge shall be num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm num fastener num num mm .
the distance between the edges of adjacent holes that are enlarged or slotted shall not be less than three times the diameter of the fastener minus the nominal diameter of the hole .
the edge distance shall not be less than that given for minimum edge distance minus one half the nominal diameter of the hole .
num .
welding .
a .
all welding shall be inspected for defects in accordance with the requirements stated herein .
any worker welder or weld inspector who in the opinion of the engineer produces inferior work may under the provision of article num be disqualified from performing aldot work .
b .
all shop welding shall be performed under cover of a permanent structure andor building capable of protecting the material and welding operation from inclement weather .
c. intersecting welds unless shown on the plans or approved shop drawings are prohibited .
d. tack welds not incorporated in the final weld shall not be used .
cracked tack welds shall be removed and the area of base material examined by mt or pt .
e. complete penetration circumferential welded splices in any component of an upright member is prohibited within overhead sign structures .
f. undercut is limited to num num mm on secondary members and to num num mm on main members .
g. excessive arc strikes andor gouges will be assessed by the aldot representative to determine if repairs are required or if the material should be rejected .
h. carbon arc or thermal cut boundaries and back gouged surfaces for groove welds shall be ground to a smooth bright surface before welding .
i. drying and storage ovens shall be electric and of sufficient size to accommodate a one day supply of electrodes .
drying ovens shall be equipped with a recording thermometer .
storage ovens shall have a visible thermometer .
j .
each welding machine shall have its approved welding procedure posted in a conspicuous area on or near the machine k. the contractor shall furnish a written welding procedure specification wps for each process and joint to be used in shop welding .
the wps number shall appear in the tail of the weld symbol on the shop drawings .
l. all shop welds shall be temporarily marked in such a manner that allows identification of the welder .
m. a complete list of qualified welders and copies of the qualification records shall be provided by the fabricator .
welders that do not have satisfactory prequalification may be required to qualify in the presence of an aldot representative or a third party certified welding inspector c.w.i .. d steel poles for traffic signal luminaire and traffic surveillance support structures .
the shafts shall be fabricated from basic oxygen or open hearth sheet steel of a single ply and having only one longitudinal seam weld .
circumferential welded splices may be used provided none of the spliced pieces except for the top piece are less than ten feet in length .
all circumferential welds shall be ground flush with the material surfaces .
in lieu of circumferential welds a two piece section slip joint shaft pole for poles without horizontal welds will be permitted when the plans or approved shop drawings require poles longer than the manufactured length capability .
steel poles shall be anchored with a one piece cast steel anchor base or a welded steel plate anchor base that is of sufficient strength to develop the yield strength of the pole .
when the anchor base is attached to the shaft it shall develop the full strength of the shaft section to resist bending action .
the base shall be provided with four slotted holes for attachment to the foundation with four anchor bolts .
the complete pole assembly shall be hotdipped galvanized section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num after fabrication in accordance with aashto m num .
each assembly must be completely coated in a single dip .
all miscellaneous hardware shall be galvanized per aashto m num .
mill certifications shall be supplied .
num glass fiber reinforced polymers gfrp .
gfrp poles shall be heavy duty class conforming to the american national standard for roadway lightingfiberreinforced plastic frp lighting pole ansi cnum latest edition .
grfp poles shall be manufactured by using a thermosetting polyester resin containing a minimum of num fiberglass by weight .
the resin shall be ultraviolet resistant and pigmented the same color as the final coating to be applied .
the resin shall not contain clay fillers .
the pole color shall be uniform throughout the entire wall thickness of the pole .
the finish of the pole shall be smooth .
a num mil dry film thickness of weather resistant polyurethane shall be coated to the surface of the pole for additional ultraviolet protection .
direct burial poles shall have a num inch by num inch num mm by num mm hand hole with a non aluminum cover provided at num inches num mm above the ground line .
the conductor entrance shall be two each num inch by num inch num mm by num mm entrance holes located num feet num mm below the ground line and one hundred and eighty degrees apart .
the poles shall be delivered predrilled to accommodate luminaires and lowering devices .
pole top tenons shall be permanently bonded to the shaft and shall be aluminum or hot dipped galvanized steel .
num aluminum .
aluminum material shall meet the requirements of the aashto sign specifications section num .
welding shall be in accordance with the provisions of section num of the aashto sign specifications .
the shaft of aluminum poles shall be one piece seamless round tapered tube full length heat treated after welding on the base flange to produce the tnum temper .
the base shall be onepiece cast aluminum .
all nuts bolts and washers used shall be stainless steel grade num or stronger and shall meet the requirements of astm f num .
each pole will have an internal grounding lug .
a pole vibration damper shall be provided .
the contractor shall furnish copies of certified mill test reports attesting to the fact that the aluminum material submitted for approval meets the contract requirements .
these reports shall include chemical determinations and physical characteristics .
num prestressed concrete poles .
concrete reinforcing steel and prestressing steel for prestressed concrete poles shall meet the requirements given in section num .
the concrete shall have a minimum num day compressive strength of num psi num mpa or as shown on the plans .
the prestressed concrete pole manufacturing plant shall follow the applicable requirements in aldotnum section num except that plant certification by the precastprestressed concrete institute plant certification program will not be required .
within num days after the award of the contract the contractor shall notify the materials and tests engineer in writing of the name and address of the fabricator of the poles .
fabrication will not be allowed to begin until two weeks after the materials and tests engineer has all of the approved details and submittals that are required for a representative of the department to adequately inspect the fabrication of the poles .
the contractor shall arrange for a representative of the department to conduct an inspection of the plant facilities and review the plants quality controlquality assurance manual during this two week time period .
num breakaway supports .
a federal highway administration approved breakaway support shall be installed on each luminaire assembly when indicated on the plans .
the pole shall meet the num aashto breakaway requirements and fhwa certification of testing must be submitted .
the contractor shall assure the compatibility of the pole base breakaway support and foundation .
transformer bases shall be used only as a replacement of a like item on an existing installation unless specifically shown otherwise on the plans .
num mast arms .
mast arms shall be fabricated from steel tubes except for aluminum poles which shall have aluminum mast arms to the lengths specified on the plans and approved shop drawings .
mast arm shafts shall be of one continuous piece without intermediate splices or couplings provided with section num structural materials for traffic control devices and highway lighting num raintight connections to the shaft of the pole and designed to rotate three hundred and sixty degrees in the horizontal plane .
a two piece section slip joint shaft mast arm will be permitted when plans or proposal require mast arms longer than the manufacturers length capability .
all hardware except split pole clamps shall be stainless steel or anodized aluminum .
the end of the arm shall be furnished with the type of fitting required by the plans .
all connecting joints for attachments for mast arms shaft extensions and luminaire arms shall be of the design indicated by plan details or approved by the engineer and shall develop full strength of the joint .
num anchor bolt assemblies .
anchor bolt assemblies anchor bolts nuts and washers shall be in accordance with aashto m num grade num or grade num except maximum tensile strength on all grades is waived and capable of transferring the load safely from the structure base plate to the foundation .
the exposed end of the anchor bolts shall be threaded rolled or cut type and provided with appropriate nuts including lock nuts and flat washers .
the anchor bolts nuts and washers shall be hotdipped galvanized in accordance with aashto m num however galvanization of the bolt below num inches num mm from the top of the embedment line will not be required .
the nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye so that a visual check can be made for proper lubrication prior to installation .
special care shall be taken when storing galvanized bolts with a water soluble lubricant .
anchor bolts for overhead roadway sign structures and high mast lighting assembly poles only shall meet the requirements provided in aashto t num for charpy vnotch testing .
notch toughness tests on specimens shall be performed in accordance with test frequency p piece testing of aashto t num with a minimum average value of num ftlb .
at num f num j at num c and the notch shall be oriented perpendicular to the longitudinal axes of the anchor bolt .
in order to meet the charpy vnotch impact requirements the steel may require heat treatment .
the charpy vnotch testing equipment shall be calibrated once each year using a national institute of standards and technology check sample .
certification of the annual calibration shall be available to the department when requested .
num pedestals .
if specified by the plans pedestals shall be furnished for steel and aluminum poles according to the overall length including cap and base shown on the plans .
pedestal shafts shall be a one piece continuous taper or parallel wall circular shaft .
steel shafts shall be of not less than num inch num mm wall thickness and of a size at the top designed to fit a standard num inch num mm slipfitter attachment .
steel shafts shall have a polished or galvanized finish which shall be protected during storage and shipment by a suitable protective covering .
the covering shall remain on the shaft until installation begins .
a one piece base shall be provided which when attached to the shaft will develop the full strength of the shaft to resist bending action .
the base shall be provided with four slotted holes for attachment to the base of the foundation .
the anchor bolts shall be recessed and ornamental covers provided .
a handhole with cover approximately num inches by num inches num mm by num mm in dimension shall be provided in the base of the pedestal shaft .
a cap for any exposed open end of a pedestal shaft shall be provided .
the cap shall be of cast aluminum and of the nipple or tenon mounting type .
index num a abbreviations num abutment and bulkhead anchors num acceptance acceptance inspection num final acceptance num for maintenance num accidents reporting num adhesives num advertisement for bids num aggregate bases and subbases num coarse num fine num slope protection num aggregate foundations num air entraining additives num asphalt pavement asphalt binders emulsions num pay factors num quality assurance num quality control num quality control quality assurance num referee testing num sampling of lots and sublots num test strips num testing lots num assignment of contract num authority of inspectors num of the engineer num award of contract num b backfill at bridge structures num at culvert pipes num cement mortar flowable num foundation num barricade permanent num barricades and signs num base soil and aggregate cement treatment num classification num lime treatment num maintenance of work num mixing num placing num sampling and testing num shoulder num bidders qualifications num bituminous base num surface treatment triple layer num surface treatments num bonds num bridge deck overlay num bridges num construction requirements num detour num elastomeric bearings num materials for construction num precast nonprestressed concrete members num prestressed concrete members num reinforced concrete decks num seals for joints num buy america num c cable guiderail num cancelled work num cement masonry num portland cement num changed conditions num claims appeal board num auditing num committee num compensation num documentation num notice of intent num record keeping num cleaning drainage structures num clearing and grubbing num coatings .
see paint cofferdam and pumping num cofferdams or sheeting and shoring num collusion num combination bids num compaction density requirements num of embankment num of foundation backfill num of lime stabalized roadbed num of soil and aggregate base layers num computer bidding num concrete acceptance num chemical admixtures num classification num construction joints num curing num curing materials num finishing num forms num handling and placing num materials num minor structure num prequalification requirements for mixture design num sampling and inspection num seal num weather limitations for placement num index num concrete pavement cleaning and sealing joints and cracks num construction requirements num grinding pavement surface num materials num pressure grouting num slabjacking num conduits electrical conduits under roadways num construction fuel num contaminated soil num contract documents furnished by the department num contract time assignment of contract time num beginning and end of contract time num days work not permitted num extension of contract time num failure to complete work within contract time num contractors personnel superintendent num cooperation between contractors num culverts concrete box culverts num corrugated metal num pipe num pipe end treatments num curb concrete curb and gutter num d default of contract num definitions num delineators num density embankment layers num materials subject to compaction requirements num modified and improved roadbed num nondestructive testing devices num roadbed or lime stabilization num subbase and base layers num disadvantaged business enterprise dbe num disqualification from bidding num drainage plane layer num drains grouted rubble num slotted num structures for inlets junction boxes num trench num drilled shaft construction casing num concrete placement requirements num construction methods num drilling equipment num encased excavations num materials num slurry num testing num tolerances num drilled shaft excavation exploratory shaft excavation num obstruction removal num slurry num e embankment num num encasement pipe for utilities num epoxy adhesive num erosion control excavation num hydraulic erosion control products num rolled erosion control products num num temporary erosion control num temporary seeding num errors plan and specifications errors num excavation benching num borrow num num channel num disposal of surplus material num finishing and dressing num for bridges num for structures other than bridges num measurement num muck num num roadway num roadway and drainage num rock num unclassified num undercutting num extra work num f fence barbed wire num chain link num construction safety num materials for fence num reset num woven wire num field office num final estimate documentation num final inspection num flowable backfill num flumes bituminous treated glass fiber num soil cement flumes num force account work num fuel .
see construction fuel full depth reclamation num g gas line num pipe and appurtenances num geometric controls num index num geosynthetics reinforcement for slopes and soft soil num geotextiles for paving num for permeable asphalt treated base num for separation of soil and aggregate num for underdrain num material requirements num graves num guardrail num guardrail materials num relocate num h handrail for bridges and sidewalks num hazard markers num materials for hazard markers num headlight glare screen num herbicide postemergent num preemergent num i immigration law alabama num impact attenuator permanent num portable num truck mounted num improved roadbed num index asphalt index num construction fuel num inlets for drainage structures num inspection by the engineer num j joint filler materials num joint sealant for hma pavement num l laboratories asphalt plant num base soil and structure num concrete plant num field num landslide corrections num laws ordinances and regulations bidders knowledge of num compliance with num lighting nightime operations num rehabilitation of roadway lighting num roadway num roadway lighting materials num structures for num lime sinks num stabilized roadbed num lines and grades num liquidated damages num load restrictions for hauling num lumber num m machine graded shoulders num mailbox num num maintenance of the work num markers land survey num rightofway num masonry brick and concrete block num mortar num rubble num stone num materials found on rightofway num guarantee num pits and waste areas num requirement for new num special acceptance requirements num unacceptable num median concrete median barrier num concrete median strip num micropiles num microsurfacing num mineral admixtures num mineral filler num mobilization num msdsar num n nightime operations num notice to contractors num p paint num partial payments num patents num pavement markers num payments final num to subcontractors num permeable asphalt treated base num pest control num piling cut off lengths num lengths of piles num load testing methods num materials num pile points num piling materials concrete and steel num index num splicing piles num piling encasement num pipe relaid num roadway pipe culverts num roadway pipe rehabilitation num side drain num planing milling pavement num police officer num polymer additives for asphalt materials num precast concrete products num price adjustments bituminous materials num q quantities num altered num approximate quantities in contract num num asphalt num basis of payment num final num measurement num r reinforcement .
see steel reinforcement removal and relocation of structures num removal of miscellaneous facilities num repair of bridges num repair of defective work num retaining wall num soil nail num soldier pile num riprap construction requirements num materials num roadbed lime stabilized num processing num stabilized num rock slopes num s safety barrier portable concrete num safety markings num sand and gravel for miscellaneous use num sanitary sewer num scoring pavement surface num seeds .
see vegetation establishment sequence of construction num sewer sanitary num storm num sheet piling num shotcrete num sidewalks and driveways num signs portable changeable message num relocation and renovation num sequential arrow and chevron num sheeting type and class type num sign materials num structure renovation and relocation num structures num site conditions num site conditions differing num slope protection aggregate slope protection num concrete slope protection num slurry seal coat num soil or aggregate surface num special provisions specifications and plans coordination num specialty items items specialty num steel bridge coating num steel reinforcement fabrication and installation num reinforcement materials num steel required to be usa product num structural steel num num bolting num structures for traffic signals num suspension of work num t tack coat num taxes num thin polymer overlay num timber num topsoil num removal num traffic control devices for construction work zones num maintenance num markings and legends num traffic signals num num traffic stripe num materials for traffic stripe num u unbalanced bidding num underdrain pavement underdrain num pipe underdrain num underground storage tanks num underwater embankment num utilities cooperation with num minor utility adjustments num utility encasement pipe num v value engineering num index num vegetation establishment num acceptance num mulching num num seeding in stubble num seeds num sequence num soil preparation num solid sodding num tree wells num vines shrubs and tree planting num vines shrubs and trees num vehicle permit oversize overweight num w water for general use num water line num water pipe and appurtenances num water wells num waterproofing and dampproofing num
